If you were one of the hundreds of thousands of poor people living in Rome, you still would
have had tantalizing glimpses of fabulous wealth.
Rome after all was the wealthiest city in the world.
You may well have known of someone, at least from hearsay, with a from rags to riches story.
There was a large number of nouveau riches living in Rome and elsewhere in the first
century AD.
Many of them were vulgar parvenues like the super rich freedman Trimalchio in Petronius'
novel The Satirican, whom we talked about briefly in the lecture on being a Roman slave.
Trimalchio holds disgustingly lavaged dinner parties in order to show off his wealth.
Perhaps stories of that sort made you turn green with envy.
Or perhaps they inspired you to work harder.
After all, Rome did reward talent and industriousness, and it was possible to rise from the ranks.
So why not dream of one day being wealthy yourself?
I'll dream along with you as you lie shivering in your attic apartment with the rain dripping
through the rafters onto your bed and your portable brazier belching out black smoke.
So what would you do if you had a million cestuses?
For starters, I suggest you buy a swanky domus with a large garden, ideally on one of the
hills of Rome, so that you can look down on the city beneath and count your blessings
you're not one of the wretched poor.
It'll be a tranquil oasis in the noisy, squalid, overcrowded, disease-ridden metropolis.
It'll be like living in the clouds, how you'll love to close the door on the outside world.
The Romans had a great saying for this, Rus in Erbe, the countryside in the city.
You'll enter your house through a passageway called the vestibulum or vestibule.
Your porter is on watch inside the door with a fierce dog to keep unwelcome visitors at
bay, the kind of riff-raff that you once were.
There are iron bars on your windows to prevent thieves from breaking in because you have so
much stuff worth stealing.
We'll talk about your stuff in a moment.
Your vestibulum opens onto the atrium, the main room in your house, where you receive
visitors, dignified visitors of course, all from the upper crust of society.
In the centre of the atrium is a marble impluvium, a pool of water.
Above it, there's a rectangular gap in the roof known as the compluvium, so that when
it's raining, water falls into the impluvium, which is a nice effect.
The walls of the atrium too are faced with marble.
Everything is so tasteful because you have such exquisite taste.
In the corners of the atrium are statues made of marble and bronze.
You even have some original Greek statues.
You had to pay much more than you intended for them at the auction, but it was worth
every ass.
That's the smallest Roman coin.
To see the mouths of all your Toffino's neighbours drop a mille passos, a mile that is, when
you had your housewarming party last week.
Your furniture is made of bronze and marble, embellished with gold and silver.
You have more chairs, stools, couches, benches and tables, and you know what to do with all
very elegant with elaborately carved legs.
There's a plethora of elaborate bronze lampstands so that at night the room is brighter than
in the daytime.
Directly off from the atrium and in alignment with the vestibule is your tablinum, which
is on a raised platform.
That's your office.
That's where you work and where you receive persons of inferior social status to yourself.
And that's where you keep all your money too in a locked strongbox bolted to the floor.
You wear the key on you at all times.
Also leading off from the atrium is the triclinium or dining room.
The word triclinium is derived from the Greek as we've seen.
It means literally the place with three couches or clinae because when you give a posh dinner
party it's customary to have your guests recline.
Our word recline too comes from the Greek word clinae in imitation of the Greek symposium.
When you want to show off you can display your finely engraved gold and silverware and
your crystal goblets.
That's right.
You have crystal goblets.
Remember that poor slave of various polio who nearly got eaten alive for smashing one
of his master's goblets.
We met him in the lecture about Roman slavery.
Well you have to admit it now that you're rich polio had a point.
He paid a lot more for the goblet than he did for that stupid slave.
And while we're talking about slaves you'll have to make a careful selection.
You'll want a number of educated slaves.
It's most prestigious to own Greek slaves of course.
You've seen that already.
But it helps too to have a smattering of other exotic races.
That's another way you can show off to your guests.
And when you get bored with them you can always change them.
Whenever you conquer a new people everyone rushes down to the slave market to buy some
of the new latest merchandise.
Oh and you'll definitely want a Greek cook by the way.
Your kitchen also leads off from the atrium.
It has lots of shelves for pots pans plates and so forth.
The rear of your house are the many cubicular or bedrooms.
There are no such things as double beds in the Roman world.
So you and your extremely aristocratic wife sleep separately in the house.
There are no walk-in closets either.
Everything that is used for storage is freestanding.
Your clothes for instance are all stored flat in chests.
The walls of your cubilia and all the public rooms of your house are decorated with beautiful
wall paintings.
The paintings depict a variety of subjects both figurative and abstract.
If you're living in the early first century AD you'll decorate your walls with fantastic
architectural vistas that take their inspiration from painted stage scenery.
There'll be lots of arches fountains gardens and buildings to feast your eyes upon and
to create a sense of other worldliness.
Let me just add that the Romans came very close to discovering linear perspective 1400
years before Filippo Brunelleschi did in the Renaissance.
If you live long enough, which I predict you will since you'll have so many slaves
to take care of you, in 20 years time you'll call in the painters again and replace what
have now become those boring and slightly faded architectural vistas with solid rectangles
of color containing figures inside which give the illusion of paintings that have been hung
on walls.
Roman wall painting is all about illusion.
It's one of the greatest accomplishments of Roman art.
Another great Roman art form is mosaic.
The floor of your atrium and your triclinium are lavishly decorated with mosaics.
Mosaics are very small pieces of colored stone that are fitted into wet mortar in a variety
of designs.
Again, both abstract and figurative.
The abstract ones can create a wonderful sense of geometric illusion.
The figurative ones are decorated with historical and mythological scenes as well as with scenes
of aquatic life.
You've obviously got the most up-to-date underfloor heating system.
It's called the hypercast system, which means heated from below, a Greek word.
It was invented around 100 BC and it's a forerunner of our central heating system.
It works as follows.
Fires are lit in one or more furnaces at the corners of the space you're heating and
the hot air and smoke pass through flues to the floor above, which is supported about
a foot and a half off the ground on small pillars.
Like all wealthy Romans, you love gardens, so you have an enclosed or peristyle garden
where you can stroll with your guests.
In the center of it is an elaborate fountain.
As you're not merely rich but super-rich in your dream, you'll own more than one property,
not only a domus in Rome itself but also a villa in the country.
Cicero, whom I mentioned before, one of the wealthiest Romans of his day, owned no fewer
than 12 residences.
I might add that Cicero got in over his head.
He was hopelessly in debt.
On one occasion, he borrowed two million cestuses from the dictator, Sulla, to buy a house on
the Palatine Hill.
Wealthy Romans could easily get a line of credit, so to speak.
A villa was no different in the arrangement of its rooms than a domus.
A favorite spot for wealthy Romans was the Bay of Naples.
The town of Stabiae, which is in the Bay of Naples, possessed a number of villi Maritimae,
seaside villas, set on bluffs with magnificent views of the bay below.
They put to shame any seaside villa today.
There's not much you can do as a man to show off your super-rich status in the clothing
department because there's a strictly enforced dress code.
The majority of Romans, irrespective of their socio-economic status, wear a solid white
toga when they're out in public.
If you happen to be a knight or member of the equestrian class, however, you'll wear
a toga with a thin purple band.
To qualify to be a knight, you have to own at least 400,000 cestuses.
If you're a senator, you'll wear a toga with a broad purple band.
Senators own at least 600,000 cestuses.
You can accessorize by wearing a fat gold ring as a mark of your status, but that's
about it.
In effect, you have to wear a uniform.
So it's up to your wife and daughters to show off your wealth for you.
They'll gad about in brightly colored garments made out of silk down to their ankles with
their arms either bare or covered with a cloak on top, and they'll wear expensive jewellery.
A few words about personal hygiene.
You and your family are so wealthy that you rarely visit the public baths.
That's because you have your own private bathing facilities.
The poet of it in his saucy poem, The Art of Love, emphasized the importance of personal
hygiene.
Don't let your armpits stink like a goat.
Don't let your teeth turn black because of laziness.
Give your mouth a wash every morning.
A good advice then as now.
Toothpaste wasn't invented, of course, so you use bicarbonate of soda instead.
However, here's a tip.
A lot of Romans swore by urine, apparently also very effective on the teeth, though I
can't say I've tried it myself.
The chances are, even though you're rich, that you still have stinking breath.
There's no such thing as dental floss.
So you might want to pop a lozinge in your mouth just to be on the safe side before you
go kissing anyone.
Let's now dream about being the wife of a super rich Roman.
I've already mentioned that you can be quite a show off.
To begin with, however, you'll probably want to remove the hair on your legs.
Don't let bristly hair make your legs rough, cautions of it.
And you'll want to plaster your face with thick makeup to make it look white because
white skin is very fashionable.
It indicates that you never expose your face to direct sunlight, as a working class woman
does.
You'll want to give your cheeks a rosy hue, however.
And for that, I recommend the use of red ochre, which is what the Egyptians used as
well.
Or else, you might use dregs from a cask of wine.
If you're a woman of a certain age, you might want to slap a bit of acid milk on your face.
It's excellent for getting rid of wrinkles.
And you'll probably spend an hour or more in front of the mirror each day while a slave,
or rather several slaves, attend to your hair.
A relief sculpture from Trier in Germany shows two female slaves fussing with their mistress'
hair, a third holding up a mirror for her, and a fourth with a pitcher, perhaps to sprinkle
water to damp the hair down.
If you don't like the colour of your hair, or if you're beginning to turn grey, you
can always dye it.
Portraits of Roman women indicate that their hairstyles became extremely elaborate in
the imperial period.
And there's a wide variety of styles, too.
Ovid says that the fashion changed every day.
That's probably a slight exaggeration, but we can certainly track changes from one
reign to the next.
There's a portrait dating to the time of the Emperor Vespasium, a second half of the
first century AD, of a woman with a kind of peacock's fan of curls that must have been
held in place by a frame made of wood or wire.
However, if worst comes to worst, and you're getting a bit wispy up on top, you can always
wear a wig.
I don't need to remind you to dab on lots of perfume, not just on your face, but all
over your body.
That's the fashionable thing to do.
You'll also want to wear loads of expensive jewellery as a sign of your status.
Gold rings, a gold necklace, a gold diadem, gold bracelets, a gold ankle bands, gold earrings.
These are adorned with precious stones such as emeralds, pearls, garnets, carnelians and
so forth.
The work of Roman jewelers is incredibly refined, and there's virtually no limit to the money
you can spend on this sort of stuff.
Oh, and if you're suffering from blotchy skin or some other form of skin disease, then
you might want to try a concoction consisting of cooked calf, genitals, honey and vinegar.
I'm told it works wonders.
So, what are you going to do now that you're all doled up?
Perhaps you'll go and visit one of your posh friends.
If you do, you'll travel in a litter borne by slaves with curtains around it so that
nobody can peek inside.
Wealthy women, as we saw earlier, were not precluded from leading a public life in the
imperial period, so it may be that you're a priestess and public benefactress like
Eumarchia, the lady from Pompeii whom we talked about earlier.
What about your husband?
What does he do all day?
Well, he probably struts his stuff and throws his weight around.
The first ritual of his day is the salutatio, which gives us our word, salutation.
That's when all his clients and other hangers on come round to the house to inquire about
his health, pay their respects and do business transactions with him.
The relationship between a client and his patron, the Latin words are clienz and patronus,
is a strictly formal one.
Clients depend upon their patrons for help and sustenance.
The client is in a position of complete inferiority to his patron.
Many of them would be ex-slaves.
The client got the occasional free meal, or perhaps leftovers, while his patron got the
attention he craved to bolster his sense of self-importance.
The more clients he had, the more prestige he had, and the more he could throw his weight
around.
So his clients come round in the morning and hang about until he dayns to get up.
When he finally emerges, they all jostle for his attention.
He might ask the lucky ones out to dinner.
In return, they'll flatter him constantly.
The poet Juvenel writes feelingly about the humiliation of being a client, having to stuff
your mouth with your cloak to pretend that you've been overcome by a laughing fit at
some pathetic joke that your patron has made.
To us it seems humiliating for both parties, but not to the Romans.
The client-patron relationship was central to the Roman social system.
It oiled the wheels and was mutually beneficial.
After the salutario, your husband heads down to the forum to hang out with his pals.
He probably has some public business to attend to, because serious wealth and politics go
hand in hand.
He may well be a magistrate, even perhaps a senator.
As a senator, he enjoys a lot of privileges, like a front seat at the games.
It's conceivable, however, that he's turned his back on public life and decided to become
a knight, an equate.
A knight's the equities were free to engage in commercial undertakings, whereas senators
were not.
Senators could not engage in either maritime trade or tax collection.
Of course, in Rome there are always ways around everything.
As a senator, you could always get one of your clients to act unofficially on your behalf.
Though if you got caught, you ran the risk of being chucked out of the Senate.
A senator's wealth primarily rested upon land ownership and agriculture.
When your husband leaves the house, many of his clients go with him, helping to create
a sense of his importance among the general public.
Men clear the way before him, including men on horseback, Numidian, that's to say North
African horsemen, were very good at that.
OK, it's time to see what's on the menu tonight.
You've invited half the neighborhood as usual, or rather you've invited a choice group of
eight or so, but each of them will come attended by his clients, so you can probably multiply
that by at least five.
Sour's udders stuffed with kidneys always go down a treat, as do dormice, smothered
in honey and poppy seeds.
Salted snails and urchins are also a tasty appetizer.
For the main course, you might have Trojan pig, that's a roasted pig stuffed with sausages
and fruit.
It's so named for the Trojan horse, which was stuffed with Greeks.
A good joke.
The pig is served standing on its feet.
When you cut it open, the sausages and fruit spill out just like the Greeks who took Troy.
Another popular dish is roasted wild boar.
Why not order your cook to insert live thrushes inside the boar, so that when it's carved
open, the birds flap about.
True, the trick has become a bit passe.
Well, how about the fetuses of rabbits?
They're frightfully expensive, but of course, money's no object.
Clams and oysters served cold might do either as a starter or as a dessert.
Probably you're going to gorge yourself.
You might even make yourself sick.
However, the notion that the Romans had specially built rooms called vomitoria, to which they
retired in order to throw up, is a complete fabrication.
Vomitorium is indeed a Latin word, and of course, it gives us our word vomit, but it
refers to the passage below or behind the seats of an amphitheater that provides the
entrance and exit for the crowd of spectators.
In other words, the passage vomits out the spectators.
As for your beverage, you'll drink wine, of course, including a lot of local Italian wines,
though you might want to supplement them with some fancy imported Greek wines.
Beer is strictly for the lower classes.
If you like your wine sweet and spicy, you might try a goblet or two of conditum.
As wine which has been mixed with an assortment of honey, pepper, dates, laurel, saffron and
mastic, and left to mature over time.
What about entertainment?
Have you thought about that?
Well, suppose you'll want to regale your guest with a recitation of that poem you've
been working on.
You'll also want to put on a bit of a show to keep things lively, blind sword swallowers,
unlegged jugglers and the like.
Oh, by the way, watch out for thieves.
I mean, watch out for light-fingered guests.
They're everywhere.
They'll steal your napkins, your cups, your spoons, even your lamps.
So far I've probably been giving the impression that super-rich Romans were vulgar and crude.
That may well have been true of a lot of them, but it certainly wasn't true of all.
It certainly wouldn't have been true of you, even if you had risen from the gutter, because
part of your fantasy is that you've suddenly acquired extremely sophisticated taste on
a par with the owner of the so-called Villa of the Papyrus.
The Villa of the Papyrus is located just outside the city of Herculaneum, beside the Bay of
Naples.
It takes its name from the large number of carbonized papyrus rolls, the equivalent of
ancient books, some 1800 in all that were found in its ruins, resulting from the eruption
of Mount Vesuvius in late August AD 79.
Many educated Romans had private libraries, but this is by far the largest that has come
to light so far.
The J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, California, which is accurately modeled on the plan of
the Villa of the Papyrus, renders the spirit of opulence of the original.
In addition to the cache of Papyrus, 24 marble statues and 51 bronze statues came to light
in the ruins of the Villa.
That's the largest number of statues that have been found in any single Roman site.
Though they include a few that are Roman portrait busts, the majority are either Greek or Greek-inspired.
They must have cost a fortune, or rather several fortunes.
Among them are several busts of Greek philosophers and statesmen indicating that the owner was
a committed Phil Hellene, or lover of Greek culture.
I talked about Phil Hellenism in my course entitled Greece and Rome, an integrated history
of the Mediterranean.
So, who was the owner?
He was almost certainly Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninos, Julius Caesar's father-in-law,
a well-known patron of Greek philosophers.
A Piso didn't just adorn his home with fancy Greek artworks.
On the contrary, his fascination with Greek culture ran very deep.
Like others in his set, he studied Greek philosophy and Greek literature and he learned how to
speak Greek.
His art collecting was merely the most visible aspect of this tendency.
It's him and others like him whom we have to thank for keeping Greek culture alive.
If you'd been invited to Piso's house, you can be sure that there would have been a very
serious tone to the conversation.
Piso liked to hobnob with intellectuals.
He believed in high thinking as well as high living.
I hope you can speak passable Greek because probably much of the serious conversation
will be in Greek and you don't want to look like a klutz.
To conclude, we've been mainly talking about the lifestyle of well under 1% of the population
of Rome, less than 1% of the free population that is.
Remember, you're poor.
The chances of improving your social and economic status aren't particularly bright.
And if you do improve your status, it probably won't be very far.
You have as good a chance of becoming seriously wealthy as you do of winning the lottery.
It's time to wake up.
Tomorrow, you'll have to renew the struggle to make ends meet.
But no one can stop you from dreaming.
In the next lecture, we're going to look at one very real avenue by which a few ordinary
men and women could escape their everyday humdrum lives by achieving celebrity status.
