What could be more contemporary than being a celebrity?
Isn't a celebrity culture a completely modern phenomenon?
The simple answer is no.
I had a lot of fun writing a book called Celebrity in Antiquity from Media Tarts to Tabloid
Queens seeking to demonstrate that many of the phenomena that we associate with celebrity
were in fact in place in the ancient world.
As far back in time as we can travel, human beings have wanted to be talked about, both
during their lifetimes and no less important after they're dead.
Gilgamesh, king of Uruk whom we encountered early in our course, yearned to leave a great
name behind him and was prepared to risk his life to do so.
He succeeded in leaving a great name.
We're talking about him to this day.
But Gilgamesh was a king.
What about people lower down in the social scale?
Aren't they filled with exactly the same burning desire as Gilgamesh?
The Greek hero Achilles certainly was.
The god offered him two fates.
He could either lead a long and undistinguished life and live to a ripe old age, or else
he could die young and achieve immortal fame.
The Greek words for this are kleos athiton.
He chose the latter of course, which is why we talk about him to this day.
Now the Greeks as we all know were a highly intelligent people.
They knew as much as we do that celebrity comes at a high price.
When we meet Achilles down in Hades in the Odyssey, Odysseus tries to console him by
telling him how famous he is.
Achilles however brushes him aside with the comment, I'd rather be a casual worker living
on earth for a man who's poor than lord of all the dead.
In other words, what's the point of being a celebrity once you're dead?
Well, I'll admit it, Achilles wasn't exactly what we would call a celebrity.
It's also a fact that the fame he achieved was contingent upon his dying and early death.
Though we might note that dying and early death always gives a boost to your celebrity
as the Greeks doubtless understood.
A very early piece of evidence for the existence of a celebrity culture dates to 423 BC.
It involves the philosopher Socrates.
Tradition has it that at the first performance of Aristophanes' comic masterpiece, The Clouds,
which gives star billing to a fictionalized Socrates, some foreigners who were in the
audience in Athens began whispering among themselves, who the heck is this Socrates
fellow?
Have you heard of him?
Whereupon the real Socrates, who was in the audience, rose from his seat and stood in
silence so that everybody could see who he was.
It may seem a bit odd that a philosopher could become a celebrity.
Can you name any philosopher alive today?
But if you'd lived in the Greek or the Roman world, and if you'd been educated, there's
a good chance you would have been one of those people who idolized intellectuals.
Just imagine it for a moment.
You're idling along and someone ahead of you says, look, there's that poet Virgil.
You immediately strain forward to see who the fellow is talking about.
You've read some of Virgil's poetry, or at least you've heard of his name.
Virgil are always talking about him, so you try to get level with him to catch sight of
his face.
By now, however, he's taken off and is running down a side street with you and a lot of others
in hot pursuit.
Well, it's hard to think of a poet today being mobbed, but that is indeed what happened
to Virgil.
His biographer, Suetonius, tells us, if ever Virgil was recognized in Rome, which he visited
rarely, he would hide in the nearest building to get away from the people who were trailing
after him and pointing him out.
Porol Virgil, an early victim of something akin to Beatlemania, though I think it's
a bit of a stretch to imagine that many of his fans would have been teenage Roman girls.
And at least when he returned to the farm where he lived up in the north of Italy near
Mantua, he wouldn't have been plagued by the paparazzi.
So why would you want to become a Roman celebrity?
For much the same reasons that people want to become celebrities today.
You might want to achieve recognition for your personal worth, because you have a good
opinion of yourself and you want others to pay you court.
Or you might want to achieve a form of immortality that will survive your death rather like Achilles'
did before he died and found out how worthless it was.
Or you might have a pathological desire for attention which you needed to satisfy.
Or you might want to achieve celebrity in order to get your hands on wealth or sex or
power or some combination thereof.
Finally, you might want to achieve visibility, not for visibility's sake as such, but in
order more effectively to promote some ideal or pet cause.
All these factors were in play in antiquity, though only the rich and famous would have
been able to use their celebrity to promote a cause.
The most conspicuous example of someone who used his celebrity status to promote an ideal
is the Emperor Augustus.
Augustus sought to project the image of the quintessential public servant, a man whose
life was unswervingly devoted to the common good.
He promoted his celebrity by putting his head, or at least an idealized simulacrum thereof,
on the obverse of every Roman coin minted throughout the empire, with the result that
he became known to the entirety of his subjects, no matter where they lived.
That was an unprecedented development in the history of celebrity.
Augustus saturated the numismatic medium, so to speak, whenever you put your hand in
your purse, out popped Augustus.
Well, you're not the Emperor of course, far from it, you're just an ordinary man or woman.
So how are you going to project your image in a pre-technological era?
Unless you're a highly talented philosopher or poet, the answer is that you're going to
have to build your reputation almost exclusively by word of mouth, that's to say, by becoming
someone whom other people talk about.
It doesn't matter what they say about you.
Remember, there's no such thing as bad publicity, either then or now.
It helps of course to be good looking, charming, witty, and have a winning smile.
Aren't those the kind of people you want to hear giving lectures for the great courses?
Well, the ancients traded on their looks and personalities every bit as much as our contemporaries
do.
The Athenian politician Alcibiades, for instance, was shameless in the exploitation of his good
looks and had men as well as women falling head over heels in love with him.
It wasn't always good looks that made you a celebrity, however.
Socrates became the most famous man in Athens, in part because he was fat and ugly and therefore
he stood out in a crowd.
I've no doubt he had oodles of charisma as well, even if it wasn't of the typical sort.
If you want to become a famous politician, and which politician doesn't want to become
famous, it helps if you have money because then you can give generous handouts and make
people beholden to you.
Your clients will come in very handy in this regard.
We talked about clients in the previous lecture.
They're the people who hang about your doorstep every day waiting to say good morning to you.
Make sure when you go out that they all throng around you and cheer you.
Tell them to be boisterous and rowdy.
That way they'll attract more attention.
That's the way to canvas and get elected to public office by getting your face out there
and making a lot of noise in public.
There are, of course, other ways of becoming a celebrity.
In fact, if the only thing you're interested in is being talked about, you can, of course,
do something monumentally evil, like the Greek arsonist, Herastratus.
Herastratus is remembered to this day for no better reason than that he burned down
the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus in Turkey around 350 BC.
He did so as he later confessed under torture simply because he had an insatiable appetite
for celebrity.
The Ephesians sought to punish Herastratus posthumously by banning all mention of his
name.
It was a complete waste of time.
Their efforts were a dismal failure.
They may even have made him more famous.
The Romans did much the same thing in the case of bad emperors like the Emperor Nero.
They passed a law against them entitled Dam Natio Memoriae and then took steps to try
to obliterate all traces of their memory.
This too proved a dismal failure.
So what other ways are there to become a Roman celebrity?
If you're not an intellectual and you don't fancy a career either as a politician or as
a famous criminal?
It's true that the path will be much more arduous than it is today, but even so, there
are several routes by which you might be able to achieve this status.
One is to go into show business.
Celebrity actors have been going strong since the 4th century BC.
At first, they were confined to their Greek world, but by the 1st century BC, they turn
up in the Roman world as well.
As a celebrity actor, you'll be able to earn a lot of money.
You'll also be able to hobnob with the elite.
Just think of Quintus Roschius Gallus, the most famous Roman actor of all time.
He began his life as a slave and when he was at the peak of his career, he earned a cool
500,000 cestuses.
That put him squarely in the super tax bracket.
One of his fans, the dictator Cornelius Sulla, elevated him to the rank of knight, just as
the queen ennobles actors today, Sir Anthony Hopkins, Sir Derek Jacobi, Dame, Judy, Dench
and the like.
To build up your reputation, it'll be helpful to develop a trademark style of acting.
The Roman historian Tacitus speaks of the thunderous applause that greeted even a moderately
well-known actor when he merely struck a pose on stage.
Of course, you'll probably have to put up with being the victim of malicious gossip.
We hear of an otherwise unknown Rufus, who wrote a scurrilous book in which he made,
I quote, revelations about who's sleeping with whom and which of them is consorting
with kings.
If you don't have the talent for acting, you might consider becoming a gladiator.
Though in reality, it won't exactly be a choice.
I've always wanted to be a gladiator myself.
I suspect it's even more exciting than working for the great courses, albeit a tad more risky.
The career path is pretty straightforward, although you have to be a convicted murderer
or an arsonist or some other lowlife.
You'll be packed off to gladiatorial school for a few months where you'll be under the
charge of a lannister or trainer.
Be fed on Philae Mignon, or the Roman equivalent thereof each day, and then Bob's your uncle.
You'll want to choose a stage name to give yourself a bit of mystique.
Achilles might do it, the name of the greatest of the Greek warriors, or perhaps an adjective
like pherox, meaning savage.
That should put the fear of the gods into your opponents.
If you're really talented, you might get a gig in the Colosseum before a crowd of fifty
thousand people, or baying for blood, whether yours or your opponents.
You know the routine, but once you enter the Colosseum, you feel larger than life yourself.
After you've done some warm-up exercises, brandishing your sword and shield, perhaps
or alternatively brandishing your trident and net, the Romans liked to see gladiators
armed with different weapons fighting against each other, trumpet sound, and you stand to
attention before the emperor.
The emperor's sitting in his imperial box in the middle of the Colosseum, a hush falls,
and you and the men you've perhaps trained alongside, the men you're now going to try
to maim and kill, chant out, aue imperator, nos morituri te salutant, hail Caesar, we
who are about to die salute you.
When the emperor drops a napkin, a mighty roar goes up, a roar from fifty thousand people
in a building shaped like a kind of funnel, just imagine it, and it's every man for himself.
Rome was big time, but there were at least seventy other amphitheaters dotted all over
the Roman Empire, where B rank gladiators fought it out against one another.
But if you actually succeeded in Rome, you'll become a household name, and not just a household
name, but also a household face.
Your picture will appear on the posters that are displayed in public places, advertising
the next fight you'll appear in.
True, there was always the possibility that your career might be cut short, if so, you
won't get the chance to tell your grandchildren about how the crowd cheered for you when you
entered the arena, and then, after killing your opponent, how you received the palm
branch and laurel crown in token of your victory.
A recent estimate of the death rate of gladiators by Mary Beard and Keith Hopkins is that one
in six of them died per fight.
Even if you survive, you'll probably be over the hill, if not under it, by the time you
reach thirty.
But look on the bright side, there's a lot of glamour attached to being a gladiator,
as there is to any profession in which people risk their lives.
Bullfighting is the obvious modern-day equivalent.
Like bullfighters, gladiators were believed to have heightened sexual potency.
So you'd be a heartthrob, as we know from Graffiti from Pompeii.
Caledas, the Thracian, makes all the girls sigh, says one Graffiti.
Crescens, the net fighter, holds the hearts of all the girls, says another.
A groupies will probably hang around the amphitheatre after the fight is over, just as they hang
about the stage door today after a concert by Metallica.
We know that it must have been tremendous fun being a famous gladiator because ordinary
people tried to get in on the act as well.
Knights, Senators, even the Emperor Commodus craved to be in the spotlight before a cheering
crowd.
Even women volunteered to be gladiators.
And the most famous gladiator of all was of course Spartacus, the leader of the slave
revolt that terrorized Rome from 73 to 71 BC.
It seems unlikely, however, that he ever appeared in an amphitheatre since he initiated the
revolt by breaking out of his gladiatorial school at Capua.
You'd earn just as much fame, perhaps even a bit more so, as a charioteer.
Spectators in Rome would queue all night for a good seat at the Circus Maximus, a circus
means racetrack or hippodrome.
The Circus Maximus could accommodate a quarter of a million spectators.
There were hippodromes like it throughout the Empire.
The very large one was at Constantinople.
It was rebuilt by the Emperor Constantine in the early 4th century with a seating capacity
of 100,000.
Your fans would be totally devoted to you and no doubt keep records of all the races you
competed in.
They might even be so devoted to you that they would die for you.
When a celebrity charioteer named Felix was cremated in AD 70, one fan was so distraught
that he threw himself onto Felix's funeral pyre and was burnt alive.
Like soccer fans today, chariot racing fans would sometimes riot.
We haven't talked about crowds before in this course.
The Latin word for a crowd is turba, which gives us our word turbulent.
When you get a dense mass of people together in a confined space who have a reason to be
worked up, anything can happen.
And it did.
In the circus at Constantinople, in the reign of Justinian, supporters of the chariot teams
ran riot, resulting in the deaths of thousands of people.
Like a modern sports star, charioteers moved, or perhaps in some cases were transferred,
from one team to another.
The teams in question were known by their colours, the whites, the reds, the blues and
the greens, racing stables in effect.
We hear of a certain Diocles who began driving for the whites, transferred to the greens
six years later, and finally joined up with the reds three years after that.
We don't know what transfer fees, if any, were involved, but we shouldn't rule the
possibility out.
The strongest evidence for the fact that some charioteers achieved superstar status lies
in the fact that the emperor Nero's greatest ambition was to become a victor in the four-horse
chariot race at Olympia.
Nero achieved his life's ambition, even though he fell out of his chariot and had to withdraw
from the race.
The judges, who knew which side their bread was buttered on, awarded him first prize anyway.
Incidentally, Nero also saw himself as the world's greatest singer and won a number of
rigged singing contests.
He's been aptly described as the Elvis of ancient Rome.
Clearly, it wasn't enough for him to be the most famous man alive.
He also wanted to be a celebrity, something quite different, to be respected, revered and
adored for his own sake, and not just for his title.
Sadly, he just didn't have the talent.
Even so, he's a fascinating phenomenon, and his craving for superstar status tells us
a lot about Roman celebrity culture.
Interestingly, when Nero died, a few Nero looky-likeies popped up here and there.
As I suppose we have to call them, who dressed like him, just as today, people dress up to
look like Elvis.
So he did, in a way, achieve celebrity.
Let's now turn to women.
How as a woman could you become a celebrity?
As in our society, you'd face an uphill battle to achieve parity with men.
I've already mentioned that some women actually became gladiators, but we don't know of any
of them who became celebrities in that profession.
The best way to become famous as a woman was, sad to say, by being attached to a famous
man, or by exhibiting outstanding virtue, or by being blessed with a voracious sexual
appetite.
Olivia, who was the wife of the Emperor Augustus, is a prime example of a woman who achieved
celebrity by being attached to a famous man, though it's important to note that she only
achieved prominence after her husband's death.
In other words, when there was no danger of her reputation overshadowing his.
She achieved high visibility in part by presenting herself in the traditional role of the quintessential
dutiful Roman widow, whose sole mission in life was to burnish the memory of her deceased
husband.
A woman of exceptional virtue was Cornelia, mother of two prominent Roman politicians called
Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus.
She was so faithful to the memory of her dead husband that she even turned down the offer
of marriage from an Eastern potentate.
As a woman with a voracious sexual appetite, or at least a woman who had a reputation for
a voracious sexual appetite, we can't do better than evoke Messalina, the wife of the
Emperor Claudius.
Messalina was reputed to hold the record for having sex.
With the most number of partners over a 24 hour period, her record stood at 25, one more
than the record of the well-known Roman prostitute.
You might not become as famous as Messalina, but if you became a prostitute, you might
achieve a celebrity of sorts.
We hear of men travelling very long distances to have sex with famous prostitutes, some
of whom earned fabulous sums of money.
In the arts and in the professions, however, very few women made their mark.
One of the very few female intellectual celebrities we hear of was Hypatia of Alexandria.
She was a philosopher and mathematician.
Hypatia was also credited with being hot, and it may well be that her fame was largely
due to the fact that she combined beauty with brains.
I'd like to end this lecture by talking about two of the most remarkable women that the
ancient world produced.
Although they were anything but ordinary, their stories both indicate that there were
women in the Roman world who knew exactly how to market their charms in order to get
what they wanted.
Cleopatra VII, a Queen of Egypt and its last reigning monarch, was one of the most skilled
self-promoters of all time.
She was anything but a dizzy airhead.
On the contrary, she used her formidable talents and singular looks to marry the most powerful
man in the world.
First, she had a steamy affair with Julius Caesar, and then, when he was assassinated,
she turned her attentions to Mark Antony, who was then a rising star.
Too bad for her that she backed the wrong horse, as she and Antony were defeated by
Octavian, and they both committed suicide.
Cleopatra knew how to grandstand and how to exploit a photo op.
She totally upstaged Antony when the two first met, a scene that provided the inspiration
for the famous description in Shakespeare's Antony in Cleopatra.
When Antony first comes to meet Cleopatra, she teasingly evades him by going off on
her barge.
For her own person, it beggared all description.
The city cast her people out upon her, and Antony, enthroned in the marketplace, did
sit alone, whistling to the air, which but for vacancy, had gone to gaze on Cleopatra
II and made a gap in nature.
The other highly skilled self-promoter was Theodora, who rose from the gutter to become
the wife of the Emperor Justinian.
Theodora was a mime artist, credited by her detractors with performing lewd sexual acts
on stage.
Perhaps Scripti's artist comes closest to describing her best.
I'll be talking about mime artists in the lecture about Roman's relaxing.
The historian Procopius reports that Theodora used to lie naked on the floor of the theatre
while geese pecked at her private parts.
This proved too much for old Justinian.
He was actually twice her age, so he popped the question, and the two promptly got married.
Though Theodora is exceptional, there's no doubt that many female artists won plaudits
and achieved celebrity, if not quite, to the same degree.
The tomb of a certain Bazilla, a mime artist, bore an inscription which commemorated her
for, I quote, having won resounding fame among many peoples and many cities.
The fact remains, however, that we hear of few female, fewer female than male celebrities
in the Roman world, and that speaks volumes, yet again, for the scandalous waste of female
talent.
To conclude, many of the marks of a celebrity culture were indeed in place in Roman society,
though it greatly helped to have wealth and status.
There were avenues available for ordinary people of talent, chiefly in the world of entertainment,
the world not only of actors, gladiators and dancers, but also of philosophers and poets.
Despite one or two spectacular exceptions, celebrity was largely the preserve of men.
In the next lecture, we're going to examine another career path for enterprising individuals
that was also largely monopolized by men, namely crime.
