Today we're going to imagine that you've decided to turn to a life of crime. Crime, including
violent crime, has been with us since the beginning of time. The Hebrew Bible acknowledged
that fact in the story of the killing of Abel by his brother Cain. And so, too, did the
Romans. In fact, the Romans went so far as to write domestic violence into the state's
foundation charter. A Romulus, the city's founder, impetuously slew his brother Remus
after Remus had derided the low walls of the new city by jumping over them. So perish anyone
who mocks our walls. A Romulus cried as he thrust his spear into Remus' belly. There's an even more
disturbing instance of a fratricidal killing in the patriotic legend of Horatius Cockles. Horatius
was the gallant Roman youth who, along with two comrades, saved Rome from an Etruscan takeover.
The Etruscans, who lived to the north of Rome, were Rome's enemies in the period of the monarchy.
When he got home, triumphant from the fray, Horatius saw his sister weeping over the death of an
Etruscan youth to whom she had been betrothed. He was incensed with rage. Without a moment's
hesitation, he did exactly what Romulus had done. He ran his sister through, uttering the words,
so perish any Roman woman who mourns for an enemy. Horatius was tried, found guilty,
and sentenced to death. However, on an appeal from his father, he was acquitted.
Well, we as Romans can draw what conclusion we like from the tale, though I think it's
fairly clear that we're expected to sympathize with Horatius. Though both these stories involve
the safety of the Roman state and deal with atypical crimes, they indicate that the Romans,
like the early Hebrews, fully understood that violence, especially unpremeditated violence,
often originates in the family. We should not, however, automatically assume that crime was
as much a problem in Roman society as it is in ours. Murder, as opposed to manslaughter,
may have been relatively rare, given the greater cohesiveness of Roman society.
It certainly was in England and Wales until about 1850. In England and Wales, only 15 murders were
reported for the year 1810 when the population stood at 10 million. What we can say is that if
you were elderly, sick, disabled, or living alone, you would certainly have been an easy target in
Rome. We know virtually nothing about ordinary criminals other than what we can glean from
Roman law. Sadly, no criminal has left us an autobiography. We do, however, know that
serial killers existed in the Roman world. Several Roman emperors, including Nero, were serial killers.
Most of what we know about Roman crime relates to what we would call today white collar crime
and involved corruption, embezzlement, intimidation, extortion, and so on.
Though these crimes no doubt existed at all levels of society, we only hear of them at the
higher end of the social scale, and what we're primarily interested in is the common criminal.
Let's begin by supposing you're a slave and that you thieve from your master or mistress.
I'm not just talking about swigging down the remains of the wine after a banquet or scoffing
down one of the pig's udders before you carry out the plate. I mean, say, stealing your mistress's
favorite pair of earrings. It doesn't take much imagination to recognize that you'd be asking
for the chop, both literally and metaphorically. You might even get the chop if you unintentionally
committed a crime, say, by smashing your master's precious vars. As we saw in an earlier lecture,
that's what nearly happened to the slave of that creep Vettius Polio, except that the Emperor
Augustus thought it his intention to feed the poor sod to his lampries. The anecdote has a
happy ending from our perspective, but it also tells us that a Roman master could take whatever
punitive action he saw fit even to the extent of taking his slaves life. Pity to the poor slave
whose mistress merely mislays her favorite pair of earrings. She's convinced she put them on her
dressing table and you're the obvious culprit. The fact is her daughter borrowed them without
asking for them, but you being at hand and being an obvious suspect get beaten before they turn up.
This sort of thing must have happened all the time, because as a slave you were naturally
under suspicion all the time. I suspect that what prevented the Romans from injuring or
killing their slaves much of the time was the fact that they represented a financial investment.
Had Polio fed his slave to the lampries, he might have felt some momentary satisfaction,
but the chances are that an hour or so later he'd be saying,
Raps, I wish I hadn't done that. I've not only lost a prize goblet, but also the
thousand Cisterci that I've forked out only last year to buy the wretch.
Of course, if as a slave you committed a genuinely serious crime, you'd die a horrible death and
everybody would think that was fair. As we've seen already, a crucifixion was the preferred
form of execution for slaves. If you murdered your master, a pretty stupid crime to commit,
because slaves would be the prime suspects, then likely all your fellow slaves would be
executed as well, the argument being that they should have prevented you. On one occasion,
when that happened, 400 slaves were condemned to death. In response, a riot broke out. The
prospect of the indiscriminate slaughter of so many innocent men and women, and perhaps of
children too, was too much even for the Roman stomach to bear. So the Emperor Claudius had
to intervene, not so much to call the bloodbath off, but rather to ensure that it went ahead
in an orderly fashion. To sum up, when a slave committed a crime of any sort, it was their
owners who acted as prosecutor, jury, judge, and very likely in some cases as executioner combined.
Let's now suppose you're a free person who leads the life of crime. Well, the good news is that
there's no police force to investigate your crimes and to bring you to book. The Roman Empire was
what we would call self-policing. I'll talk about the implications of that in a moment.
True from the days of Augustus onwards, there were soldiers stationed in Rome, such as the
Praetorian Guard, but their primary function was to protect the Emperor and keep public order.
They certainly didn't have time to go around investigating crimes.
Rome, like Greece, didn't have a public prosecutor either. Victims of crime would bring what was
in effect a civil suit before an elected magistrate called a praetor. Assuming that the criminal could
be apprehended in some way, most likely by a group of concerned citizens, the praetor would then
conduct a trial and pass judgment. It goes without saying, however, that if you knew you
were likely to be proven guilty, you'd have plenty of time to escape before the trial took place,
because you weren't other than in exceptional circumstances kept in custody. The state only
got involved in a lawsuit when it determined that its security was at risk. That meant primarily
in cases involving treason. Another area of state intervention was in the marketplace, where
the state appointed officials who had to regulate fair trade by imposing a standard system of
weights and measures. What this all means is that if you were the victim of any kind of crime,
you'd have to be proactive in redressing the injury that you had suffered, particularly if you
had discovered the criminal inflagrante delicto. This will be much easier if you're a man than a
woman, and if you're well to do rather than if you're poor. It wasn't that the Romans were
indifferent to crime. On the contrary, they like the Greeks and like supporters of the death penalty
in this country believed that the victims of crime have the right to exact their own vengeance.
As Cicero reasoned, our instinct to exact vengeance is nature's gift to us to ensure
both our survival and that of our family. So, if you were a thief and you broke into someone's
house at night, the owner was at perfect liberty to kill you. If, however, you were discovered
breaking in during the daytime, the owner was expected to call the neighbors and bring you
before a magistrate. Likewise, if you committed a murder or a homicide, the victim's next of kin
was expected to bring you to justice. In many cases, however, I suspect that the victim's
next of kin, along with his neighbors and friends, would have exacted rough justice on the spot if
they could, say by beating you into a bloody pulp and leaving you for dead. And unless it could be
proved that they had lynched the wrong man, no legal action would be taken. If you did go through
the courts as the victim's next of kin, however, you could demand blood money from the killer.
That's to say, a sum of money in compensation for the life of your relative. The amount would be
determined by an arbitrator. Arbitrators played an important part in Roman legal process because
the system was much more informal than ours. Of all the murders ever committed, the most notorious
was that of Gaius Julius Caesar on the Ides of March, 44 BC, which was perpetrated by no
fewer than 60 conspirators, none of whom turned informant, a unique statistic in the history of
murder. It was after Caesar's murder that the first recorded post-mortem was undertaken by the
victim's personal physician, a man called Antistias. Incidentally, when Julius Caesar's funeral
took place five days later, mob violence broke out and many houses were set alight. Political
unrest was simmering beneath the surface in Rome on many occasions, sometimes orchestrated by
leading political figures, although in the absence of CCTV surveillance, it was usually
impossible to identify the instigators. There was no police force, no public prosecutor,
and no lawyers either, although if you happened to be well off, you could hire the services of
someone with the gift of the gab who would write a speech for you. The best and also the most
expensive speechwriter in the business in the late republican era was Marcus Tullius Cicero.
Cicero would defend you no matter how guilty you were for the right exorbitant fee, of course.
One of his clients was a sleazebag called Titus Anius Milo. Milo was a mafia style boss. He got
into a shootout, rather a pitched battle, with a prominent politician called Publius
Claudius Pulca, just outside Rome on the Appian Way. We don't know how many thugs on both sides
were killed, but Claudius himself was slain and Milo was accused of assassinating him.
The facts of the case were so clear that even Cicero couldn't get his client off the hook this
time. But Milo fled before the verdict was pronounced. A self-imposed exile was very common
in the ancient world, since, as I said, those facing charges were not taken into custody before
the trial took place. Political thuggery was just one of the faces of violent crime in Rome.
The streets were particularly dangerous at night. There was little in the way of street
lighting, no policing, as we've seen, and all sorts of undesirables would be lurking in the
shadows ready to mug you. If you do go out at night, even in a city like Rome, I strongly
recommend that you take a few burly slaves with you. If you don't, you'll be asking for trouble.
A burglary was also common. If you live in a house or a lower-story apartment,
you'll want to have iron bars across your windows.
So far, I've talked mainly about crime in the city. If you happen to take a
sea voyage for pleasure or if you're a merchant, there's the ever-present risk that you'll be
captured and ransomed by pirates, particularly, of course, if you look wealthy. If you're not
wealthy, the chances are that the pirates will kill you or sell you into slavery somewhere
outside the borders of the Roman Empire. The Greek biographer, Plutarch, who loathed pirates,
describes how, if you said to a pirate something to the effect of,
now, my good fellow, I should point out to you that I'm a Roman citizen, so let me go on my way.
There's a good chap, and we'll forget all about it. Well, if you said this, at this point,
the pirate would prostrate himself on the ground before you and humbly beg your forgiveness,
and when he'd had enough fun tormenting you, he'd lower a rope down the side of his ship
and politely tell you to climb down, no doubt watching you as you floundered about for a few
moments before going under all the more quickly because he'd made you wear your toga to show
you're a Roman. Pirates pretty much operated at will, not only attacking ships on the high seas,
but also coastal towns and islands. It was Pompey the Great who cleared the Mediterranean of them
in the 50s BC, though we shouldn't suppose that he eliminated them entirely. After all,
they're still around today. The countryside was every bit as dangerous as the sea.
Brigands were particularly numerous in the swamp lands and mountains of Italy,
and the provinces were no doubt more dangerous than Italy. That's why Roman towns were walled
and why their gates were closed at night to provide protection against bandit attacks.
Families would also bolt and bar their doors at night. You can't be too careful.
The countryside, like the sea, was very much a laur unto itself. The Roman state didn't have the
manpower to eliminate the threat of bandits even though it set up guard posts and road patrols
known as viatores outside the towns. Even so, it was best to travel in convoy and of course,
never at night. But even with a bodyguard, you'd still be at risk. We'll see that
traveling in the countryside was still unsafe, even in medieval times.
We hear of one bandit who rejoiced in the name of Buller Felix. Buller means an ornament or an
amulet and Felix means fortunate or lucky. Probably he had nine lives. He led a band of
600 robbers and he said to have plundered Italy for two years. The size of his band gives some
indication of the scale of the problem. Buller Felix lived around AD 200 but banditry was common
in all periods of Roman history. It was particularly rife after periods of civil strife
when disbanded soldiers no longer having a source of employment decided to turn to a life of crime.
It was a life not without a certain glamour, moreover. You experience a close feeling of
camaraderie with your fellow bandits. I suspect you take a certain pride in living your whole
life outside the rule of law and thumbing your nose at the Roman authorities. Apuleus, the author
of a Roman novel called Metamorphosis or the Golden Ass, puts the following speech into the mouth of
a fictional bandit who, being down on his luck, is now applying for membership in a new gang and
who is clearly very proud of his achievements. He says, once I was the chief of a very powerful
gang that ravished the whole of Macedonia, I am the famous Heimus the Thracian. At the mere sound
of my name the whole province trembled. I'm the son of Theeron, also a bandit. I was suckled
on human blood. I was brought up in my father's band and I'm the heir and the rival to his power.
A fugitive slaves too would naturally have gravitated towards banditry.
The danger of encountering bandits is indicated by the numerous epitaphs from
all over the empire stating that the deceased has been
Interfectus, a latronibus, killed by bandits. These were the lucky ones, so to speak, the ones
whose bodies could be found for burial. Many others must have just disappeared on the road
from one town to the next. Jesus is parable of the man who fell among thieves on the road from
Jericho to Jerusalem, as told in St Luke's Gospel, speaks to an everyday reality. The road from
Jerusalem to Jericho, though a fairly major road, was notoriously dangerous and there would have been
nothing unusual about coming across someone who had been badly beaten up and left for dead.
It's not surprising that first a priest and then a Levite simply
pass by on the other side of the road. They don't want to get involved.
The Samaritan, moreover, takes pity on the man and pays a cost of his medical bills,
so to speak, at the nearest inn. The fact that the story forms the subject of a parable about
Christian charity indicates how exceptional such conduct was.
Though bandits lived outside the law, many of them had connections inside towns and cities
with individuals who were prepared to assist them. And this introduces us to another kind of criminal
known as a rekeptor, literally a receiver of stolen goods, a much-despised brand.
There were lots of other Romans on the make. You had to keep your wits about you.
Judging from the epigrams of martial, legacy hunters were to a penny, out to make a pretty
Cestertius by marrying some rich old dame who's on her last legs.
The scams, too, were common. We hear of a certain Pythias, who fooled a certain Canius into believing
that he owned a villa beside the best place to fish in all of Sicily. He did so by hiring as
many fishermen as he could do to pretend that they were all bringing in catches by the armful.
Canius begged to buy the place and agreed to pay Pythias well over the odds.
On the next day, he invited his friends around for dinner. There wasn't a fish or a fisherman
to be seen. He'd been conned. Let's now turn to punishment. You've been found guilty of a
serious crime. What will happen to you? A sentencing you to a term of imprisonment is
not an option that the Pretor has at his disposal. The Romans would not have understood what
possible good could come from keeping someone locked up for a long period of time. For one thing,
they would have regarded it as a complete waste of public money. They did have a few prisons,
but they largely reserved them for high-profile criminals awaiting execution.
A Rome itself had only one prison, the so-called Mammatine Prison, a dark, dingy and cramped
structure located in the Roman Forum. One of its longest residents was the Gallic chieftain
Versin Getorix, who was housed there for six years simply so that he could be led in triumph
before being garotted, a particularly painful form of strangulation which involves slowly twisting
a wire around the victim's neck till he expires. If you're convicted of banditry,
a typical punishments include impaling, crucifixion, and being thrown to the wild beasts.
If you're found guilty of parichidion, the crime of killing your father, you'll be sown into a sack,
along with a snake, a rooster, a dog, and a monkey, and then tossed into a river or into the sea to
drown. I don't need to spell out the agony and the horror of what will happen to you inside that
sack. If you're found guilty of arson, you'll be burnt alive. Poetic justice, we might say.
Other forms of execution include being hurled to your death from the Tarpean Rock, a jagged spur
of rock that overlooked the river Tiber. It's no longer visible today. Chances are you'll die
a lingering death. The Tarpean Rock wasn't particularly high, so you'll probably end up
with broken bones, but still alive. From the time of Augustus onwards,
condemned criminals were also put to good use as entertainers, either as gladiators or as
bestiary beast fighters. If so, at least you'll have a sporting chance of temporary survival,
unless that is, your punishment takes the form of appearing in a mythological-based drama,
in which case you'll act the part of someone who suffers a terrible punishment, like Prometheus,
for instance, whose entrails were gnawed at by an eagle, or Pentheus, who was torn apart,
the joke being that the enactment will be for real.
It certainly helps to come from the upper draw, if you're bent on a life of crime. If you come from
the lower orders, there's a very good chance that you'll be flogged for a minor offense or executed
for a more serious offense in one of the ways I've just described. If, however, you belong to the
upper echelons of Roman society, then the worst that will generally befall you is either loss of
civic rights or exile, coupled with confiscation of property. We need to bear in mind, however,
that the Romans put a much higher premium on membership in their community than we do.
To be deprived of the right of vote, for instance, wouldn't seem much of a punishment in our society,
whereas in Rome it would have entailed a huge social stigma. This is indicated by the fact
that people who couldn't vote were designated infamase, our word infamous, which meant in
effect that they were socially invisible outcasts, in other words. Exile, moreover, meant being
expelled not just from your country, as it would if it existed as a form of punishment today,
but from the entirety of the Roman Empire. It meant ending your days among barbarians,
a fate worse than death for most Romans. It would therefore have acted as a highly effective
deterrent because you really could find yourself banished to a region where not a single person
spoke Latin and where your chances of survival were slim. This was the punishment meted out by
Augustus to the poet Ovid, who was banished to the shores of the Black Sea. We don't know what
Ovid's crime was. The poet himself speaks darkly of his carmen et error. Carmen means poem or song,
and it's probably a reference to Ovid's the az amatoria or art of love, which mocks Roman values.
As for the error, that may be a reference to the rumor that Ovid had an extra marital affair
with Augustus's daughter Julia. And while we're talking about Julia, she too was banished for
her adulterous affairs to the tiny island of Pandeteria off the west coast of Italy in 2 BC,
where she remained for five years. Pandeteria is less than three quarters of a mile in length
and barely 100 yards broad at its widest extent. What a fate. I think I would have gone crazy.
To conclude, given the severity of the punishments that were meted out to convicted criminals,
it's somewhat surprising that anyone would turn to a life of crime. That, however, is to ignore
the degree of desperation and destitution which many people faced daily. In a society, moreover,
which offered tantalizing images of fabulous wealth, you might well have succumbed to the belief that
you too could better yourself financially, even if it meant risking your life. In the absence of a
public prosecutor, a police force, the ability to gather incriminating evidence or a tradition of
investigative journalism, it's somewhat remarkable that the Roman Empire didn't simply dissolve into
lawlessness. It's certainly true that being a Roman criminal of the violent persuasion wasn't
a lot of fun if you got caught, but your chances of evading arrest were probably somewhat better
than they are today. In the next lecture, we're going to look at fun itself by contemplating how the Romans relaxed.
