Life as a Roman was a serious business, whatever your station in life happened to be. You had
an empire to govern and as anyone knows who's tried to run an empire, you can't do it by
sitting on your hands. No wonder you needed to display the appropriate measure of gravitas,
a word we hardly need to translate, but even the Romans had to take time off.
So now it's time for you to kick back. Time off didn't come in the form of a weekend,
however. Your daily life wasn't structured in that highly predictable way. True, there
was something called the nunlinun, or market day, which fell every eighth day, but it wasn't
a day when people like you necessarily stopped working. It's true too that the Roman calendar
differentiated between days that were fasti and days that were nefasti. On days that were
fasti, the law courts met and public business was conducted. On days that were nefasti,
the law courts were shut and no public business could be conducted. Again, however, these
weren't necessarily days when ordinary Romans like you stopped working.
The only days when you definitely would take a break was on festival days. The number of
festival days varied from one city, town or village to the next. As in the Greek world,
festivals involved sacrifices, and after the gods had been given their share, the remainder
of the meat would be distributed among the celebrants. Over time, the number of festivals
in the Roman calendar increased sharply. Under the emperor Claudius, mid-1st century AD,
as many as 159 days of the year were identified as public holidays, and 93 of these were
largely given over to what we would call entertainment. So, in fact, you and your Roman
buddies paid yourselves back quite handsomely for taking on the burden of running the world,
the Mediterranean-centered part of the world that is. Aside from the festivals, you obviously
needed to kick back on a daily basis. The chances are that you'd down tools in the middle
of the day when the sun was at its hottest are just as people do throughout the Mediterranean
today. You'd also relax, of course, at the end of the day, assuming, of course, that
you didn't just flop down on a bit of straw, absolutely exhausted.
So I want now to tell you how you'd spend your day when you weren't actually doing
whatever it was that you did to keep body and soul together. I'm going to assume that
you live in a city, or at least a medium-sized town, because, of course, there's much more
to do with your time off in a city than there is in the countryside. Although, as we'll
see later, wealthy Romans knew all about the delights of getting away from the bustle,
inconvenience and discomfort of the big city with all its crowds, its foul odours, and
its distressing sights. You'd have risen very early at first light,
so around midday, you're ready to head over to the barbs to meet your pals. Don't forget
to bring your personal strigel or skin scraper and towel. Otherwise, you'll have to share
a strigel, which I don't personally recommend. When you arrive, an attendant will give you
a little box to leave your belongings in, the Roman equivalent of a locker.
If you go to one of the great bathing establishments in Rome that were donated to the city by the
emperors, by Trajan in AD 105, or by Caracalla in AD 215, or by Diocletian in AD 305, you'll
probably have to fight your way in as they could accommodate tens of thousands of people,
and wouldn't you know it, the whole of Rome has arrived at the same time as you. But it'll
be worth it. They're incredibly impressive with their lofty vaulted ceilings, their columns
made of brightly coloured marble, and their floors decorated with semi-pressure stones.
If you have any doubts about whether to take pride in being Roman, a visit to the imperial
bars would quickly dispel them. They're so grandiose and massive.
Once you've stripped down and given your little box to an attendant to look after, you'll
head for the cold bath known as the frigidarium. There's also a caldarium, or hot bath, and
a tepidarium, or moderately warm bath. You wouldn't actually swim by the way, the bars
generally weren't big enough for that. Thanks to the invention of the hypercast or underfloor
system of heating around 100 B.C., and thanks to the introduction of glass 150 years after
that, it became possible to heat the rooms to very precise temperatures.
When you've spent enough time plunging and splashing and soaking, and either sweating
or chilling out, you can head to one of the snack bars to buy a drink and the Roman equivalent
of a hot dog. If you're a fitness freak, you might want to spend some time weightlifting
or playing a ball game. There's a large enough space in the grounds for teams to play against
each other, or maybe you want to gamble by playing a board game.
If on the other hand you're more intellectually inclined, you could catch a lecture in the
lecture hall or simply take out a roll from the library that is attached to the bars and
quietly read. And when you've had enough of that, why not take a stroll in the gardens
or else admire the paintings, the sculptures and mosaics that adorn the public throughways.
The bars are also a great place to go to chat and gossip. You could make business deals,
talk politics, or merely watch people pass by. If your muscles are aching and you want
to relieve them, you could get a massage or to put it bluntly, you could have sex,
a paid for or otherwise. Watch out for thieves, however. They did good business at the bars.
Incidentally, we don't know whether men and women bathed separately or together. If we
did, that would tell us a great deal about how Roman men and women interacted. Most scholars,
however, believe that different times of the day were allocated for men and women with
the mornings being reserved for women since that's when men were at work. The bars are
a fascinating phenomenon in the history of Roman social interaction because they provided
the one context in Roman society which was otherwise very hierarchical where members
of different social classes would literally rub shoulders together. So if you were a senator,
say you might well find yourself as you bathed surrounded by ignorant louts from the lowest
level of society. Though the inspiration for bath houses came from the Greeks, Roman
bars were enormous by comparison with their Greek counterparts. And that too tells us
a lot about the Romans, namely that they were not averse to being stuffed together like
sardines. The public entertainments which I'll be talking about later were all premised
on the assumption that unless you were a senator or a knight, you'd be sitting or standing
cheek to jowl with other Romans. By the way, not everyone enjoyed the bars. There were
a few sourpusses who turned their noses up at the sort of riff-raff who frequented them.
The soic philosopher Seneca the Younger, in one of his letters, goes on about people
who jump into the water making a cannonball effect and the ones who tweak someone's armpit
hairs so that they scream out loud. He also objects to the cries of the sausage cellars
and the cellars of bread and the cellars of drinks and so on. After the bars, you'd
go back to work and then later in the day, if you were poor, you might patronise the
local tavern. That's if you didn't mind a bit of rough and tumble and a possible brawl.
If you were modestly well to do, however, you'd avoid such establishments and invite
your pals over for a convivium. A convivium means literally a living together, or as we
would probably phrase it today, a hanging out together. The convivium was similar to
the Greek symposium from which it derived. If you could afford it and if you were rather
lardida, you'd have a special room in your house known as the triclinium where you'd
hold your convivium. As we've seen, that word is derived from the Greek and means the
room with three couches of clinae. Cinae, the single la word for couch, gives us our
word recline. However, what went on at the convivium had a distinctively Roman flavour.
To begin with, respectable women, including your wife and your daughters, were permitted
to attend, whereas in the Greek symposium, as we've seen, only hetari female companions
who were paid by the hour for their services could attend. This meant that when in Roman
depictions of a convivium we see hanky-panky going on, it's much more likely to be between
free-born men and women than between free-born men and prostitutes. In addition, the Roman
convivium was much more hierarchical than its Greek equivalent. The symposium downplayed
social distinctions, whereas at a convivium you'd know exactly what your standing was
in the eyes of your host from where he seated you. The place of honour was at the bottom
of the middle of the three couches. Let's hope no one sticks their smelly feet in your
face, though you'll be pleased to know that it was customary for a slave to wash the feet
of all the guests before they lay down. There was also much more emphasis on eating at a
convivium than at a symposium. We've already seen the kind of food you'd eat if you could
afford it in the lecture about being a rich Roman. If you were putting on a slap-up affair,
you'd probably hire some entertainers. How about a troupe of dwarf acrobats? They're
always fun to watch. Pricy, though. The most famous description of a Roman convivium is
the fabled party hosted by the super-rich Valga Friedman called Trimalchio, whom we've
met before. So much for how you'd spend your leisure hours on a daily basis. Let's now
turn to festival time and talk about publicly sponsored entertainment, by which I mean all
those fun activities which aspiring politicians and emperors put on to impress you. What the
Romans called spectacular, meaning things worth seeing. There was undoubtedly a lot
more going on in the Roman world that could be classified as spectacles than there had
been ever before in human history. Although it's true to say that the Hellenistic period,
the period following the conquests of Alexander the Great had seen a marked increase in lavish
events over the preceding classical period because that was one of the ways Hellenistic
kings liked to impress their subjects. But Roman society, it's fair to state, was a spectator
society. If you want entertainment on a grand scale, then I recommend you attend the Games
or Ludi. As I've just indicated, these were generally paid for by magistrates and emperors
and by wannabe magistrates as a way of curing popular favour. They were known technically
as munera or gifts, a nice euphemism as they came with a quid pro quo, which was that you'd
be expected to vote for the sponsor at the next election. In effect, they were therefore
bribes. A full programme included theatrical performances, gladiatorial displays and chariot
races. The satirist, a juvenile who was writing in the late 1st and early 2nd centuries AD
noted, the anxious Roman desires only two things, panem et kirkense, that's to say, free handouts
of wheat, the panem, and regular gladiatorial entertainment in the circuses. The description
of you as an ordinary Roman, as anxious, is illuminating. It's as if you needed a regular
fix of spectatorship to calm you down. It's one of the earliest statements about entertainment
serving as a social sedative intended to mollify the masses and keep them under control.
Our own society, one might argue, runs on similar lines. Where would we be without our
soap operas, our daily fix of simulated sex and violence, and our bottomless credit lines
which seem at the outset to resemble free handouts? I'm not of course talking about the patrons
of the great courses, they have better things to do. A fronto, an orator who was roughly
contemporary with juveniles said much the same thing. The Roman people is held together
by two things, wheat dolls and public shows. Control is secured as much by amusement as
by serious things. Note that last sentence, fronto saw things for what they were.
We'll begin with drama. As in the Greek world, you'd be able to see both comedy and tragedy.
The plays of only two comic writers, Plautus and Terence, have survived. The plots are
Greek in origin but the stock characters are thoroughly Roman, the miserly old man, the
crafty slave, the young man in love with the prostitute and so on. You'd recognise the
types straight away. There's only one Roman tragedian whose work has survived, namely
Seneca, and we don't actually know if his plays were performed. They may have been intended
for dramatic reading only. Seneca was writing in the first century AD. In earlier periods,
however, tragedies definitely were performed on stage. Perhaps you went to the theatre
from time to time. I dare say you enjoyed the comedies but, given the chance, you'd
probably prefer cruder and more boisterous forms of entertainment. I hope you won't
take this as an insult but you just don't have the attention span of the Greeks. Remember
when Terence first tried to put on his comedy called The Mother-in-Law, the actors had to
abandon the performance because the audience found out that some famous boxers and a tight
rope walker were about to perform elsewhere and so they all got up and headed for the
exit. And the same thing happened when he tried to put it on the second time, this time
because of a gladiatorial contest. In fact, it wasn't until 50 BC that Pompey gave Rome
its first stone theatre. Greece already had stone theatres some three and a half centuries
earlier. What happened previously is that you'd sit on a wooden bench or milly squat
on the ground. And already by the middle of the first century BC, drama was anyway losing
out to two new forms of entertainment, mime and pantomime. Mime artists played only one
character whereas pantomime artists took all the parts in the play they were performing.
That's the meaning of pantomime, all mime from the Greek word panta meaning all or everything.
So if say you were a pantomime artist enacting the story of Medea, you'd have to play the
part of the foreigner Medea, her Greek husband, Jason, who abandoned her for another woman.
Jason's new bride, the bride's father and last but not least, Medea's children whom
Medea murders. I'm not quite sure how you'd pull it all off but I'd have loved to be there
to watch you. You needed oodles of talent to be a pantomime artist. You wore a mask so
you couldn't rely on different facial expressions to create each of your characters. You mainly
expressed character through different movements and gestures. In some ways it was probably
not unlike ballet. Mime artists on the other hand appealed to a more low brow audience.
Some of them even performed lewd sexual acts on stage, at least that was the charge leveled
against the future Empress Theodora as we saw in the lecture about being a celebrity.
If you were an entertainer, you couldn't exercise your full rights as a Roman citizen.
You were considered infamous from which our word infamy comes. The closest English word
is probably notorious though that doesn't quite do it because it was an official description
of your social status. And for that reason many actors and other entertainers were either
slaves or foreigners. It comes as no surprise that the Romans like to live vicariously every
bit as much as we do today and like us they had an inexhaustible appetite for violence.
The difference is that they couldn't produce simulated violence as we do so they had to
deal in the real stuff. This explains in part the popularity of gladiatorial combats and
other such abominations including throwing condemned prisoners to the beasts or treating
public executions as a form of entertainment. In the early days gladiatorial contests were
staged in the Roman forum and were watched by a few hundred people at most. They were
something you put on at a funeral to honor your dead rather like a sacrifice to the dead
in fact. It was the emperors who seized upon the potential that they offered for carrying
favor and no one more so than the emperor Titus who dedicated the Colosseum in Rome
with an estimated seating capacity that was just five thousand shy of the seating capacity
of Shea Stadium. The peak in the popularity of gladiatorial combats probably occurred
in the reign of the emperor Trajan around AD 100. Trajan sponsored 123 days of celebrations
to commemorate the success of his campaign against the Dacians a people who lived in
the loop of the lower Danube. In the Colosseum alone in that year five thousand pairs of
gladiators fought against each other and ten thousand beasts were slaughtered. I have
to believe that you would have gotten a bit nauseated after a while whatever your appetite
might be for seeing prisoners and criminals and wild beasts slaughter one another. There
were variants on gladiatorial combat such as staged sea battles in which teams of gladiators
would fight on board ship in an artificial lake specially created for the occasion. All
these activities continued until the end of the fourth century in the eastern half of
the Roman Empire and until the fifth century in the West. It was the church that eventually
put a stop to them. We're interested in people's mindset in this course and the question arises
did every Roman delight in the spilling of human and animal blood. Not everyone I'm happy
to report. There were a few bleeding hearts pun intended a Seneca among them the tragic
playwright I mentioned a moment ago on returning from a gladiatorial contest. A Seneca wrote
it was murder pure and simple. The men had no defensive armor. Their bodies were exposed
to every stroke. What is the need for armor or fighting skill when these only delay the
death blow. But this prisoner was a highway robber that a murderer you'll say. So what
Seneca continues. I agree he deserved to suffer because of his crime but what crime have the
spectators committed to deserve to see his punishment. All day the crowd cries kill him
whip him burn him. Why does he receive the sword thrust like a cow. Why is he so squeamish
about dying. And when the show stops for an interval the spectators cry let's have some
throats cut in the meantime to keep things interesting. Well Seneca gives us a pretty
chilling account of the mood of the crowd literally being for blood. What what would
you have thought about the killings. Would you have seen it as an entertaining day out
for the wife and kids. We can't assume you would have been immune to the allure especially
as the experience was such an expression of Roman identity connected as it was both with
conquest and with political campaigning. There's just one other indication of compassion that
I want to cite. However Cicero tells us that the audience at the games put on by Pompey
the Great in 55 B.C. were deeply affected at the site of elephants being pitted against
convicted criminals in a kind of mock battle. No one in the audience had ever seen elephants
before. And as Cicero states they thought that the elephants I quote had something human
about them. The circus was even more popular than the arena. Many of the largest hippodromes
were in the East. Alexandria Antioch Varaitis Caesarea Maritima Carthage and Constantinople
a four horse chariot racing was extremely dangerous and fatalities were common. There
were seven laps in all so there'd be lots of opportunities to cut off your opponent
and make him crash either into the retaining wall or the central divider particularly as
you rounded a bend at breakneck speed. Perhaps you're one of those Romans who have come along
hoping you'll see a driver being thrown out of his chariot or dragged along the ground
like in the film Ben Hur. Chariot teams as we've seen were associated with four stables
the greens the blues the whites and the reds. We hear of numerous riots between fans of these
different stables. By far the most serious riot broke out in Constantinople in A.D.
531 during the reign of the emperor Justinian it reputedly left 30,000 fans dead and it
very nearly brought down the empire in consequence. I can feel the adrenaline pumping inside me
just talking about all this. Again however not every Roman was enthralled by this kind
of entertainment even though it was a lot more palatable than gladiatorial combat. Pliny
for instance wrote I really can't understand why grown men should be so besotted with horses
galloping and men standing. He's referring to the charioteers and cells who stood in
their chariots. The whole thing is as dull as ditch water. Whatever we may think about
violent entertainment there's no doubt that it acts as a safety valve and I'm not convinced
that it would have made the Romans more bloodthirsty. They were pretty bloodthirsty to begin with.
They had to be. They ran the world. I seriously doubt whether the spectators who streamed
out of the Colosseum after watching limbs being hacked off felt motivated to beat up
some luckless members of the proletariat any more than a Spaniard would after watching
a bullfight. Whatever feelings it may release at the time it is a sobering experience watching
human beings put their lives at risk in the name of entertainment. Lastly a word about
oh so modern phenomenon getting away from it all. Well is it so modern. Turns out that
it isn't at all. The seriously rich in antiquity like the seriously rich today also like to
romp in an exotic playground even if the playground is just a few miles away from home. A wealthy
Romans for instance particularly like to go to by eye a town on the coast just a few miles
from Rome and there were many such resorts all over the Roman Empire. Wealthy and tykeens
for instance inhabitants of Antioch would escape to a resort town called Daphne. Then
as now the real jet setters would own their own island like the emperor Tiberius who sick
of Rome retired to the island of Capri where he spent his declining years. To conclude the
Roman sense of grouchy task which was linked to other important Roman virtues such as pietas
piety and feed days faithfulness was balanced by a healthy awareness of the need to relax
though the Romans obviously differed from us in the extreme forms of spectatorship in
which they indulged. If we were to suggest to a thinking Roman that his or her relaxation
often came at a rather heavy cost to the participants principally prisoners and slaves she
or he might well argue that their sacrifice was a small price to pay for the enjoyment
of society as a whole and for keeping the plebs satisfied and by society as a whole
she would have meant the six million odd people who thanks to the empire enjoyed a standard of
living that was unparalleled by any society previously in history. Whatever our sensibilities
may be in antiquity it would have been a pretty difficult argument to resist.
In the course of the next three lectures we're going to turn our attention to
various forms of religion that flourished in the Roman Empire. We're going to see the ways in
which both polytheism and monotheism affected the lives of everyone living within the empire
whatever their belief system happened to be. So we're going to examine a world charged with gods
and the god
