In his treatise on the nature of the gods, the orator and politician Cicero describes
the Romans as the most religious of all mortals.
What he seems to have meant by this is that they were extremely punctilious in performing
religious ceremonies.
From a non-pollithistic perspective, whether we happen to be Muslims, Hindus, Jews, Christians,
however we might not think of the Romans as particularly religious at all.
That's because their religion was largely about self-interest.
They worshipped their gods and gave them offerings because they wanted to receive from them
in turn the good things of life.
If anything, the Romans were even more practically minded than the Greeks in this regard, though
there wasn't much to choose between the two.
Religion to them was a contractual agreement, which is not surprising perhaps in light of
the fact that they were a very legalistically minded people.
I give so that you, the deity, may give, as Cicero put it.
Why would anyone, deity or human, give without the expectation of getting something back
in return?
Isn't that what all relations are based on?
So why should the gods be any different?
That was the Roman take on it.
From a Roman perspective, your gods have it in their power to improve the quality of your
life.
To quote Cicero again, Jupiter, Jupiter was the chief deity, the equivalent of the Greek
god Zeus, is called best and greatest, not because he makes us just or sober or wise,
but because he makes us healthy and rich and prosperous.
The subtext of that is, which of us would want to be just or sober or wise when she
or he can be healthy and rich and prosperous instead?
Religion helps you to get on.
That said, it doesn't dominate your life.
As the poet Horace aptly puts it, let us make ourselves as comfortable as we can and
leave everything else to the gods.
A most sensible accommodation from a Roman perspective.
So let's begin by looking at what you did to earn the favor of your gods.
We'll begin by talking about family religion.
By family or recall, we need everyone who lives in your home, including your slaves.
The Roman familia, like its Greek oikos or oikia, was a religious affiliation.
Its head was the patefamilias who ministered to the deities that safeguarded his home
and family.
We met the patefamilias in the introductory lecture about being a Roman.
You'll begin the day by reflecting upon your dreams the night before to try to determine
if the gods have sent you a warning that you need to heed.
If they have sent you a warning, you might want to engage the services of an haruspex
or reader of the entrails of animals, a religious expert, in other words, who will give you
his expert opinion.
It helps to have a chicken on hand for this purpose.
If its liver looks healthy, he'll give you the green light and you can go ahead with
your plans, no worries.
If it doesn't, better to cancel your plans and stay at home.
Remember what happened to Julius Caesar when he ignored the omens on the day of his murder.
Things did not turn out well.
That's not an example you'll want to follow.
Incidentally, there were lots of other ways of practicing divinatio, or divination as
we call it, trying to find out what the future holds.
They include astrology, observing the flights of birds, interpreting the weather, particularly
thunder and lightning, and so on.
In the political sphere, it was an area of Roman religion that was especially subject
to manipulation.
Next, you and your family will gather around and pray to your household gods.
Even your slaves will be in attendance.
You'll do so standing beside a household shrine with the edge of your toga pulled up over
your head out of respect for the gods.
Incents will be burning and someone will be playing the double pipes.
That's to shut out all the extraneous noises.
You pray with your palms uplifted, perhaps reading from a roll that a slave is holding
out for you.
Make sure you don't trip over your words.
That's called making a wittium, from which our word vice comes.
If you do make a wittium, the gods won't answer your prayers, so you'll have to begin
the whole ceremony again.
I have to say, I think it would have been very moving to observe a Roman family at prayer.
You might think of making a sacrifice afterwards.
A bloodless sacrifice, that's to say some grains of corn or some fresh fruit will be
perfectly acceptable to the gods if that's all you can afford.
Though if something important is happening, let's say you're negotiating a business deal
or your son is going off to war, your wife is about to give birth, you'll want to offer
an animal sacrifice.
If you're wealthy, you'll sacrifice pig, sheep, a goat, a cow, even a dog, depending
on which deity you're praying to.
Remember that the animal has to be without blemish, otherwise the gods will feel insulted.
Pure white is the best color.
After you've sacrificed and cooked the victim, you and your familia will then partake of the
sacrifice, apart from the pieces that you offer to the deity.
On especially important occasions, you'll invoke the major gods like Apollo, Ceres,
Diana.
On a daily basis, however, you'll simply invoke your various household gods.
These include, in premise, Vesta, the spirit of your half.
It's important that the fire in your half never goes out because it's symbolic of the
life of your family.
You'll also invoke the penates, the spirits of the storeroom, whose job it is to ensure
that you have enough food in the larder.
Kendauden, an authority on Roman religion, memorably describes the penates as the gods
of the well-stocked freezer.
Watch your penates.
You don't have a home because there'll be nothing to eat.
In Virgil's Aeneid, when Aeneas flees from the ruins of Troy, he carries on his back
his father Ankaesis, who in turn is clutching an image of their penates, along with a small
statue of Vesta, both of which they'll need in order to found a new city as well as home
elsewhere.
In addition to Vesta and the penates, you'll pray to the lares, the spirits of your dead
ancestors who protect your home.
Another word for the dead is the mayores, the greater ones.
The dead are greater than you are, never forget it, and therefore deserving of your respect
and veneration, and they take a continuing interest in the welfare of their descendants.
You'll also pray to your Geneas, our genius, it's your Geneas that looks after you in
your capacity as Pata Familias, because you're the embodiment, so to speak, of the family.
Last, you'll pray to the particular set of deities whom you worship for personal or
professional reasons.
For instance, if you're a craftsman, you'll pray to Vulcan, patron of craftsmen.
If you're a merchant, you'll pray to Mercury.
And if you're sending cargo abroad, you'll pray to Neptune.
All this devotion generally takes place around an idicula, or household shrine, later known
as a lararium.
The idicula was originally located in the atrium, the most important room of the house,
leaving off from the vestibule.
Later, however, it was sometimes placed in the kitchen, or even in the garden.
It often carries a depiction of your laraes in the form of two young men standing on
either side of your Geneas, who is also often depicted as a man.
There might also be a Juno in the scene, the guardian spirit of your wife, the Mata Familias.
So, once you've attended to the gods, you're ready to go out.
Remember to bid farewell to the laraes as you leave, and set off from your home with
your right foot first.
Setting off with your left foot is terribly unlucky.
That's why the Latin word for left is sinister.
Another word of advice.
It's best to do anything that's important on an odd-numbered day, not say on the second
and fourth, etc., of the month.
Even-numbered days are considered unlucky.
Greet the laraes, too, on your return home.
When you sit down to eat, it's customary to keep a few moments of silence before offering
the gods some choice morsels.
From 30 BC onwards, you'll be expected to pour a libation in honor of the Geneas of Augustus
when you're having dinner.
That's because the emperor, or prinkeps, was the Pata Familias of the entire Roman family.
It was rather like toasting the queen with the words, God save the queen, if you happen
to be British.
The libation didn't mean that Augustus was a god, not to begin with, though that happened
over time, as we'll see later.
It was as if the welfare of the state and the health of the emperor were much the same
thing, which is what toasting the queen implies as well, what toasting the Egyptian pharaoh
had meant also.
As the household was getting ready to retire for the night, it would be the role of the
Mata Familias to supervise the sweeping of the floors and the cleaning of the lararium.
You would want to keep your house uncontaminated by evil demons and the like.
Your most important religious function as Pata Familias is supervising the periodic
ceremonies relating to birth, coming of age in the case of your son, marriage in the case
of your daughter, and death in the case of all.
All these events are marked by important religious rituals, and since you're the head of the
household, you'll have to perform them all.
Priests don't concern themselves with this sort of thing.
They only attend to state religion.
If your wife gives birth to a baby boy, a slave will receive him from your wife and place
him at your feet.
If you pick the baby up, that means you acknowledge him as your son.
If you don't, he'll be quietly removed from the house, probably by one of your slaves,
and either abandoned or perhaps given away to a childless couple.
One reason for rejecting a boy would be suspicion on your part that he is a product of an adulterous
relationship on the part of your wife.
Another would be his sickly appearance.
In the case of a baby girl, if you accept her, you'll formally instruct your wife or
a slave to feed her.
If your newborn is deformed, you're required by law to kill him.
We don't have any idea what percentage of Roman babies were rejected by their fathers.
Baby girls were more likely than boys to be rejected because they represented a financial
burden on the household.
It may well be therefore that the health criteria for choosing to raise them were more stringent
than they were for boys.
So many years pass and your son comes of age.
You'll now have to supervise the ceremony, whereby he exchanges the toga praitexta,
the toga with a broad purple border, praitexta means having a border, which he has been wearing
up till now for the toga viriles, a plain white toga, literally manly toga.
This will take place when he is about 15 or 16, there doesn't seem to have been a single
defined moment, and it signals not only his attainment of adulthood, but also his becoming
a Roman citizen.
After the ceremony in your home, if you happen to live in Rome, you'll accompany him to
the capital, the hill overlooking the Roman Forum, where the most important state shrines
are located.
And there you'll make a sacrifice to Jupiter and Ewentas.
Ewentas is the goddess of youth, one of the many personifications whom you, like the Greeks,
worshipped, others being peace, good fortune, concord, harmony, faith, and so forth.
There was no equivalent coming of age ceremony for your daughter, unless we think of her
wedding as a kind of coming of age.
We've already discussed the wedding in the lecture about Roman women, so I won't say
anything further about it here, other than to remind you that it took place in the home
of the bride.
It was at this point in her life that you relinquished your power, your patria potestas
over your daughter, who now passed into the power, the potestas, of her husband.
Another religious duty you have to perform is to supervise the funerals of all your family
members.
You'll order the corpse to be laid out on a couch in the atrium, dressed in her or
his finery, and with a wreath placed on the head.
Friends and relatives will come to the house to pay their respects.
If you happen to belong to a family that is particularly distinguished, you'll take out
the imaginas, or masks, of your dead ancestors from the lararium, and distribute them among
your relatives so that they can impersonate your ancestors in the funeral procession.
The funeral procession departs from your house and ends up in the forum.
To create an impact, you've engaged some musicians and professional mourners to accompany it.
The women in the family will be very demonstrative in their grief.
They'll tear their hair, beat their breasts and wail.
When the funeral cortege arrives in the forum, the corpse will be carried up onto the rostra,
or speaker's platform, and set upright so that the crowd gathered below can see its
face.
Then you step forth and deliver a fulsome eulogy on behalf of the deceased, recounting
all his or her accomplishments.
This might go on for some time.
After all, it's an opportunity to remind everyone how distinguished your family is.
Once the eulogy is over, you lead the cortege outside the walls of the city to the place
of interment.
The most prestigious burial ground was just outside the city walls, along the Appian Way
in the case of Rome, because that was where most people would see the monument you erected
to the dead as they passed along that road.
It was yet another way of showing off and reminding people of your family's importance.
You'll have the corpse cremated if you can afford to do so, because this is considered
more noble.
When you return home after the funeral, remember to have your house ritually purified.
To be on the safe side, I advise engaging the services of a professional purifier.
There's always some corner of the house that might get overlooked.
All this depends, of course, on your having enough clout and enough cash to lay on a top
of the line funeral.
What if you weren't in that income bracket?
Well, in that case, you'd better join a burial club, or collagium, from which our word college
comes.
An inscription from Lanuvium, a town outside Rome, records the rules and regulations of
one such club.
It tells us that you have to pay an entrance fee and a monthly subscription, and then you'll
be able to dine regularly with other members of the club, secure in the knowledge that
they'll take care of your body when the time comes.
The Romans, like most of us, had contradictory views about the afterlife.
Clearly, not everyone believed in an afterlife.
I particularly like the epitaphs that runners follow.
Non fuui, fuui, non som, non curo, which translates, I wasn't, I was, I'm not, I don't have any
cares, or perhaps I could care less, in a word, whatever.
I know of no more pithy way to express the finality of death.
So far I've talked about what went under the title of the Sacra Privatta, domestic religion.
What about state sponsored religion?
As we've seen in the earlier lecture on relaxing in Rome, state sponsored religion provided
you with entertainment.
Both dramas and chariot races, Ludi Skaini and Ludi Kierkenses, were held on public holidays
called Fairy Eye in honor of the gods.
Rather as in ancient Egypt, when it comes to the major gods, the way you most commonly
encountered them, so to speak, was by having a day off and getting a free handout.
But how did you actually think of your gods?
The answer is rather differently from the way that the Greeks thought of their gods.
It's true that your religion was profoundly influenced by Greek religion.
It's one of the topics I covered in some detail in my course entitled, Greece and Rome, an
integrated history of the Mediterranean.
The influence began in the monarchical period, the period of the kings, as early as 600 BC,
and it continued right the way through the republican period and beyond.
By the third century BC, your gods had become assimilated to the Greek gods.
What I mean by that is that your god Jupiter had been equated with Zeus, Jupiter's wife
Juno, with Hera, Jupiter's daughter Minerva, with Athena, and so forth.
There was a crucial difference between the two systems, however.
As a Roman, you wouldn't have thought of your gods in human guise to quite the same extent
as the Greeks did.
That's because Roman religion was in origin animistic, and I believe always retained something
of that aspect.
At least in the minds of ordinary people.
Animistic derives from the Latin word animar, meaning a spirit, a spirit being something
less clearly defined than a god.
The early Romans put their faith in vague numina, powers that had very precise functions, but
no physical identity.
And even later, Romans didn't invest them with the same palpability that the Greeks
endowed their gods with.
I'm not talking here about their appearances in literature, like Virgil's Aeneid, where
the gods do indeed assume very palpable human form, but that I think was largely a literary
convention.
As a Roman farmer, you would have worshipped the spirit that presided over the grain when
it lay underground, the spirit that presided over it when it came up out of the ground,
the spirit that presided over it after it had been collected and stored, and so on.
But I seriously doubt whether you would have visualized these numina in any way.
Similarly to the household gods whom we talked about earlier, the Lares, the Panates and
Vesta were very shadowy figures without any distinct personalities.
There was also a large number of Roman numina that controlled the environment, spirits of
fountains, mountains, woods, streams and so forth.
And there were still others that had to be placated in connection with childrearing,
a veritable army in fact.
They include Alamona, who feeds the embryo in the womb, Nona and Decima, literally ninth
and tenth, who bring the mother successfully to full term, Postuerta, who avert a breech
birth, Edula, who teaches the baby how to eat, Portina, who teaches it how to drink,
Ossi Pagina, who strengthens its bones, etc., etc., etc.
Scarce wonder why so many infants died when there were so many numina to placate and when
you could never know which of them was most likely to take offense.
A natural instinct in the face of all this is probably to say the Romans were a highly
sophisticated people.
They can't possibly have believed in that sort of nonsense.
Indeed some scholars have argued that educated and elite Romans were very cynical and that
they exploited Roman religion primarily as a way of gaining political influence.
They point out that Roman politicians fixed omens and used positions of religious influence
to curry favour, control elections and so forth.
Well, one can always of course claim that religion, every form of religion is the opium
of the masses, but that gets us nowhere.
I think it's clear that Roman polytheism did indeed have meaning for the majority of
people who practiced it.
People don't go on doing things in the name of religion if they no longer believe in their
efficacy.
But a majority of Romans did go on doing things in the name of their religion right up until
the time when Constantine converted to Christianity.
And even after then polytheism produced martyrs, people who died for their faith just as Christianity
did.
In some, if polytheism wasn't worth a hill of beans, Christianity would have finished
it off far sooner.
I've been assuming up till now that you're a Roman citizen.
What if you were a foreigner living under Roman rule?
What kind of religious observances would you follow?
Well, that would very largely be up to you.
If you were an Egyptian, you'd be free to worship Egyptian gods.
If you were a Celt, you'd be free to worship your Celtic gods and so on.
As one of the six million or so who lived under Roman rule in the imperial period, you were
not required to abjure your gods in order to live in the Roman Empire.
Your hosts were a tolerant people, just so long as you didn't practice human sacrifice
as the British Druids allegedly did.
In fact, the Romans incorporated many foreign deities like the Eastern Goddess Sibylée and
the Egyptian Goddess Isis into their pantheon of officially sponsored state gods.
What you were expected to do as a foreigner, however, was to demonstrate at least token
goodwill towards the native Roman gods.
And more important, from the late 1st century BC onwards, you also had to acknowledge the
divinity of the Roman Emperor.
The impetus behind Emperor worship, as it is called, derived from the East, which had
a strong tradition of worshiping its kings as gods.
Augustus himself encouraged it by taking the name Augustus, which has a religious mystique
about it that virtually defies translation.
It was a way of signalling his authority, his alctoritas, a word that also defies translation.
Augustus' name means something like reverend to the factor of ten.
It goes without saying that educated Romans would have had a different attitude towards
emperor worship from people who, since time immemorial, had worshiped their kings as gods.
But that doesn't mean they would have been cynical about it either.
It was no more irrational to regard the Roman Emperor as a god than it is to make allowing
the stars and stripes to touch the ground a criminal offence.
The Greek historian Dio put it well when he said that the name Augustus indicated that
he was more than human.
I combine to that.
Similarly, I'll concede that a flag is more than a thing.
Personally speaking, I wouldn't have had the least problem conceding that Augustus was
more than human, especially if I'd lived through the generation of civil war that preceded
his benevolent takeover in 27 BC.
After all, he had restored, quote unquote, the republic after it had been virtually reduced
to rubble, a god indeed, or the nearest human equivalent.
I mentioned a moment ago that the Romans were a tolerant people, but even a tolerant
people have their limits.
So if you refuse to acknowledge the divinity of the emperor, you were in deep trouble because
that was tantamount to saying you didn't acknowledge the authority of Rome.
Look, we're the Romans.
We're in charge, kindly, genuflect before the image of our emperor.
How difficult is that?
Impossible, of course, if you happen to be Jewish and worship the one God.
The Romans just couldn't understand the Jewish mentality.
It was so utterly alien to them that an otherwise very decent and civilized people should respond
so irrationally to such an innocuous request.
But the Jewish people did object, and they were prepared to die rather than compromise
their religious beliefs.
And in so doing, set themselves on an inevitable collision course with Rome.
In the next lecture, we're going to talk about what it was like being Jewish in the Roman
Empire.
