The Jews were certainly a thorn in the side of the Romans, but the problem they presented
was largely confined to the tiny province of Judea. They were an ethnic minority and
they largely kept themselves to themselves. They had no interest whatsoever in going around
looking for trouble by converting the mass of the Roman population to their strange belief
system. But that's exactly what the Christians did. The Christians were prepared to corrupt
the minds not only of Jews, Jews were fair game, but also of decent, law abiding Roman
polytheists. In so doing, they took on the full might of the Roman Empire, which they
were prepared to destroy if necessary.
To begin with though, we need to note that Christianity wasn't the only religious system
that evolved in competition with traditional polytheism in the first three centuries of
the common era. More and more polytheists too were becoming concerned about their fate
in the afterlife and looking for the promise of eternal salvation. The Eleusinian mysteries
which we encountered in our lecture about death in ancient Greece had offered personal
salvation to those who underwent initiation. The problem was that not everyone could travel
to Eleusis and anyway, you had to be able to speak Greek to qualify for the salvation
it offered.
So other mystery religions began to gain ground. One was the cult of the Persian god Mithras.
Mithraism was particularly popular in Rome in its port town of Ostea and among soldiers
serving on the frontiers of the empire. As it was secretive however, we know little about
its requirements ethical or otherwise. What we do know is that it never had the popular
appeal of Christianity partly because women were debarred from participation.
Women turned to the cult of the Egyptian goddess Isis. We met Isis in our lecture about Egyptian
religion. Isis was the sister and wife of Osiris. It was Isis who retrieved the dismembered
parts of Osiris' body after he'd been chopped up by Seth. She personified long-suffering
womanhood and also held out the promise of a blessed hereafter.
In some it wasn't the case that polytheism had become defunct or that polytheists couldn't
experience the spiritual life or that polytheism wasn't reinventing itself in a way to address
the needs of its adherents when Christianity came along.
So what was it that would have attracted you to Christianity? Well to begin with here for
the first time in history was a religion that was not judging you by the size of your wallet
or your status in society or your gender or your ethnicity. The pagan gods were out and
out snubs. The more you gave them the more they were likely to listen to you. The Christian
god isn't like that at all. He'll listen to your prayers no matter what so long as
you're truly penitent. He'll actually love you. What god has ever loved you before. In
fact if you're poor or downtrodden or despised or sick he'll look on you with special favour.
That's clear from the so called Beatitudes, the verses that begin, blessed are the meek,
blessed are the poor in spirit and so on. And if it doesn't work out for you in this life
you can look forward to salvation in the world to come. So you, the other side of history
now move to the fore. Let's now suppose you're a Jew living in Galilee in the province of
Judea in the early decades of the first century AD. There's a very good possibility that you've
heard of Jesus, a Jew himself of course, because he's a teacher credited with miraculous powers
of healing and he's attracting widespread attention. He isn't the only religious charismatic
who's getting attention though. In fact there are lots of them. The region is rife with
charismatic, each promising his own unique brand of spiritual enlightenment, spiced in
many cases with what we would call today liberation theology, the promise of freedom from Roman
oppression, of a new world and of the coming of the Messiah, the anointed one. One such
was John the Baptist who as his name suggests, taught that if you underwent full immersion
in the waters of the River Jordan you could achieve a new state of being, a new relationship
with God. Baptism in other words, functioned as a rite of passage. We talked about rites
of passage before. They enable you to pass from one stage to another. Perhaps you go
to the River Jordan and experience something of what John is talking about. But later you
fall in with the crowd that is following the rabbi from Galilee and there's something
about his personality and his message that puts all the others in the shade. You become
one of his followers. Perhaps you even accompany him for a few days to hear him teach. You
might have joined his band for any one of a number of reasons. Perhaps you're inspired
by the spiritual message of his teaching. Perhaps you see him as a social reformer advocating
the redistribution of wealth. Or perhaps he strikes you as a political revolutionary,
someone who is going to lead a revolt against the Roman occupation. Galilee after all is
a center for resistance to Roman rule. The Gospel writers certainly present the occasion
when Jesus casts the moneylenders from the temple as a violent act with political implications.
And finally when Jesus enters Jerusalem at Passover, you and his other followers are
in a high state of expectation. There's talk about a new kingdom coming into being. So
maybe you expect him to force a showdown both with Rome and with the Jewish authorities
that collaborate with Rome. No wonder the Romans go along with the request to crucify
him after his arrest, even though their prefect Pontius Pilate seems to have thought that
the claim that Jesus was challenging the emperor's authority was a misreading of his intentions.
And when exactly is this? We can't be certain, but Colin Humphries, a scholar in Cambridge
University, has recently suggested that the crucifixion took place on April 3, AD 33.
In the early days, weeks, months after the crucifixion, as one of Jesus' followers,
you would have felt deeply demoralized. Your leader had been crucified, a most humiliating
form of execution, generally reserved for slaves and traitors. And the promised so-called
kingdom of heaven had manifestly not arrived. On the contrary, the Romans were still in
charge and it was business very much as usual. It must have required a supreme act of faith
not to accept defeat. What saved the Jesus' movement, as we call the first generation
of Christians from extinction, was in part the reports of his posthumous appearance on
earth, reports that were circulated by his closest circle, namely his disciples. Without
those reports and the faith they engendered, it's difficult to think that the movement
would have weathered this dark period. We're now in the 40s. Christianity has
become a movement, if not yet a religion, quite separate from Judaism. Let's suppose
you're a Gentile, that's to say a non-Jew. The word Gentile means belonging to the same
race or religion, hence a Roman polytheist, all of whom in Jewish eyes could be lumped
together. Gentiles are now becoming increasingly interested in the new religion. You hear that
Paul is in town and you decide to go and hear him. Paul was a Jew who underwent conversion
around AD 34 just a few years after Jesus' death. He undertook three missionary journeys
in 45 to 47, 50 to 53, and 53 to 57. In the course of them he visited Antioch, Ephesus,
Thessalonica, Corinth, Philippi, and Athens. These were all Greek foundations, though being
coastal they also had Jewish communities engaging in trade and commerce. It was easier to convert
monotheist than polytheist to the new religion for obvious reasons, though Gentiles would
also crowd around to hear Paul speak. You're one of them. He says some very controversial
things and angers a lot of people by criticising their behaviour, but he mesmerises you and
you decide to become a Christian. The problem is you're not Jewish, so do you have to convert
to Judaism first? If you do and you're a man that means undergoing circumcision, a considerable
deterrent. But Christianity needs converts and in the end Paul and the Apostle Peter after
chewing the subject over for a good long while say, no, if you're a Gentile you don't need
to become circumcised. It was a political act as well as a religious decision. Had they
not agreed to admit uncircumcised Gentiles a Christianity might never have become a Mediterranean
wide and later world religion. A time passes again. We're in the early 60s. In the first
30 years following the crucifixion, the Roman authorities left followers of Jesus alone.
In principle, they adopt an attitude of impartiality, even indifference to the squabbles between
Jews and Christians. As far as they're concerned, Jesus was a Jew who had a quarrel with traditional
Judaism. So when riots break out as a result of Christian missionary teaching, as we learned
from Acts, the Romans merely step in to restore order but otherwise take no action. And when
the first Christians undergo martyrdom such as Stephen and James, the brother of Jesus,
it's clear that they're victims of Jewish enmity who were executed illegally by the
Sanhedrin, the Jewish Council and without the approval or cognisance of the Roman authorities.
From the 60s, however, being a Christian is fast becoming less and less acceptable.
You begin to sense that non-Christians are avoiding you and talking about you behind
your back. It's a very subtle form of prejudice but palpable nonetheless. It's as if you
have been identified as the member of an illegal organization.
We don't know when or why the Romans first became hostile towards the Christians. The
first evidence of persecution dates to AD 64 when the Emperor Nero accused the Christians
of setting fire to Rome. He did so in order to staunch the rumour that it was he who was
responsible for the fire. That must have ratcheted up the prejudice against Christians by several
notches. The historian Tacitus who detested the Christians makes it clear that there was
no substance to the charge. Even so, Nero was no fool and he wouldn't have made the
charge if he didn't think he could make it stick. In other words, if there wasn't an
existing prejudice to start with. And in fact that's what Tacitus confirms. He tells us
that the Christians were hated for their quote-unquote abominable crimes, though he doesn't tell
us what these crimes actually were. He also tells us that Nero first condemned self-confessed
Christians and then later on testimonies received from informers condemned many more. In other
words, Nero instituted a witch hunt. Six years later in AD 70 the Jews were expelled from
Judea as we saw in the previous lecture. They would have included many Christians since
the Romans would hardly have bothered to differentiate them from the Jews.
Let's now talk about your daily life as a Christian. In the first century of Christianity,
Nero's reign apart, you would have felt fairly safe, at least as far as the authorities
were concerned. You wouldn't have lived all day and every day in fear of being persecuted.
Even so, you probably wouldn't have advertised the fact that you were a Christian either.
That would have been asking for trouble. It's not unlikely that Christians were from time
to time arrested when they attracted the attention of the authorities or when the Romans wanted
someone to blame. In addition, there may well have been quite a bit of what we might call
Christian baiting to which the authorities turned a blind eye. Christian boys, for instance,
might well have found themselves being bullied and beaten up by non-Christian boys.
But after Nero, there's no record of persecutions for over a century. In fact, the Romans weren't
quite sure what to do with the Christians as we learn from the correspondence between
the Emperor Trajan and Pliny the Younger, the governor of Bithynia and Pontus. The correspondence
dates to the year 112. Pliny is perplexed. He tells the Emperor that he's been receiving
anonymous denunciations against Christians. How should he act upon them? Should he treat
young Christians and old Christians alike? What should he do if a Christian agreed to
convert back to polytheism? Should he or she be pardoned? And so on. Trajan wasn't favorable
to Christianity, but his response was eminently reasonable and fair. A Christian should not
be sought out, he tells Pliny. If proven guilty, they're to be punished. But if they return
to the pagan fold, they're to go unpunished. And importantly, he instructs Pliny not to
take action on the basis of anonymous accusations. In other words, Trajan advocated what we would
call today a don't ask, don't tell policy. As a Christian, many aspects of your life
would be much the same as that of any other Roman. Your children are reading the same
books and receiving the same education as other children. Even those influential theologians
and teachers called the church fathers saw much to commend in classical authors. In fact,
they regularly quoted classical authors in their religious treatises.
There were, however, a certain professions that you would not have been permitted to
enter because of your faith. They included the theatrical profession, the early church
regarded actors as immoral and, unsurprisingly, prostitution. Your faith would also have prevented
you from holding any public office because, to do so, you would have had to acknowledge
the divinity of the emperor. The same story as with Jews as we saw in the last lecture.
Theatrical performances, gladiatorial contests and chariot races were out of bounds. One
of the church fathers, Saint Clement of Alexandria, who flourished in the second half of the second
century in the early decades of the third, described them as cursed and other Christian
writers are equally condemnatory. By the end of the first century AD, Christians were becoming
fairly numerous in coastal cities throughout the Mediterranean, especially in the eastern
half of the empire. By the second century, they're found in Egypt, North Africa, around
the shores of the Black Sea, and as far west as Gore. There are more of them in the cities
than in the villages. Even so, it's been estimated that in AD 250, there are only about 50,000
Christians in Rome. And even as late as 312, they still represented a small minority, perhaps
between 5 to 10% of the population overall. They only began to become the majority when
imperial pressure outlawed and supplanted polytheism from the 320s onwards.
So how did you become a Christian? You first had to undergo the sacrament of baptism, which
meant, if you were an adult, full immersion in water. This was followed by the sacrament
of confirmation, which consisted of the laying on of hands and the anointing of your forehead
with oil. You would then be able to celebrate the Eucharist, a word derived from the Greek
for Thanksgiving, which you will receive on a weekly basis. The Eucharist was preceded
by a shared communal meal known as an agape, meaning a love feast. The agape evolved out
of the Jewish Passover, though it actually commemorates the Last Supper, the bread and
the wine that are served being understood to be the body and blood of Christ.
I hardly need to point out that preparing and sharing food unites families and communities
alike. It makes you feel well disposed towards your table companions. But it does something
else as well. It makes you more receptive to new ideas. You also meet with your fellow
Christians on Wednesdays and Fridays, these being days of prayer and fasting. You gather
for these services in what we call house churches. House churches were private residences that
became centers of conversion and worship. Greet Prisca and Aquila, who work with me
in Christ Jesus. Greet also the church in their house, Paul wrote in his letter to the
Romans. The oldest church is in Rome. Santa Cecilia in Trastevere, Santa Prisca on the
Avertine and San Clemente are all thought to have been houses originally. It was no
accident therefore that church services were held indoors, unlike the pagan services which
were held out of doors. It meant too that Christians were less visible to the authorities.
It wasn't until the beginning of the third century that purpose built churches came
into being. When Jews converted to Christianity, whole families tended to convert. But when
pagans converted to Christianity, this was less likely to be the case. In the first
two to three centuries of Christianity, Roman households of mixed faith may well have been
the norm rather than the exception. We can only imagine how they functioned in such
circumstances. It must have required a great deal of tolerance on both sides. Not everyone
can produce tolerance, especially when it comes to religion, and some households must
have been riven down the middle. Very possibly some wives were repudiated and some sons
disinherited when they embraced Christianity. Slaves too who converted to Christianity would
for obvious reasons have been particularly vulnerable to physical abuse.
Being a member of a Christian family is very different from being part of a non-Christian
family. You and your spouse are taught to believe that marriage is a permanent union
that lasts till death. Divorce, therefore, is not an option. If your spouse dies, you
can't remarry. You're both expected to be faithful to one another, unlike in a Roman
family where the husband was much freer to dally around. Since one of the purposes of
marriage is procreation, you're not permitted to practice abortion or contraception. All
this meant that there had to be major adjustments in how Romans thought of themselves and of
their spouses if they converted to Christianity. It must have led to conflict in certain families.
You can't bring about a moral revolution of this magnitude without introducing domestic
conflict, even though it has largely gone unreported in our sources.
Let's now fast forward to the year 249-250, when the first large-scale persecution of
the Christians took place under the emperor Decius. Decius orders a D.A.'s imperie, that's
to say a general supplication to the gods for the safety and victory of the emperor.
And he enjoins it upon everyone living in the empire. He is responding to mounting
political instability, which is threatening the security of the empire itself, and he
sees this as a way of calling the Christians to order.
What would you have done in such a situation? Well, I can tell you what most Christians
did. They didn't become martyrs. They complied. Decius was clever. He didn't demand that you
give up your religion. He simply required you to pay your respects to the gods on whom
the welfare of this state depended, and to take an oath to that effect. If you didn't
comply, you'd be arrested, interrogated, thrown into prison, and perhaps tortured, women as
well as men. As I said, most Christians complied, and the church only just survived.
It was the example of the few who underwent martyrdom that held it together. Descriptions
of the deaths of martyrs were read out at services in churches to inspire those whose
faith was becoming wobbly. More persecution followed under the emperor Valerian in 257
and 258. Once again, they were prompted by threats to Rome's security, occasioned by
a series of military defeats. Half a century later, the emperor Diocletian instituted a
further persecution, first in 302-3 and then again in 304. The edict of 304 sanctioned
the killing of all Christians who refused to sacrifice to the gods. It was the most brutal
and repressive edict ever passed. And yet, it failed. Why? Because the climate of public
opinion had changed. A majority of non-Christians was no longer prepared to countenance the
slaughter of their fellow citizens. They no longer looked at Christians as the enemy.
Diocletian's edict continued in 4th till 311 when the dying emperor Galerius issued
an edict of toleration.
There's one last point to note. Let's suppose you were one among a large number of people
who, even though they converted to Christianity, continued to believe in the old pagan gods
as well. As late as the early 6th century, a certain Caesarius of Arles was complaining
in his sermons that self-proclaimed Christians were still visiting pagan shrines, making
vows to trees and praying to rivers. In actual fact, the Christians shrewdly turned this
enduring pagan sentiment to their advantage by making it easier for people to convert
to Christianity. For instance, they chose December the 25th as the day of Jesus' birthday,
in part because two related pagan festivals, one called the Saturnalia and the other called
the Diez Natalis Solis Invicti, the birthday of the invincible son, took place in December.
And for the same reason, they established churches on the site of pagan temples and incorporated
bits of temple architecture, columns, pediments and the like, into their churches. It was
partly a convenience. It meant that the Christians merely had to adapt an existing building to
their needs rather than construct one from the ground up. But it was also a sound psychological
ploy, since it suggested, importantly, continuation rather than rupture. Human beings are loathe
to relinquish ties with the past if they can avoid it, especially in the area of religion.
To conclude, for the first time in human history, a system of belief was foregrounding a sense
of community that was inclusive and non-hierarchical. For the first time, human beings were no longer
being judged according to their income or the nobility of their ancestry. On the contrary,
the sick, the poor and crucially to sinners were told they were not only vital to the
Christian sense of community, but also beloved of God.
In the next section, we're going to leave the Mediterranean and travel to the island
of Britain, where my benighted ancestors were still practicing human sacrifice hundreds
of years after the Roman Empire had embraced Christianity.
