So the Romans have gone for good. How, as a Romano Brit, are you going to cope with your
brave new world after the drawdown of Roman troops, followed by their withdrawal, or indeed
their retreat, as we might call it? The Romans never made any secret of the fact that theirs
was a military occupation. And of course you grumbled like billio under their yoke, but
they had provided you with security, and maybe you secretly hoped they'd return. Maybe that
was the official line that came from Rome that they would return one day after they'd
sorted out their little local difficulties back home. However, if you knew anything about
what was happening on the continent of Europe, then you would have realized that wasn't going
to happen. So you're on your own now. In today's lecture we're going to talk about the world
the Romans left behind, the people who came from abroad to fill the vacuum, and the British
Celts, formerly the Roman Britons of our last lecture, caught up in the middle of these
dramatic events. It's not as if civilized life collapsed overnight. It never does. On the
contrary, you would have experienced a slow deterioration in the quality of your life,
rather than a steep decline. Little by little, you would have observed the infrastructure
collapsing, the aqueduct start to spring leaks, the sewage system becomes clogged, the roads
begin to get overgrown with grass and so forth. You and your Romano-British pals would not
have had the skills or the organizational ability to keep deterioration at bay. Coinage fell
out of use around 420. It wouldn't be revived again until the 7th century. If you'd been
living in a Roman city, you might now have retreated to the countryside, returning to
a life of agriculture. Living in a city depends on a cooperative ethic and a collective act
of will, and you just weren't up to that. You had relied too heavily on the Romans. Your
biggest city, Londinium, had become a deserted ruin by the middle of the 5th century, scarcely
a generation after the Romans had departed. The only city that seems to have continued
to function as a city was Canterbury. The population could no longer keep all the land
that it had farmed during the Roman occupation under cultivation. As a result, much farmland
reverted to scrub and forest. Famine increased, and with it disease. The Romans, as we noted,
were no longer providing you with hygienic water. Though the deterioration was gradual
at first, it gathered pace as time passed. And as if life wasn't bad enough already,
within a generation you had to deal with a new people who had begun to arrive in large
numbers, the so-called Anglo-Saxons, Angles and Saxons and others.
A 6th century British monk called Gildas wrote a tract called On the Ruin and Conquest
of Britain, in which, rather like one of those Old Testament prophets, he denounces his contemporaries
for all the ills of the age. Though Gildas is writing long after the Romans have departed,
he pleads to one of their consuls as follows. The barbarians are driving us to the sea,
and the sea is driving us to the barbarians. Between these two ways of dying, we are either
slain or drowned. It used to be the fashion to refer to the
period of British history from the 5th to the 10th century as the dark age on the grounds
that the lights had gone out for most people. We've talked about a dark age before, the
dark age of Greece. It's when literacy, artistic accomplishment, architecture, civilized values
and much more besides, goes down the tubes. A communication with the outside world breaks
down. The only contact you have on a regular basis
is with your neighbours, and you certainly don't even trust your neighbours completely.
You live in an atmosphere of paranoia. A stranger passing through your midst is an object of
deep suspicion. You hear rumours, often wild rumours, about what's happening in the outside
world. All the same, mothers gave birth, children grew up and most people died peacefully in
their beds. True, the population shrank, but daily life went on.
The Romans left Britain in 410 as we've seen. It was perhaps a generation or so later when
the Anglo-Saxons began to arrive. We don't know how many arrived. Was it just relatively
small bands of warriors or a full scale army, albeit a somewhat ragged one? Did they bring
their wives and children? We don't know. What we can be sure of is that they came from a
wide geographical area from northern Germany, southern Denmark, southern Scandinavia and
a southern Friesian coast, that's to say the coastline to the north-east of France.
They didn't immediately assert themselves as a culture. The first to arrive were nomads
primarily interested in plunder. By the end of the 5th century, however, they had begun
to establish settlements in much of the east and the south of what later came to be called,
in their honor, England. So what did you do when the Anglo-Saxons
started arriving? Did you put up a spirited resistance? Well, yes, you certainly did if
there's any truth to the Arthur legend. It was King Arthur, so the story goes, who valiantly
defended Britain against the invaders. Around 500, he defeated them at an unidentified site
called Mons Badonikas. Arthur turns up in the writings of Gildas whom I mentioned earlier
and he later became a major figure in medieval histories and romances about Camelot, Queen
Gwynevere, Lancelot and the Round Table. But did Arthur really exist? No one knows
for certain. It's possible the Brits invented him to make themselves feel less bad about
being a conquered race. After all, it would have been greatly comforting to tell your
children that their fathers and forefathers had put up a heroic resistance to the invasion
and had even come close to victory before being overwhelmed by the sheer force of numbers.
And in time, you would have believed the legend yourself.
The truth of the matter, however, is that despite what Gildas says, we don't know for
certain whether we should be thinking primarily in terms of a warlike invasion or of an essentially
peaceful settlement. Nor do we know to what extent there was intermarriage between the
British and the Anglo-Saxon invaders, or to what extent the native population was forced
to retreat westwards to escape the Anglo-Saxon advance and encroachment on their land. Did
the Anglo-Saxons implement a policy of ethnic cleansing? Certainly some of the native population
withdrew from the lowlands of England to Wales and the West Country. That's to say to the
counties of Somerset, Devon and Cornwall, the part below Wales that sticks out into
the Atlantic like the leg of a seated man. We know that because these counties experienced
a substantial increase in population as the result of the influx of refugees. And as the
British withdrew, they took with them their belief in Christianity, along with the vestiges
of Roman culture, including their knowledge of Latin. Both Christianity and Latin survived
in the monasteries which they established, particularly around the coast. In fact, the
seat of Arthur's power was identified with Tintagel, a castle on the north coast of Cornwall.
Let's now turn things around. Imagine you're an Anglo-Saxon arriving in Britain sometime
in the mid to late 5th century. The Romans left over a generation ago. You discover a
landscape of crumbling buildings and grass-covered roads, evidence of a vanished civilization.
You've never seen buildings quite this large before, perhaps. You're like one of those
Greeks we encountered before who saw the great circuit wall at Mycenae. Who could possibly
have built such a structure, they had asked. It must have been the gods or the one-eyed
giants, the Cyclopers, one of them replied. As an Anglo-Saxon, you'd have had a similar
reaction. You stumble into the empty shell of a Roman bathhouse and marvel. You can't
comprehend what you see. It must be the work of sorcerers or giants.
But you decide to construct small dwellings, like the dwellings that have been reconstructed
on the site of an Anglo-Saxon village at West Stowe in Suffolk. So your puny little settlement
grows up in the shadow of majestic, crumbling ruins whose remains you use to construct new
buildings. It wasn't until the 10th century that you began quarrying stone primarily to
build churches. This is not to say that the Anglo-Saxons were simply ignorant slobs, a
great Anglo-Saxon expression, by the way. They belonged to a proud warrior culture and
by around 600, that culture is beginning to assert itself in a variety of ways, and not
least through poetry. This is evident from the epic poem, Beowulf,
its finest literary production, which originated in oral form in the 7th century, though our
earliest manuscript of the poem is dated around 1000. Beowulf is about heroes, monsters and
dragons. It's set in a pagan world, though it has Christian elements and a Christian
perspective. The sophistication of Anglo-Saxon culture is also evident from the work of its
weapon smiths, in the spears, fighting axes, swords and shields that have been discovered
in graves. You need these weapons because you're always fighting, primarily other Anglo-Saxons
who occupy the next door kingdom down the road. Eventually, several competing Anglo-Saxon
kingdoms emerge, constantly at war with one another. If you're wealthy, you have some
body armor, a shield, an axe and a highly decorated sword, and you'll probably ride
into battle on a horse. But you're not wealthy. You barely get by and you're dependent on
your local lord for protection. So when he calls you up, you simply grab your pitchfork
or your hoe or your stave and you run screaming into battle, wearing nothing more than a short
tunic and leather shoes. But when you weren't fighting in the winter, what were you doing?
If you happen to be a thane or nobleman, you'll enjoy feasting and drinking at night. You'll
do this in a great timber-framed hall with only wall hangings for decorations. You sit
on benches, you drink from a vessel perhaps made out of oryx, horns perhaps fitted with
gilded silver and every night you get roaring drunk. You have beeswax lamps to shed light
and you hear tales about fighting like the ones in Beowulf. An Anglo-Saxon monk and historian
who lived in the eighth century called the venerable bead describes the scene for us.
You, the king, he writes, sit feasting in the company of elder men and thanes in winter.
The fire is burning on the half in the middle of the hall and all is warm inside while outside
a storm of rain and snow is raging. If you're wealthy, you sleep in a bed with a bed curtain
around it to provide privacy. It's not a bad life and if you get bored, you can always
entertain yourself by terrorizing some of the local peasants. But what if you weren't
a thane? What if you were one of those peasants, one of the majority in other words? There doesn't
seem to have been much of a middle class, so probably you would have been either very
rich or very poor. And if you were very poor, then life as usual would have been an endless
struggle for existence. You'd own a small parcel of land called a hide and support yourself
as best you could by farming, hunting small game, fishing. You have to give some of the
grain you harvest to your local thane in return for protection and so that he doesn't come
and beat you up. If the harvest fails, your very survival will be at risk.
You and your extended family live in a hut made out of mud and wattle, much like the
British Celts. There's a fire for cooking in the middle of the dirt floor and a hole
in the roof for the smoke to escape. There are apertures but no windows. Your diet is
very simple, bread, milk, cheese and eggs. Very rarely you butcher a pig. Your hut is
situated among a cluster of farmsteads worked by other peasants. It's a village of sorts
but without any amenities. Below the peasants were the slaves. Slavery was an important
feature of Anglo-Saxon society. As in Roman society, slaves performed a variety of jobs
including some that required expert knowledge. They were also used as trading commodities.
Many children were sold into slavery in this way. There's a story that when Pope Gregory
saw some Anglo-Saxon slave children in the Roman Forum, he asked who they were. Anglesund
he was told. They're angles. A known Anglesund said Angeli si forent cristiani. The pope
punded back. They're not angles but angels if they become converted to Christianity.
And promptly he decided to send out a Christian mission to Britain. So the story goes. We
don't hear of any wedding ceremony as such before the introduction of Christianity. However
on the morning after the marriage had been consummated, the husband provided his new
wife with a Morgan gifu or morning gift. This would remain hers forever. It meant that Anglo-Saxon
women had a limited degree of economic and social independence. Certainly more independence
than many women in the Middle Ages would have. Life expectancy was low particularly for women
from skeletal evidence found in cemeteries. It's estimated that only 10% of the Anglo-Saxon
population lived more than 45 years. In a cemetery in Oxfordshire only half the women
lived to be 30. A common ailments include ostearthritis, hip, shoulder, knee, ankle,
wrist, etc. Degeneration of the vertebra probably mainly as a result of the stresses of everyday
life. And we also find evidence of tuberculosis and leprosy.
Plague 2 was common as were drought and famine in the Anglo-Saxon world. The venerable bead
talks of a particularly severe outbreak of plague in 664 which devastated first of all
southern and then northern Britain. Plague doesn't leave any traces in the skeletal
evidence but it's likely to have been a regular occurrence given the fact that sanitation
was rudimentary. Though there were physicians they were few and far between. Since many
illnesses were ascribed to the work of the devil and since God too was believed to punish
the wicked many people hoped for a miracle cure. Such cures were primarily thought to
be effected by saints. When you die you'll be buried outside your
settlement probably on a rise of low hill that's visible from afar. It'll be just an
open tract of land and not a cemetery as such. It was the Christians who later invented
cemeteries and the concept of sanctified land. If you're wealthy your body will be displayed
in all its finery along with everything you'll be buried with and this is to honor you and
also to enable your family to show off its wealth.
One of the wealthiest Anglo-Saxon burials is the so-called Sutton Hoo ship burial which
came to light on a headland overlooking the sea in Suffolk in 1939. It's thought to have
contained the body of a member of the ruling family of the kingdom we call East Anglia.
It's dated AD 620 which makes it roughly contemporary with the composition of Beowulf. The dead
man was buried with his weapons and armor, gold coins, silver drinking vessels, shaggy
woollen cloaks and so on. However, I'm sorry to tell you you're not an Anglo-Saxon king
you're just a humble peasant and the chances are you'll be buried without any grave gifts
at all. In fact over 50% of inhumation burials don't have any grave gifts. That seems to
suggest that the gifts were purely for show not for use in the afterlife but we can't
be sure. Perhaps you didn't give much thought to what happened to you after death or you
simply didn't care. When in Beowulf the body of one of the heroes is put on board a ship
and the ship floats away on the tide, the poet comments, no one can truthfully say who
received the cargo. Spectacular though its contents are the Sutton Hoo ship burial was
put in the shade by the discovery in 2009 of the largest ever horde of Anglo-Saxon gold
which was discovered in a field in Staffordshire in the Midlands. The horde also of 7th century
date was found by an amateur metal detector called Terry Herbert who lived on disability
benefit. The gold alone amounted to 11 pounds. The discovery of the horde demonstrates a
vital role that is now being played by amateur enthusiasts in recovering the past. It also
demonstrates the climate of fear that I talked about earlier when in doubt bury your riches
and that's the safest bet. If you don't come back for them it'll be because someone
wax you. You worship among other deities two, Woden, Thor and Freya the gods who have given
us the names of the days of the week. Two Tuesday, Woden Wednesday, Thor Thursday and
Freya Friday. Easter two is named for a powerful Anglo-Saxon deity called Iostra because Iostra
had an important festival at this time of the year. No Anglo-Saxon temples have come
to light however and it may be that most worship took place in the home. The problem we face
is that the Christians were bent on destroying all traces of Anglo-Saxon religion and they
all but succeeded. What we do know is that you believed in sorcery and witchcraft and
that you performed rituals to avert the influence of evil spirits. You inhabited a world that
was populated by dark and mysterious forces that could be harnessed by your enemies to
do you evil. In some ways these forces are more frightening than the gods. They're anonymous
so to speak. They seem to be just as powerful as the gods and they're extremely malicious.
By invoking them a witch could blight your crops, infect your cattle, kill your children
and so on. It was a terrifying world indeed. So it's up to you to be on constant guard
and take whatever action you can to avoid ruin. Watch out for your neighbor in particular.
He's always wanted to take over your land. You'd better hire a witch to avert the spell
he used recently to kill your newborn. The native Brits were unimpressed by all this
talk of sorcery and witchcraft. That's for losers they said. Instead they clung to Christianity
and it was Christianity that would win in the end. Christianity as we saw earlier flourished
especially in Wales and Ireland. It was Ireland that produced some of the most redoubtable
missionaries. One was St Colomber who in 563 travelled to Scotland and founded a monastery
on the remote island of Iona. Another quite separate push to convert to Christianity came
from Rome. In 597 Pope Gregory the Great launched a mission to convert the Anglo-Saxons under
the leadership of St Augustine. Not to be confused with the philosopher and theologian
St Augustine of Hippo who wrote the Confessions and the City of God. St Augustine converted
Ethelbert, a king of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Kent. Thousands under him later followed
Ethelbert's lead. Conversion was usually a top down process with the king taking the
lead and his people following suit and almost invariably there were political reasons for
converting. In the 660s Irish monks founded monasteries at Lindisfarne and Whitby in the
north of England. Christianity was now unstoppable even though there were two competing branches
of it on the island. Christianity had a profound effect upon the daily lives of ordinary people.
Very soon the church became a force to be reckoned with and began involving itself in
people's lives. Adultery on the part of a husband became a punishable offence. Previously
only a wife was subject to punishment and marriage between close family members was
forbidden. So put yourself into the shoes of a Christian missionary for a moment. The
message that you bear is at complete odds with Anglo-Saxon warrior culture. You advocate
a life devoted to prayer, renunciation of worldly pleasures, humility, forgiveness and obedience.
Conversely the people you're making your pitch to go in for killing other Anglo-Saxons
and boasting about it afterwards. And yet the two polar opposites somehow came together
and made common cause. It's one of the most remarkable developments of this period, indeed
of any period, how a warrior culture came to embrace a culture of compassion. It obviously
had a lot to do with the kind of men, men mainly I think who became Christian missionaries,
men who were persuasive, determined, indefatigable and fearless. They just wouldn't take no
for an answer, no matter what the risks involved, not even from a warrior who was threatening
to slit their throat, which is why of course they succeeded. Whatever we think about religion
and whatever our religious belief, early Christianity must have produced some formidable
advocates to do battle, metaphorically speaking, with Anglo-Saxon warriors. By the 10th century
pretty well every village had its own church with its own graveyard.
To become a monk or a nun you needed equally formidable skills. You lived in an extremely
violent world and had only the protection of your faith. When you weren't praying you
were likely to be teaching or tending the sick or hoeing or brewing or copying out manuscripts
such as the Lindisfarne Gospels, which are thought to have been produced in the early
8th century at Lindisfarne Monastery in the northeast of England. Imagine being required
to do manual work of some sort, having to go to the church eight times each day and night
and then immersing yourself in copying a text which you illustrate with fabulously complex
and intricate patterns involving fanciful animals and birds. It required a supreme act
of concentration and it also required a lot of physical resources. It's estimated that
the Lindisfarne Gospels required 300 skins of calves to make the leaves of vellum on which
the Gospels were written. Michelle Brown, a curator at the British Library, has estimated
that it would have taken the scribe ten years to produce.
Of course only a small percentage of the Anglo-Saxon population was educated, but that small percentage
had access to classical learning, an enormous benefit for society. So it was due to the
monks and nuns that Latin survived because the Bible, the prayer books and other important
secular works were all in Latin. I take my hat off to them. They saved the Greeks and
the Romans from extinction and in time, too, an Anglo-Saxon literature evolved of which
Beowulf is a shining example.
To conclude, Anglo-Saxon Britain was by no means a period of unrelieved darkness. Both
its achievement and its legacy are powerful. It produced illuminated manuscripts, both
secular and sacred, scientific and humanistic, whose beauty is unsurpassed. It created outstanding
examples of metalwork. It gave Britain its laws. It led to the formation of a unified
state. And last but by no means least, it gave birth to a language that has come to
dominate the world, the language we call Old English, the direct ancestor of the language
that we are communicating in here today.
In the next lecture we're going to focus upon a new set of invaders, the Vikings, who also
made England their home.
