In the window of your local Viking recruitment office, you can see a sign which reads, Wanted.
Young men with an insatiable thirst for adventure.
No experience necessary.
A preference will be given to those who are prepared to desecrate sacred buildings, abuse women and children, and massacre unarmed men.
Well, that at least is the image of the people we're going to be talking about in today's lecture.
We don't actually know what motivated the Vikings to undertake their raids because they've left us no writings.
The Viking era begins with the destruction of a very important and wealthy monastery on an island called Lindisfarne off the north coast of England in 793.
It ends with the Norman conquest of Britain in 1066, a period of nearly 300 years.
The Vikings weren't a nation, no such thing as a nation existed at this time.
Instead, they comprised a hodgepodge of several Scandinavian peoples who later became Danes, Swedes and Norwegians.
In other words, they were rather like the Greeks, constantly warring among themselves.
Most of the Vikings who arrived in Britain came from the country that later became Denmark.
In fact, the word Dane is conventionally applied to all the Viking raiders who came to England, irrespective of their place of origin.
When we think of the Vikings, we think foremost of their raids.
That's how they're portrayed in the film entitled The Vikings starring Kirk Douglas and Tony Curtis, which came out in 1958.
It blew me away when I first saw it, especially the Viking funeral at the end.
It made me want to become a Viking raider, almost as much as I wanted to become a Greek hoplite or a Roman gladiator.
Certainly, the Vikings terrorized much of Western Europe, including the British Isles, but the raids aren't the whole story.
In fact, until they began raiding, they had been traders for hundreds of years.
They'd been trading with the Anglo-Saxons.
In time, too, they established permanent peaceful settlements outside their homeland in the Faroe Islands from 825 onwards,
in Iceland from 870, in England from 876, on the southwest coast of Greenland from 986 onwards,
and in Vinland on the east coast of Canada from 1,000 onwards.
They also had trading contacts with both the Middle East and the Far East.
It is greatly to the misfortune of the Vikings that their deeds, rather their misdeeds, were recorded solely by their victims,
the churchmen whose churches they raided.
We never get to see the Viking side of the picture.
In the church's eyes, the Vikings were the perpetrators of wanton acts of barbarism.
The fact remains, however, that we're always on shaky ground when we only have one side of the picture.
There's always an other side to history, as we discovered when we were talking about the Persians whom we see exclusively through Greek eyes.
I want you now to imagine you're a young Viking male.
You've heard from others about the attractions of being a raider, and you want to try it out for yourself.
You have the urge to leave home.
You feel fired up by the desire for exploration.
Becoming a raider will enable you to set yourself up for life with the loot you bring back.
You also see raiding as a kind of rite of passage from adolescence to manhood,
a way to prove your metal and earn respect, both from your peers and from society at large.
And you know that old Viking saying, every girl loves a raider.
So let's suppose that you've volunteered, if that's the way it's done.
We don't know how raiders got selected.
You're now committed to a life, or at least to a few years, of adventure,
uncertainty and living outside the rules.
That doesn't mean you're a hooligan.
The voyages that the Vikings undertook required great courage and great technical skill
in terms of both shipbuilding and navigation.
So you'll have to undergo an intensive training.
You'll probably need to acquire an expertise that will be valuable at sea.
You may have to learn how to construct and repair a longboat,
the name we attach to their warships.
Viking longboats were among the lightest, swiftest and slimmest ships ever built.
They could reach a top speed of 10 knots.
They were 60 to 80 feet in length and required between 25 to 50 oars.
They were built out of thin planks of oak called streaks that overlapped one another.
The gaps between the streaks were caulked.
That's to say stuffed with wool that had been soaked in tar.
The keel was cut directly from a single tree trunk.
The timbers could actually bend when they were struck by heavy waves and thus absorb the impact.
This made them extremely seaworthy.
The fact that longboats could cross the Atlantic testifies to that.
As well as oars, the ships had a mast with a square sail made out of wool,
either decorated with stripes or blood red in colour.
The steering oar, which served as a tiller, was attached to the right side of the ship close to the stern.
Our word steer comes from the Old Norse Stira, S-T-Y-R-A.
It's why we call the right side of a ship starboard.
Typically the prow and the stern ended in a carved dragon's head and tail
to intimidate the enemy, as if the sight of a Viking ship by itself wasn't intimidating enough.
All the shields were inserted into racks, one on each side of the ship.
You'll often be on the high seas for days on end having to keep the same direction,
so you'll need to learn about currents and prevailing winds.
The only navigational tool at your disposal is a lead weight attached to a rope,
which you drop into the water to keep a safe distance from the land in the dark.
You'll have to develop the right mindset for the enormous challenges that lie ahead.
You'll feel an intense sense of camaraderie with your fellow raiders
and intense pride too in being a Viking.
Well let's suppose the year is 793, June the 8th to be precise.
The commander of your expeditionary force has decided to make an attack on a monastery
on a tiny island called Lindisfarne off the coast of Northumbria in Northern England.
He's decided on Lindisfarne because it's fabulously wealthy.
A rumour has it that it's flush with objects made of gold and silver encrusted with jewels.
And it's also a soft target ripe for the plucking.
The monks are the only inhabitants on the island
and they certainly won't put up much resistance.
There are about 50 to 100 men on board your ship.
Around dawn your captain orders you to lower the mast and sails.
You row quietly towards the island,
dipping your oars into the water as gently as possible.
Your ship is almost invisible in the early morning mist
even when it's quite close to the shore because it sits so low in the water.
Its keel is so shallow that it can be hauled up onto the shore.
Addressed in a padded leather tunic and leather helmet
armed with an iron-headed axe, a spear and double-edged sword
and clutching a round wooden shield, you silently disembark.
The monks don't know what's hit them until you rush forward screaming.
Most of them scatter, a few stand their ground and try to bar your entry in the name of some god
but you push them roughly aside or cut them down.
The raid is over in a few hours but perhaps less.
You've no interest in any other military action.
You gather up the spoils and sail back to your homeland.
No doubt to a very warm welcome.
Maybe you tell stories of heroic fighting to make the whole thing seem rather glamorous.
Incidentally the raid on Lindisfarne didn't come without a warning.
At least if we are to believe the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
which reports that it was preceded by whirlwinds, lightning storms
and the clincher of fiery dragons flying in the sky
all of which was followed by a great famine.
The next year, 794, you and your comrades return and plunder Jarrow
another wealthy monastery not far from Lindisfarne.
And the next year, 795, you plunder the monasteries on the islands of Iona and Skye
islands off the west coast of Scotland and so on.
It's like killing fish in a barrel.
Later you extend your raids to south east England and to the northern coast of France.
You harry shipping both in the Baltic Sea and the North Sea.
At first you're content to raid.
In time, however, you decide to establish settlements in the territories that you've raided
and after a while, you send a message back home telling your family to join you.
One of the most important Viking establishments in England was at York,
the former Roman town of Eborrachum.
Under the Anglo-Saxons, it had become euphoric.
The Vikings couldn't pronounce that so they called it Jorvik.
Around 850, you also establish a settlement in the south of England on an island in the River Thames.
From now on, you're a threat to the interior as well as to the coast of Britain.
And no one is safe from your raids throughout the whole land.
In the hope of keeping you at bay, the Anglo-Saxons begin paying Danegeld,
meaning gold for the Danes, a bribe in other words.
It was only a stop-gap measure.
Gradually, you gain so much control of the north and east of England
that this becomes known as Dane Law, the law of the Danes.
Though Dane Law never became a consolidated political entity.
Of the former English kingdoms, only Wessex in the south,
the territory of the West Saxons held out.
But hold out, it did, largely thanks to King Alfred, who reigned from 871 to 899.
In 878, Alfred defeated the Danes and stopped them in their tracks.
Almost a century later, in 959, the Anglo-Saxons were in control of all England.
They'd come back from the dead, so to speak.
And eventually, Danish kings did establish themselves in the land,
but only for a very brief period.
So far, I presented the Vikings as fearsome warriors who struck terror into the local people.
There's got to be another side to their personality, and there was.
To begin with, only a small minority of Vikings went on raids.
And even if you were one of them, you'd only be away during the summer months.
And besides which, no one can spend their entire life pillaging and plundering,
it's too bloody exhausting.
You're going to have to settle down eventually, not least,
because old age will present you with no alternative.
I'm sure there were plenty of decent, peace-loving, law-abiding Vikings
who were protective husbands, loving fathers, and dutiful sons.
Perhaps you were one of them.
No doubt you took pride in the raids, but you may not have shared the taste for violence.
The finds that are on display at the Jorvik Viking Centre at Coppergate in York
reveal this other, so to speak, peaceable side of the Viking character.
And it's this side that I now want to turn to.
Let's talk about your home life.
You harvest crops, raise livestock, and go hunting and fishing.
Or some combination thereof.
Your most important crop is barley, but you also cultivate beans,
cabbage, hops, peas, and flax.
You use flax for making linen clothes.
You also raise pigs, sheep, cattle, and goats.
As generally in pre-modern times, you slaughter many of these animals in the fall,
so you don't have to feed them in the winter.
You also hunt bears, foxes, squirrels, and stoats for their fur.
Deer, elk, and reindeer for their meat,
and elk and reindeer again for their antlers.
You use the antlers to make a variety of objects,
such as arrowheads, drinking cups, combs, and so forth.
You fish at sea for cod and herring,
and in rivers and lakes for salmon and pike and perch.
The most valuable sea creature is the seal.
You caulk your boats and ships with seal oil.
You also put the oil in your lamps.
You make bags, gloves, and shoes out of the skin, and you eat the meat.
You supplement raiding with trading.
In fact, there wasn't much distinction between raiding and trading at times.
You trade hives, fur, amber, whale bone, and walrus ivory
for gold, silver, and semi-precious stones for the jewellery that you make.
You also trade those items for salt, spices, and wine.
A very important occupation is that of smith.
In fact, smith is an old Norse word, meaning skilled craftsman.
Smiths produced a variety of goods, including swords, nails,
equipment for horses, simple pots and pans.
Their decorative items were of extraordinary refinement,
not only jewellery, but also tableware.
They primarily worked in iron,
but were also skilled in gold, silver, copper, and bronze.
So much for the men.
What about the women?
Well, I'm sorry to say that it's pretty much business as usual.
You're typically several years younger than your husband.
You can, however, choose your husband and sue for divorce.
Going into labor, which you do regularly, puts you at grave risk.
Your world is that of the home over which you have charge,
though you enjoy a lot of independence when your husband is off raiding.
As well as cooking, child-minding, spinning, and weaving in your spare time,
you probably have to help out on the farm as well.
You'd certainly have your work cut out for you
if you had to help set up a new community abroad.
Both men and women most commonly wore woollen outer garments,
perhaps with linen undergarments, the very wealthy wore silk.
Fur was used for cloaks and as a trim.
Men wore trousers, women loose-fitting clothes.
Brooches, often ornamental, were the main fasteners for clothing.
Both men and women wore boots or shoes made out of leather, especially goat skin.
Men were bearded and women wore their hair long, sometimes in a pigtail.
I bet you, Pong.
Ibn Fadlan, an Arab who encountered some Viking merchants on the river Volga in Russia
in the early 10th century,
complained that when they washed, they all did so in the same bowl of water.
And that they also spat into that same bowl and blew their noses into it as well.
Spitting and nose-blowing into it.
Well, I guess it's a Viking thing.
You probably lived in the country, though there were some Viking towns like Jovik.
The most characteristic type of home was the longhouse.
Its length would reflect its owner's status and wealth.
Some longhouses were as many as 250 feet, about 75 metres, in length.
Houses in towns tended to be smaller and were often built together in a row.
If wood were available, you'd live in a kind of log cabin.
If not, your walls might be made of wattle and daub.
That's to say, interwoven branches smeared with dung or clay to make them waterproof.
Another variation, particularly common in Iceland, was stone foundations with walls.
There'd be a hole in the roof for smoke to escape through.
The floor is beaten earth.
The roof is made of thatch, turf, wooden tiles or matted reeds.
If you're well off, you'll line the walls with wooden panels.
You don't have much furniture, a bench or two and a few stools.
Most of the time, you'd crouch, recline or lie on the floor.
You'd sleep on a rug, perhaps laid out on a raised platform.
Some words next about your culture.
Whatever your age or status in life, it's very unlikely that you're literate.
Though, like other Scandinavian and Germanic-speaking people,
you can communicate in a script called runig.
The basic Viking alphabet consisted of 16 runes.
Each rune comprises upright or diagonal lines.
Runes were often carved on stones that commemorated the dead
or celebrated mighty achievements.
Despite being largely illiterate, you're the heir to a world-class literature,
which we call Old Norse.
Although we don't have any manuscripts in Old Norse that go back to the Viking Age,
some of the poems that were incorporated into the poetic Edda,
an anthology of the 12th century, very likely date back to the Viking Age.
Essentially, however, it's an oral culture that places very high significance on memory.
I expect you would have been completely mystified by an illuminated manuscript
of the kind that monks labored to produce.
You might even have feared it as something with magical powers.
Perhaps that was the reason why Vikings destroyed countless libraries with irreplaceable manuscripts.
One manuscript that did survive from these Dark Ages is the Book of Kells.
It contains the four Gospels in Latin.
It's the work of a monk or group of monks around 800, and it was found in an Irish bog.
It's named for the fact that it's believed to have originally been housed in the Abbey of Kells.
The Vikings had begun attacking Irish monasteries in the 790s.
So put yourself for a moment into the sandals of one of those monks,
who has been laboring for years to create that beautiful book.
Your busy copying in your own world wrapped up in it
when the cry goes up, Vikings, Vikings, you know what this means.
You've heard the horror stories.
You're determined to protect your book at all costs.
So you grab it and you start running as fast as you can away from the monastery.
But a Viking starts running after you.
You do the only thing you can.
You toss the book into a bog.
The Viking catches up with you and slays you.
But your book survives.
It survives to this day.
You can see it in Trinity College Library Dublin.
We can hardly call the Vikings cultured, but they did adhere to a form of democracy.
Local chiefs were subject to a local assembly called a thing,
where the free population could express its views and make complaints.
Because the people couldn't read, the laws would be read out in the thing once a year.
A society was divided into three classes, nobles, free men and slaves.
Slaves were called thralls.
Hence our word, enthralled, meaning to be captivated by someone or something,
because thralls were often captured in war.
Your gods bear a close resemblance to Anglo-Saxon gods.
The principal god is Odin, a god of war and death.
Frey and Freya, the god and goddess of fertility, their brother and sister.
Thor, god of thunder and Loki, a god of fire.
You perform most of your religious practices in the home, just like the Anglo-Saxons.
You don't worship in temples, and there are no priests so far as we know.
When you first encounter Christianity around the second half of the tenth century,
you see Christ as just one more god to add to your pantheon.
No problem there.
You even take over some of the mythology, quote-unquote, of Christianity.
Hearing, for instance, about the crucifixion,
you invent a similar story that Odin sacrificed himself
by hanging himself on a tree and then resurrecting himself afterwards.
There are other indications of a sort of merger between the two religions.
Some of the silver coins that have come to light in Viking York
are inscribed with the name Peter, presumably a reference to Saint Peter.
However, the last letter of Peter is in the shape of Thor's hammer.
We've seen evidence before of polytheistic religions
welcoming a monotheistic god into their fold without giving up on all their other gods.
You can't be too careful when it comes to venerating the gods.
Eventually, however, you come round to the realization that Christianity is the only game in town.
The Danish king, Harold Bluetooth, converted to Christianity around 960,
though he may well have kept his fingers crossed as he made the switch.
Norway and the Norse colonies in the Atlantic held out
until the beginning of the 11th century and Sweden until the end of the 11th century.
This was centuries after England, Ireland and continental Europe had converted.
And even then, the conversion to Christianity was a long and uneven process
which lasted in some places 200 years.
In Scandinavia, there's very little evidence of Christian influence
until the end of the 1st millennium AD.
Even well into the Middle Ages, Viking graves are inscribed with the symbols of
Votan on one side and Christianity on the other.
Finally, let's talk about how you buried your dead.
The Hollywood film The Vikings, which I mentioned earlier, does a grand job faking a Viking funeral.
The character who's played by Kirk Douglas is placed in a long boat, which is then pushed out to sea.
Burning arrows are fired at it from the shore and the boat burns before sinking.
I don't know who dreamt up this ritual, but unfortunately there's no secure archaeological data to support it.
If you happen to be a member of the topmost echelons of Viking society,
your body would be placed in an unburned ship that was covered in a mound, just like the Anglo-Saxons did.
The most spectacular is the Osberg Ship Burial in Norway.
It's preserved in clay near the Oslo Fjord.
It's dated by dendrochronology, that's a scientific technique for dating the age of wood,
which was applied to the ship's timbers in this case, to around 830.
The Osberg Longship has been described as the equivalent of a luxury yacht, because it wasn't built for open waters.
Its prow is exquisitely decorated with elaborate wood carvings ending in a snake's head spiral.
It contained the skeletons of two women, one aged 50 to 60, the other 20 to 30.
We don't know why two women were buried together.
It was one of them's sacrifice to accompany her mistress into the next world,
with the expectation that she would perform the same duties for her in the afterlife as she did in this life,
but which was the high-born lady, and which was the servant.
Ironically, we can no longer tell.
We've met the possibility of such a burial before, nearly two and a half thousand years before in the Royal Cemetery at Ur.
Ordinary people, it seems, don't escape their fate, even in the afterlife.
Two oxen, and at least 14 horses, had also been slaughtered and laid on board.
Though the Vikings terrorized the Anglo-Saxons, the Anglo-Saxons never succumbed on the contrary.
The Viking invasions had the paradoxical consequence of eventually solidifying the country under a single non-Viking ruler,
and the Viking presence in Britain was never equal to that of the Anglo-Saxons.
With one or two exceptions, wherever they went, the Vikings didn't populate large areas.
They were far fewer in number than the local population.
The one place where they did settle in large numbers was northern France, the region that is known today as Normandy.
Normandy takes its name from the fact that it was ceded to the Northman, or Norseman, another name for the Vikings.
The Norseman, who were under the leadership of a man called Rolfa,
struck a deal with the Carolingians, who were the rulers of what later was called Normandy.
They agreed to rule it in the name of the Carolingians.
It's as if they woke up one day and said to themselves,
all this pillaging and plundering is all very well, but it wears a man out.
It's time we settled down, and so they did, and became, in effect, French.
Or rather, they became what passed for French in those days, even to the extent of learning the French language.
Let's say they became French-ified, because we shouldn't think of the region that we call France today as a nation state back then.
In the next lecture, we're going to look at the Normans who invaded England and see what effect they had on English daily life.
