There's a wonderfully funny book by two authors named W. C. Sellar and R. J. Yateman entitled
A 1066 and all that. A memorable history of England comprising all the parts you can
remember including 103 good things, five bad kings and two genuine dates. The two genuine
dates are 55 BC, the year of Julius Caesar's first so-called invasion of Britain and 1066,
the year of the Norman conquest, the year of the last invasion of Britain.
Sellar and Yateman conclude the Norman conquest was a good thing as from this time onward
England stopped being conquered and was thus able to become top nation.
In this lecture we're going to look at how England stopped being conquered by focusing on the year
1066 and the decades immediately after it. Like the Romans before them the Normans made it clear
from the start that they were here to stay. There's was a very serious invasion. We'll see
that Sellar and Yateman were right in their judgment on the whole. I want to begin by asking
you to imagine you're a Norman soldier who lives in Normandy in northern France. You're descended
from the Northmen, another name for the Vikings. Your ancestors settled in France in the early
10th century. In time they adopted the French language. They also became thoroughgoing Christians
as we see from the many churches and monasteries that they built in northern France.
You belong to a culture that produces ferocious warriors, a skilled horseman as well as men who
are adept with lances as well as bows and arrows. You wear a conical helmet with a distinctive
nose guard and a loose fitting howbook. That's to say a tunic covered with metal plates or rings,
what we call chain mail. Over your legs you wear cross-gartered hose and on your feet you wear
leather shoes with spurs. You have a shield shaped rather like a kite, primarily designed to protect
your thighs when you're on horseback. You're armed with a sword, a battle axe and a lance.
You're proud to be a Norman warrior but you're also proud of the fact that your culture values
the arts of peace, meaning scholarship, good government, law and order, education, craftsmanship
and last but not least architecture. You might well have continued to live in northern France
were it not for the fact that the late English King Edward the Confessor had nominated your
chieftain William the Bastard or to give him his more flattering title William Duke of Normandy
to be his successor or at least that's the story that William himself put about to challenge the
legitimacy of the newly crowned King of England Harold Godwinson. William announces that he's
going to invade England to defend his claim to the throne and lo and behold you've been picked
to join the invasion. On the whole you're happy to go Britain is right for the plucking and you've
no doubt been promised a handsome reward for your services. You know too that you belong to a more
advanced culture to that of the Anglo-Saxons so they won't give you any trouble.
By claiming the English throne William initiated what was arguably the most violent upheaval
in English history. The tide moreover could have gone either way it certainly wasn't a foregone
conclusion that he would conquer Britain. What William may or may not have told you is that if
the invasion is successful you're going to have to stay put in England for good so you polish your
armor say goodbye to your wife and family and get ready to sail across what the English chauvinistically
to this day call the English Channel. The 20 odd miles of water that separate England from the
continent just like Julius Caesar had done 1100 years before. Just before you set sail however
you learn that William isn't the only claimant to the English throne. It turns out that the
king's brother Tostig living in exile has joined forces with a Norwegian king called
Harold Hardrada and that he's making a counter bid for the throne. So Harold Godwinson is now
facing two invasions. Let's now see things from the viewpoint of a foot soldier in his army. I say
foot soldier because King Harold unlike Duke William doesn't have any warriors on horseback.
Anglo-Saxon warriors fought only on foot. It's September 1066. You're in camp outside London
and you don't know if you're going to be marching south or north. It depends on who lands first.
In the event the Norwegians land first and join forces with Tostig. So your king Harold
leaves you north and you win a victory not far from York at a place called Stamford Bridge.
Both the Norwegian King Harold Hardrada and Tostig are killed though your army suffers
heavy casualties. I can't resist telling you the date September the 25th not because it's my
birthday but because it's important for our understanding of the pace at which events now move.
Four days later William crosses the English Channel and lands on the south coast near a place
called Hastings. He'd wanted to land first but had been delayed by contrary winds. You the English
soldier have barely had time to recover from your jubilation at your victory when you hear
the news. It's now the end of September beginning of October. Your king is facing a dilemma. He can
either march south to sweet and offer battle or rest his army and wait for reinforcements to
arrive from around the country. The problem with the latter course of action is that it will leave
the Normans free to plunder the Sussex countryside. If Harold sought counsel on what course to adopt
which he probably did there were no doubt a few hotheads who urged battle without delay but the
majority would surely have counseled delay. The distance from Stamford Bridge to Hastings is well
over 200 miles and even if you'd been all pumped up ready to fight again when you began the march
a reality would have set in by the second or third day surely and remember you'd had to march
150 miles from London to Stamford Bridge in the first place. Can you imagine how foot saw you
would have been? The problem is that Harold owns estates close to where the Normans have landed
and he sees it as a point of pride not to allow William to ravage them. That argument doesn't
sit well with you as an ordinary soldier. From your perspective your king is more concerned about
his property than about your welfare but the order is given march south immediately. You probably feel
a somewhat resentful the flush of victory you felt a few days ago has evaporated.
It takes you about 10 or 12 days to march from Stamford Bridge to Hastings although the roads
that the Romans had built some 700 years before are still in use. They weren't in the same condition
that the Romans had left them in. You have a tough slog through the mud and the rain. This is England
remember so you of course you must battle with the rain. You're pretty well done in by the time
you arrive at Hastings whereas William's army is well rested. You do however manage to gain the
advantage of higher ground when the battle takes place on October the 14th and despite your exhaustion
you fight with great courage. For an hour or more you doggedly resist the assault of the
Norman cavalry by creating an impenetrable wall of shields. In fact you're on the verge of victory
when either you or your king make two fatal errors. First when you think you've got the
Normans beaten you break ranks and charge down from your hill in disorder. Perhaps it's a Norman
faint to deceive you or perhaps you really were on the point of breaking through. We just don't know
the Normans quickly regroup however and slaughter you as you charge towards them.
The second error follows quickly upon the first. The sensible thing would have been to make an
orderly retreat so that you could live to fight another day but retreat is out of the question.
It's not the way you've been trained. Instead you form a protective circle around your king.
This is what your military training has taught you to do at all costs even at the cost of
eventual victory. William now orders his archers to fire their arrows up into the sky almost
vertically so that it's very difficult for you to see them as they drop from above like a hailstorm.
Harold himself is killed by an arrow that strikes him in the eye and that in effect ends the battle.
The Normans build the first of their castles on the site of the battle and in the next two months
they undertake mopping up operations squashing all resistance. William easily takes London
and announces that he's going to be crowned king in Westminster Abbey. A Westminster Abbey
was built by King Edward the Confessor so he's rubbing salt in the wound.
The death of King Harold is depicted in the famous Bayo tapestry which illustrates the events
that led up to the invasion as well as the battle itself. The Bayo tapestry it's actually a piece
of embroidery not a tapestry is so named because it was originally displayed in Bayo Cathedral in
northern France. It sheds an invaluable light on daily life in the medieval period. It's thought
to be the work of English needle women in the 1070s. Can you imagine what you would have felt
if you'd been one of those English needle women ordered to immortalize England's defeat at the
hands of the Normans? It would have been the ultimate indignity more rubbing of salt in the wound.
What if you were one of the needle women whose husbands had been killed in the fray each time
you embroidered a fallen English soldier you'd be thinking it was your husband and that you
were killing him again. Maybe as Andrew Bridgeforth suggests you tried to get even with the Normans
by encrypting secret messages intended to help undermine Norman rule whether that's true or not
it's a comforting thought. Next imagine you're a Norman. You've won the battle of Hastings
and the rest is history well almost. The English church wasn't easily cowed it required you to do
120 days of penance for each soldier you had killed. William got around the demand by bribing the
church. That's to say by founding abbeys where monks would pray that your soul would be saved
from eternal damnation. Your Duke is due to be crowned King William I of England in Westminster
Abbey on Christmas Day. You've been told to expect trouble and you're feeling very edgy. When the
Archbishop places the crown on his head you hear cries of God save the king. You don't understand
what the words mean. You think they're intended to initiate a revolt. Perhaps the locals are
planning to break into the abbey and assassinate William. That's your thought. So you panic to
create a distraction you begin setting fire to the neighbouring houses and in the process
you destroy a sizeable chunk of the city of Westminster. William himself was we're told
completely rattled. It's clear from his jitteriness that the conquest was not yet as your descendants
might say a feta complet. So how do you feel being Anglo-Saxon now that you've been subjugated?
Resentful and oppressed of course. Who wouldn't? So you resist. The most serious resistance to
Norman rule came just three years after the conquest in 1069. That was when your cousins
in the far north of England rebelled against Norman rule. The north still had strong ties
to Scandinavia. That's why Harold Hardrada had landed there in his bid for the English throne
in 1066. The ill-fated revolt resulted in what has been aptly called the harrowing of the north.
William showed no mercy. Entire villages were wiped out. He ordered his men to slaughter
livestock and burn the crops. They did such a good job that nothing grew on the land
for years afterwards. Even his supporters were horrified. A later contemporary called
Auduric Witalis wrote that 100,000 people starved to death in the winter that followed.
Such ferocity is all the more remarkable in view of the fact that there were only about
10,000 Normans in England at the time to keep you in check. So you, the British, the Anglo-Saxons
quickly learnt your lesson. The Roman conquest had taken over half a century,
but you've been crushed within a decade if not less. There's no parallel in English history and
very few parallels anywhere. There was one group, however, who would hardly have noticed
that things had changed, namely slaves. The Doomsday Book, which I'll talk about in a moment,
indicates that 10% of the population was enslaved at the time. People at the bottom of the social
ladder would not have found life very different under the Normans from life under the Anglo-Saxons.
It might even have improved slightly. In fact, slavery now died out in Britain, largely because
the Normans weren't interested in making fine distinctions between classes. As far as they were
concerned, everybody was now working for them. Let's now move forward 10 years. The conquest has
become an unalterable fact of life. You can hardly remember the time when the Normans weren't around.
You've begun to suffer the effects of long-term occupation. If you had been moderately well
to do, or wealthy, you're probably worse off than you were before the conquest. That's because
William has seized your land and given it to his supporters. If you've collaborated with the Normans,
however, you may be doing okay. The Normans needed to get at least some of the local aristocracy on
board to help them run the country. Every town, every village, every settlement is now under
permanent military watch. The Normans have destroyed buildings and constructed fortified castles
all over the land so that they can observe everything you do. Castles with thick walls that
serve both as residences and as strongholds. They've erected them both in the countryside
and in towns as safeguards against revolt. Or rather, you have. It's you, the subjugated English,
who dug the stones out of the quarries, cut them to size, and piled them high on top of one another
under the supervision of your new masters, all of you, women and children, as well as men.
Let's talk about these castles for a moment. They very much defined relations between the
conquerors and the conquered. They were the Norman equivalent of foam tapping and homeland security.
The earliest ones were built of timber, but later they were built of stone or brick. Their walls
were often splayed at the base to protect them from being undermined in the literal sense of the
word. Typically, a castle was built on a mound of earth called a mott. It was enclosed by a wall,
or perhaps as many as three walls, and surrounded by a ditch. The ditch often had stakes in it
to repel an invader and was sometimes filled with water. To enter the castle, you had to pass
over the drawbridge, which could be hauled up by means of iron chains at a moment's notice.
There was a massive tower known as a keep on top of the mott that looked out over the Bailey,
the area enclosed by the wall. The lord, together with his retinue, lived in the keep,
which was also used for storage. There would be a chapel attached to it. The Normans were very
religious. The walls had thin lancet windows and narrow on the outside, but splayed on the inside
to let in a bit of light while keeping out arrows. To get from one floor to another,
you'd use a spiral staircase. This twisted upwards in a clockwise direction so that
attackers would be hampered in using their swords as they ascended. The Bailey contained
domestic buildings. It was where what we might call the support staff lived, including the soldiers.
In times of siege, the defenders would throw down boiling water or oil or hot sand upon the
attackers from the battlements, which were shaped like teeth. The Normans placed everyone under
a tie of obligation to a superior. There's someone you're answerable to, and there's someone above
him that that person is answerable to, and so on, all the way up to the king. You, of course,
are at the bottom of the ladder. You're bound to your local landlord, to whom you owe a portion
of your services or agricultural produce. We call this system of hierarchical obligation,
the feudal system. To make sure they know what everyone in the land is worth,
Norman officials go around collecting data. Very likely they'll be coming to snoop around
your village. Don't try and hide your oxen from the commissioner's prying eyes. If you do,
it'll be curtains for you. When they've finished their investigation, the commissioners will write
everything down in the Doomsday Book, the first national survey ever undertaken in England.
They complete it in 1086, just 20 years after the conquest. A later Norman, called Richard Fitz
Nigel, said that it was called the Doomsday Book because its decisions, like those of the
last judgment, are unalterable. Living under the heel of the Normans, you quickly came to the
realization that you're going to have to play by Norman rules. This meant learning how to speak
French or what passed for French in those days. I seriously doubt whether you being a poor peasant
picked up any French words, but the elite English certainly had to learn it. A French has entered
into our language of course, particularly the language for food with the Anglo-Saxon word
referring to the beast and the French version referring to the feast. So we have pig, Anglo-Saxon
pork, French, sheep, mutton, cow, beef, and so on. Sadly the Normans didn't teach the English
how to cook. English food would remain executable for 900 years. You also came to the realization
that you were pretty safe so long as you did what the Normans asked of you. You wouldn't have known
this at the time, but the Norman invasion was the last time in British history that the island
was invaded. The Vikings were still doing their ravaging and pillaging thing, but you wouldn't
have to fear them ever again. And it's here that geography plays its part. Your island has been
invaded several times in the previous thousand years because it lacked a strong central government
and because it was vulnerable to raiders who came by sea. But now everything changes because you
have a strong central government. Virtually overnight you've become more secure than any other
part of Europe and would remain so throughout history. And this gave your daily life a very
welcome predictability. So Sela and Yeatman were right after all. The Norman conquest was a jolly
good thing. As under the Romans the landscape was rapidly changing. You see a lot of destruction
and a lot of construction. The Normans loved to destroy and they loved to build. Within 50 years
most of your churches, with the exception of Westminster Abbey, have been torn down. In their
place new churches rise up, built in the so-called Romanesque style. The term Romanesque was coined
in the early 19th century. It implies that the Normans were aping the Romans in their fondness
for heavy round arches which typified their architectural style. At first you see evidence
of destruction and rebuilding in the towns but eventually it spreads to your village which
acquires its own Norman church. Within a remarkably short period of time you forget what the landscape
looked like prior to the arrival of the Normans. What all these massively strong buildings are
telling you unambiguously in the language of stone was we're here to stay and don't you forget it
you nasty smelly little Englishman. To help build all those castles and churches there was another
peaceful invasion of skilled Norman craftsmen including masons, carpenters, metal workers
and glass makers. Though as I said the heavy lifting was done by Anglo-Saxons like you.
Over time however you and the Normans got to coexist peacefully with one another. At the
beginning during the reign of King William I your relations with the Normans were very tense.
William had originally expected you to be much more compliant. He wanted you to believe that
Norman rule signalled a return to normalcy since he was the rightful heir to the throne.
To support this fiction he was careful to preserve many existing English institutions
and practices but you weren't deceived in the least. You saw your land being snatched from you
and you've seen how brutal he was in putting down unrest.
In time however the Normans relaxed their iron grip. They became more how shall we say mellow.
The encounters you had with them became almost friendly and unlike the Romans stationed in
Britain the Normans didn't ever head back to Normandy. They actually adjusted to the rotten
weather. You and they identified yourselves as a single people. We've talked a lot about
mindsets in this course but we've never encountered anything quite like this before.
And once the Normans had finally put you in your place they seemed to lose interest in
treating you as a conquered people or rather the Normans couldn't treat you as a conquered people
not in the long term because there wasn't enough of them. Remember theirs was a very
small invasion force compared with the Romans. Assimilation took over a century but it happened
in the end so the violence of the conquest has to be seen alongside the enlightenment
of the long term occupation which in time led to a blending of two races into one.
The Normans retained their possessions in France and continued to speak French at court but in
time they learned how to speak English thereby beginning a time hallowed tradition that still
exists to the present day in that the English refused to learn French. In fact it was under
the Normans that the English language became the national tongue. Well I'm joking about the
English refusing to learn French of course although it is true that they've always been
notoriously bad at learning foreign languages but the fact is that the geographical situation
of England as an offshore island has resulted in well a certain insularity in the mindset of its
people. Another consequence of the Norman conquest was that England became attached to what we call
the continent primarily to France, Italy and Germany rather than as before to Scandinavia
due to the Viking invasions. So the English began to share a great deal in common with the French,
the Italians and the Germans not least shared institutions such as the church. A trade and
communication between England and the continent took place via that narrow strip of water known
as the English Channel which has in so many ways defined England's history. To conclude the Anglo
Saxons had had a good run for their money they'd arrived in Britain around the middle of the fifth
century and had continued to dominate the island for about 600 years notwithstanding the severe
setbacks they had faced under the Vikings. Over the course of the next eight lectures we're going
to turn our attention away from conquest and occupation to the relatively settled conditions
that prevailed in medieval England after the Norman conquest, focusing chiefly on the 14th
century the period we call the late middle ages. We're going to look at the poor as well as the
wealthy at women as well as men. We're also going to look at that strange phenomenon of the medieval
knight whose vows required him to protect those who live on the other side of history. We're going
to pay a lot of attention to the impact of religion on the lives of ordinary people. We'll see that
religion was arguably the most powerful force in the medieval world inciting people to undertake
both peaceful pilgrimages and bloody crusades. We're going to investigate what daily life was like
in medieval times and what kind of worldview medieval people held.
