The term middle ages sends shivers down some people's spines, and I have to confess it
isn't the period of history that I choose to be born into myself. Give me a provincial
Roman town any day. Life was brutal in the middle ages, disease, warfare, famine, daily
occurrences. But it was also the period when the other side of history finally found its
voice. Ordinary people acquired human rights. Ordinary people staged a revolt. Ordinary
people left us written accounts of their lives. Crucially too, women, some women at least,
began to wield extraordinary power. Much of what I've just instanced had happened before
at various times and places, but in the middle ages there's a more concerted thrust than
ever before from below. Or rather to keep with our chosen metaphor from the other side
of history. The previous five lectures have all dealt in shifts and discontinuities, Celts,
Romans, Anglo-Saxons, Vikings, Normans. We've been all over the place, even though geographically
we've remained in England. In the next eight lectures, England will still be our main concern.
England incidentally had by far the largest population of any country in Europe in the
middle ages, though what I'll be saying applied to Europe more broadly than it has done in
any of our previous lectures. That's because medieval society throughout much of Europe
had a certain homogeneity and that was due to several factors. To begin with, the church
not only imposed uniformity of belief but also dictated the rhythm of your daily life.
You would have shared that rhythm with everybody in Europe. The church also encouraged you
to travel on a pilgrimage say or on a crusade and in so doing you would have encountered
people from all walks of life as well as people from different countries. And next whatever
your status and background you would have been affected by the terrible epidemics that
raged the length and breadth of Europe, most notable of which was the Black Death. Then
all the people of Europe were subject to the same institutions such as kingship and
knighthood and the same ideology such as chivalry, the code of behavior enjoined upon knights.
And finally, if you happened to be educated, you would have been able to communicate in
a shared language irrespective of your ethnic background, namely Latin.
As a result of all this, for the first time since the fall of the Roman Empire, we can
talk about people transnationally so to speak, sharing a recognizably common lifestyle and
thinking recognizably the same thoughts as Europeans even though that concept in political
terms lay very far in the future. And though you wouldn't have thought of yourself as
a European, you would have seen yourself as part of a pan-national movement, namely
Christianity, because the split between Roman Catholicism and Protestantism had not yet
occurred. There was one church in Europe that ruled all.
Let me come clean. I'm an ancient historian, not a medievalist. Even so, I have a passionate
interest in the Middle Ages. I used to teach English literature in a school called Oakham
in Leicestershire, and so I taught Chaucer's Canterbury Tales in the original Middle English,
which I love. Jeffrey Chaucer is one of my heroes and my inspiration for this part of
the course. He was fascinated by ordinary people, by merchants, knights, people connected
with the church, tradesmen, cooks, doctors, servants, the full gamut of medieval society,
honest and dishonest alike. He was, in other words, a witness for the other side of history,
and I shall evoke him as such. He lived from 1343 to 1400, which is partly why my focus
will be on the 14th century, though the 12th and 13th centuries will occasionally feature.
The 14th century was, moreover, full of events that had a profound impact on daily life,
most notably the Black Death and the Peasants' Revolt, both of which impacted on the other
side of history. One of the fundamental differences between
the centuries from 400 to 1,000 and all the centuries that have followed is that there
was no break in tradition on remotely the same scale as there had been following the
collapse of the Roman Empire. That's not to say that daily life was always a doddle.
The fact remains, however, that the people living in the Middle Ages are our first cousins,
so to speak, even though our lives and mindsets are very different. Now, that's because many
of our institutions have their roots in an uninterrupted line of dissent that goes back
to the Middle Ages. It was in the Middle Ages, for instance, that ordinary people, at least
if they were free, acquired some legal rights. No free man shall be taken or imprisoned or
dispossessed or outlawed or exiled or in any way ruined, nor will we, that's the King
and his henchmen, go or send against him, except by the lawful judgment of his peers
or by the law of the land. By the lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the land, what
stirring words those are and how they still resonate today. They come from Magna Carta,
the Great Charter, which King John signed at Runnymede in 1215 and which Americans often
see as the origin of their own legal system. Then again, our university system has its
roots in the Middle Ages in the late 11th century, to be precise, when students fired
up with the love of learning traveled long distances to the residences of noted scholars
where they would remain for long periods of time in order to acquire as much instruction
as they could. So the origins of the Great Courses go back almost a thousand years, though
thanks to technology, you don't have to travel any distance at all. But the chain is unbroken.
All of this is not to deny the huge contribution made by the classical world to Western civilization,
but it was the medieval world that kept the achievements of the classical world alive
and handed them down to us today. There's another way in which we and the people living
in the Middle Ages are first cousins. If you happen to live in Europe or travel there,
the Middle Ages are all around you. That's as true of Northern Europe as it is of the
Mediterranean Basin. In England alone, there are some 10,000 medieval churches that are
still standing today. Most of them still in use. And there are also a great number of
castles. The Middle Ages are not just all around you if you happen to live in Europe.
There are also only a few feet beneath you. You can see a bit of them in a tunnel for
pedestrians when you go shopping at Sainsbury's supermarket in Collier's Wood in south-west
London. That's like coming across a bit of the Middle Ages underneath Wegmans or price
chopper in upstate New York. Underneath that modern supermarket is the
chapter house of Merton Priory. Priory is an offshoot of an abbey where monks lived.
The chapter house was the engine room, so to speak, of the Priory. It's where its day-to-day
business was conducted. Merton Priory was huge. Its church, which hasn't survived, was
the size of Westminster Abbey. The Priory was demolished in 1538 when King Henry VIII dissolved
all the monasteries and turned the country Protestant. It's one of the most important
medieval sites in England. So, let's now ask what it was like to live in the Middle
Ages. To begin with, you're probably not literate. One depressing estimate is that
as late as 1500, 90% of all men and 99% of all women were illiterate. Look on the bright
side, however. If you're literate but a bit short-sighted, you can now purchase a pair
of bone eyeglasses. Eyeglasses were available from the 12th century onwards. In addition,
you have only an approximate sense of the passage of time. Though mechanical clops were
invented in the 13th century, these were extremely rare. There are no labor-saving
devices unless you happen to be rich, in which case you'll have serfs, of course, and domestic
servants. Unlike in Greece and Rome, however, domestic servants tend to be free. But whether
you were educated or not, whether you could tell the time or not, the church governed
your daily life in all kinds of ways, irrespective of your social status. The Lord's Day Sunday
was rigorously observed. There were also about 50 holy days of which the most important
were Easter, Whitsun and Christmas. It was Sundays and holy days that provided a break
from the daily grind. The church ministered to you not only in times of bereavement but
also when you faced other types of hardship. It provided shelter for the homeless, including
widows and orphans, and hospitals for the sick. It educated your children. That's if
you were sufficiently well off to have your children educated rather than send them out
to work. But it also made it its business to scare the living daylights out of you by
instilling in you the fear of eternal damnation. In fact, if anything characterized the medieval
mindset, it was the fear of eternal damnation. More or less, everybody seems to have believed
in hell. Even if you had been exceptionally pious, you'd still expect to face a period
of punishment in purgatory, a place situated between heaven and earth where you would have
to atone for your sins before being admitted into heaven. As a result, there's a very
good likelihood that you would have been preoccupied if not obsessed with death and what followed.
The other principle force in your life was the king. Even if you had no expectation of
ever meeting the king any more than I have any expectation of meeting the queen, you
owed allegiance to him. He was your lawgiver, the highest judge in the land, your supreme
military leader and the protector of your church. That, too, is still theoretically
at least largely the case today, though in practice the monarch does what parliament instructs
her to do. It was in the Middle Ages that there occurred
the first real challenge to the power of the king. It resulted in the murder of Thomas
Beckett, the Archbishop of Canterbury in 1170, by four knights who thought they were performing
the bidding of the king, King Henry II. How would you have reacted as an ordinary person
when you learned of the murder? Probably with horror. Henry II was lucky not to have lost
his throne and he knew it, too. He made penance by having himself publicly whipped. He needed
to make amends not only to the church, but also to his people. And not for the last time
in the Middle Ages, we see the other side of history bringing pressure to bear on the
monarchy. Let's now turn to the physical conditions
of people living in the Middle Ages. On the bright side of things, you probably have good
teeth with few cavities because sugar isn't widely available. We tend to think of people
in the Middle Ages as somewhat stunted, but on average, men attain the height of five foot
seven inches or 1.71 meters, only about an inch and a half or four centimetres shorter
than the average modern Englishman. Your customary fare is wheat, oats and barley cooked in the
form of porridge. You also eat a great deal of bread along with something called con panagium,
a Latin word meaning the with bread thing. The with bread thing would be any scraps that
you could lay your hands on, awful or tripe, say, with a bit of oatmeal chucked in along
with a few spices if you were lucky. You only eat meat or fish on holidays, holy
days. This means your diet is very deficient in iron. Even an egg is probably something
about delicacy. For most of the year, fresh fruit isn't available, so you're probably
suffering from scurvy. That's to say your skin starts to hemorrhage and your gums become
horribly red and infected. Your outer clothes are made of wool and your undergarments of
linen. The chances are that you live in a village. You probably live in a village of
about 400 people at most. The only cities of any size are London with about 70,000 inhabitants,
Norwich with 13,000 and York with 10,000. It's been estimated that around 90% of the
population was engaged in agriculture. There needed to be that many people working the
land in order to feed the population. And even with so many farmers, harvests were frequently
poor which meant that famine was an ever present hazard. And there are other health issues
which affected practically everyone. You're battling constantly with lice. That's why
you keep your clothes near to the toilet. The privy, as you call it. Assuming you're
lucky enough to have a privy, you believe that the smell of excrement and urine acts
as a deterrent to lice. You bathe very infrequently, if at all, so you may well contract a painful
and disfiguring skin disease such as leprosy. Even King John of Magna Carta fame bathed only
once every three weeks. If you live in a town, you bathe in the public baths or stews as
they were called. That's where the prostitutes ply their trade too. If your job involves
physical labor, there's a good chance you're suffering from arthritis. The incidence of
arthritis in medieval skeletons is extremely high. You're also likely to contract venereal
disease and be suffering, as ever in our course, from gastroenteritis. You'll only be able
to get proper medical treatment if you have lots of money. And you might be better off
without it. If you need the services of a surgeon, you'll probably go to your barber
who, as well as cutting your hair, can extract a decaying tooth or even amputate an infected
leg if necessary. Life, it goes without saying, was far more hazardous than it is today.
So your chances of suffering a permanent injury as a result of an accident, a street brawl
or a fire, are extremely high. You have only a 50-50 chance of surviving to adulthood.
You have about a one in ten chance of surviving to 60. And all this is without taking into
account the Black Death or the great mortality, as it was known at the time, arguably the
greatest health catastrophe ever to strike Europe.
We need to pause and think about this terrible affliction, since it had devastating consequences
for all aspects of medieval life. The Black Death affected almost everyone in Europe except
for the inhabitants of Poland for some reason that we don't know. Even if you didn't contract
it yourself, you'd almost certainly have a close relative or a friend who did.
The disease originated in the Crimea in 1346, entered England's ports in late June of 1348,
and then proceeded to fan out over the whole country at an estimated rate of five miles
eight kilometers per day. It's generally estimated that about one-third of the entire population
of Europe were carried off. It probably killed half of all Londoners. Monasteries and nunneries
were particularly badly hit and being closed off. So once the plague latched onto one member
of the community, it wrecked havoc on all. And nor was this a one-shot deal. It returned
several times during the 14th century and was not finally eliminated till the late 17th
century. On each occasion, it disappeared as quickly and as mysteriously as it came.
Most scholars believe that the Black Death should be identified as the bubonic plague.
The bubonic plague is named for the swellings or buboes, hence bubonic, that develop either
in your neck or groin or on your thigh or in one of your armpits. You'll carry the
disease for about five days before becoming ill. You'll develop a high fever as the germs
enter your bloodstream and lymphatic ducts. Your body will feel tingly. Your tongue will
go black. Your breath will stink. Your skin will become blotchy. You'll have a headache
and you'll become short of breath. Your body will then produce the buboes I mentioned.
If most of the toxic substance goes to the buboes and if they drain naturally or are
lanced, you may survive. If not, your organs will shut down and you'll die of toxic shock
about three or four days after the symptoms first present themselves. All a doctor can
do is lance the buboes.
The reason why the disease spread on such a vast scale was due both to the deplorably
low standards of hygiene and to the prevalence of commercial ships that docked in ports
throughout Europe, carrying rats infested with fleas that subsequently infected humans.
The disease was a function in other words of an interconnected world.
Disease in those days could cover about 25 miles per day, so it took the Black Death
little more than a year to spread throughout the whole of Europe. This meant that people
had no time to prepare for it. Understandably, we think primarily of the toll that the plague
took on human life, but it was no less devastating in its effects on the countryside and on livestock
since whole villages were abandoned. With no one to tend them, a sheep and oxen roamed
freely through the countryside and many thousands perished.
Nothing in our modern experience remotely helps us to understand what it must have been
like to live, let alone find meaning in life when death stalked you at every turn, as it
did in the period from 1346 to 1353. As when the AIDS epidemic first broke out, you would
quite likely have believed that the Black Death was punishment for the sinfulness of
mankind. Most diseases in the Middle Ages, by the way, were thought to be caused by
divine judgement, though some were thought to be caused by the alignment of the planets
and stars. As a result, you might have thought to atone for your sins by submitting to extreme
forms of penance, by undergoing flagellation, for instance, by whipping yourself with iron-tipped
scourges so that your blood ran. Alternatively, you might have looked for scapegoats. Christians
in mainland Europe blame the Jews for poisoning their wells and then burnt the Jews alive
in their houses. This didn't happen in England for the simple reason that the Jews had been
expelled in 1290 over a century and a half earlier. I'll explain why at the end of this
lecture. But there were plenty of other people to hold responsible, foreigners, witches,
or simply the people in the next town. And what if your whole family falls sick? What
will you do then? Will you show love and compassion? Or will you abandon them altogether, deciding
it's a death sentence to remain under the same roof? It's a terrible thought, but many
people had to deal with it. The Black Death rocked, but it did not ultimately destroy
faith, and the church eventually recovered even though it was weakened by the powerlessness
of prayer. A Winston Churchill in his great history of the English-speaking peoples wrote,
it seemed to be the death rattle of the race. It wasn't, of course. Life went on. It always
does, and that is why we should take considerable pride in our medieval ancestors. They showed
true grit. Earlier in this lecture, I suggested that the people who lived in the Middle Ages
were our first cousins, and I want to end by talking about three of the legacies they
have left behind them. First, the English language. If you were educated in the Middle
Ages, then you could read and write and speak in Latin. That meant you could communicate
with people in continental Europe, since Latin was the lingua franca, so to speak. I don't
need to spell out the enormous advantages of a common language. They're so enormous
that it's rather surprising that Latin became what we call today, rather dismissively, a
dead language, but it did. In time, however, what we call the vernacular European languages,
the languages that are spoken today, modern English, modern Spanish, modern Italian and
so on, supplanted it. That's because there was a push from below, a push from the other
side of history, in other words. One of the earliest supporters of the vernacular everyday
languages was Dante Alighieri, who wrote a treatise around 1305, in which he claimed
that vernacular Italian was as suitable a vehicle for literary composition as Latin is.
That was a revolutionary thought at the time. One of the earliest works to be written in
Middle English, the English of the Middle Ages, was an allegorical work by William Langland,
called Piers Plowman, which first came out around 1360. It was read by all classes of
society. And it's no exaggeration to state that the rise of the English language was
due in part to the fact that it became the vehicle of world class literature. And this
was true of other European languages too. Dante wrote his divine comedy in vernacular
Italian. There are other legacies from the Middle Ages that are still with us that we
have less to be thankful for. One is the anti-Jewish sentiment that I mentioned earlier. Anti-Jewish
sentiment in England can be traced back to the middle of the 12th century, specifically
to the year 1144, when Christians claimed that Jews living in Norwich, a city in East
Anglia, had ritually murdered a boy called William. Norwich had a thriving community
of Jews at the time. Anti-Jewish sentiment was fueled by the fact that Jews were the
moneylenders. Christians thought that the Bible regarded moneylending at interest, usually,
as a sin. Some Jews became very rich in consequence, thereby inciting resentment. And the whole
problem was compounded by the fact that Jews were not permitted to join guilds. That's
to say, associations of craftsmen. So they were in effect coerced into usury. Other
myths of children being ritually sacrificed by the Jews gained hold throughout Europe
and beyond. It's a myth that still resonates in neo-Nazi publications today, and even in
some Muslim propaganda. An even worse instance of anti-Jewish sentiment took place in 1190
when the Jewish community in York, having gathered in the castle, keep for protection,
to celebrate the Sabbath, was threatened by a violent mob. Many Jews committed suicide
rather than fall into the hands of that mob. Others perished in the fires they had lit
while the rest were slaughtered. A hundred years later, in 1290, King Edward I issued
an edict expelling all Jews from the country, though some got rounded by converting to Christianity.
The edict wasn't formally revoked until 1656. So for over 350 years, there were very few
Jews living in England. There had been other expulsions of Jews from other parts of Europe,
but none on this scale. So the Jewish race now became, officially so to speak, part of
the other side of European history. Although, as we saw in the lecture about being Jewish
in the Roman Empire, anti-Jewish sentiment on the part of the Greeks had already been
evident in the first century AD. A final legacy that got implanted in the Western mindset
in the Middle Ages is the concept of a crusade. It's a concept that has proved remarkably
adaptable without ever losing its original force, that of a so-called holy war against
Islam. So we see yet again that perennial East-West divide polluting the mind just as
it had done in antiquity, defining how people think of the other. I'll be devoting a whole
lecture to the crusades. In the next lecture, however, we're going to be looking at another
perennial divide. That's between rich and poor. It was as acute in the Middle Ages as
it has ever been in history. And as we shall see, it didn't end even after you had died.
