The chances are that if you had been living in the middle ages, you'd have been a peasant.
The English word peasant derives from the French word pezan, meaning a country dweller.
Today, the word peasant is virtually synonymous with poor, but not all peasants were poor in the middle ages.
Some were fairly prosperous and a few were quite wealthy.
But it's the poor that we're going to be concentrating upon in this lecture.
Since few medieval peasants could write, we have to try to recreate their lives from other sources.
This includes not only archaeology, but also administrative and legal records, such as the records of village court proceedings.
A village court proceedings are invaluable. They tell us about many aspects of daily life, such as criminality, law enforcement, work and recreation, and sexual behavior.
As a peasant, you might be either free or servile. If you're free, you'll own what was called a freehold property, in return for which you have to perform services to your landlord.
This might include having to plow your landlord's fields for say 20 days per year.
Most peasants were servile, however. They were known variously as serfs, bondmen, and villanes, spelt V-I-L-L-E-I-N, from which our word villain comes.
Villane comes from the Latin word willanas, meaning someone who is tied to a villa. It didn't carry the same overtones as villain does for us today, though it wasn't exactly a complementary either.
If you're a villane or a serf or a bondman, the terms are pretty much interchangeable, you have to perform more services than free presence, as well as pay tax.
You have to pay a tenth of all you produce, called a tithe, to the local church.
If you want to get married, you'll have to seek permission from the lord of the manor, and you'll probably have to pay a fine known as merchant, from a Welsh word meaning daughters.
The justification being that you'll be depriving the lord of one of his workers. Everything you own belongs to your lord, even your clothes.
You're not allowed to leave his manor where you toil without his permission. The only way you can gain your freedom is by saving enough money to buy your own plot of land.
You live in what can only be described as a hovel. Your whole family eats, sleeps, and lives in one or two rooms. The floor is made of beaten earth.
Your toilet is a cesspool which overflows from time to time, and boy does it stink.
Very likely there are rats cuddling along the floor or under the roof of your dwelling. You may keep pigs inside your house to keep you warm in winter.
You perform some tasks communally like hay making. Hay provides winter feed for your livestock. You rarely see strangers accept peddlers selling their wares, soldiers off to the wars, and pilgrims on their way to a pilgrimage site.
There is however a caveat to this picture. Though it describes accurately enough the lives of the very poor, we don't know what percentage of the population that represented.
Some scholars believe that England was relatively prosperous, except in the crisis years when there was famine.
I want to focus now on the consequences of the Black Death for peasants who were struggling to survive.
As we saw in the last lecture, the Black Death entered England in the summer of 1348 and reduced its population by about a third.
If you've managed to survive it, you'll certainly be traumatized, though you'll benefit from the fact that there are far fewer peasants available for hire.
So, virtually overnight, your services, whether you're free or servile, have become much more valuable. You're able to demand better wages and choose whom you work for.
Alternatively, if you rent land, you can force down the rent that you pay on it.
There's a problem, however. Your landlord is facing his own difficulties, owing to the contraction of the economy.
His difficulties are made more acute by the fact that England has been at war with France since the 1330s, and Parliament is scrapped for cash.
So, in 1377, the Parliament of King Richard II, Richard is a mere lad of ten years,
tries to restore the traditional balance in favour of your landlord by imposing a poll tax.
That's to say, by imposing an annual tax literally on the head of everyone in the land.
This was monstrously unjust and a much heavier burden for poor peasants like you than for the wealthy, since everyone had to pay the same tax.
It was a tax for breathing, so to speak.
And to make matters worse, in 1380, Richard tripled the tax, though by this point there was a sliding scale, so to speak, with the wealthy paying more than the poor.
You've had enough. You can no longer make ends meet.
If you're going to die of starvation anyway, you might as well go down fighting.
So, you rise in revolt, the so-called peasants' revolt.
Although, as I've indicated, not all the people who were peasants were poor.
Certainly, the leaders of the revolt weren't starving landless men.
In addition, a lot of townspeople joined the rebellion.
So, in June of 1381, you and other rebels from Kent and Essex march on London.
It's a huge uprising.
Medieval chroniclers estimate that 60,000 people swarmed into London from Kent alone.
Many Londoners sympathise with your cause and join your ranks.
Persons unknown unlock London Bridge, the city gate, and even the Tower of London, so you can enter.
You torch the houses of selected individuals, including those responsible for collecting the poll tax.
You've nothing against the Boy King.
Your enemy is the system.
To show your loyalty, you chant with King Richard and the true-hearted commons.
You actually succeed in making the King promise to abolish villainage, a serfdom.
And just as the two sides are on the point of striking a deal, however,
your leader, Watt Tyler, is killed and the King renails on the deal.
I want to pause for a moment to take stock of this event.
We've not met anything like this before in history.
The peasants' revolt was a truly popular uprising.
Not primarily against the King, but against an unjust system.
The unjust, outmoded system by which vassals, as they were called, and lords,
owed each other concilium et auxilium, a Latin term meaning council and aid.
Vassals had to give labor or produce or military service to their lord,
while their lord protected them in time of danger.
That was the auxilium part.
The concilium part was the fact that vassals were expected to seek advice over disputes,
over choice of marriage partners and so on,
whereas their lord was expected to consult them before taking any important decision.
That's how Parliament got started, in fact.
Parliament comes from the French word palais and means literally a speaking session.
So the origins of European democracy go directly back to the Middle Ages,
not to ancient Greece.
Please note, the only person who didn't owe anything to anyone except to God, of course, was the King.
So this was the first time that the other side of history said,
enough is enough.
The only comparable phenomenon was the slave revolts that occurred in the Roman era.
They were comparable, but not equivalent.
They were strictly local affairs and they did not have, as their objective,
the abolition of slavery.
The objective of the peasant's revolt was nothing less than the abolition of villainage
and it all but succeeded.
One of the main reasons why it failed was because a seemingly chance event
of the killing of what Tyler derailed it.
In fact, however, it wasn't a chance event.
It was almost certainly planned in advance.
As a peasant, you have no option now but to give up and return home.
You've achieved nothing.
Later, the King exacts harsh reprisals against you and all your peasant friends.
Revolution was an idea whose time had not yet come.
It would need to wait several hundred years.
But the idea was born in 1381.
I've already mentioned Seller and Yeatman's comic history of England entitled 1066 and all that.
They had this to say of it.
The pheasants' revolt, note pheasants, were thus clearly romantic episodes and a good thing.
It's certainly tempting to romanticize the men and women who all but forced their betters to think outside the box.
There is, however, another side to all this.
Some of the men who joined the revolt advocated anarchy, murder and indiscriminate looting.
These were in the minority, however.
The rebels were the first ordinary people in history to say,
Stop pushing us around.
The pheasants' revolt spoke to real grievances and injustices in English society.
Life was extremely precarious in the Middle Ages and many people lived on the edge of subsistence,
including widows, orphans, the sick, the elderly and the disabled.
What do you do in such circumstances?
You can always throw yourself on the charity of the church, which did its best to protect those in need.
But you might become so desperate that you're forced to steal.
As in Rome, there's no police force.
Instead, a person who discovers a crime is expected to raise a hue and cry,
alerting the neighbors who are expected to down tools and pursue the criminal.
And then, after catching him, to hand him over to the local constable so that he can await trial.
My advice to you as a thief is, don't get caught.
If you do get caught, you'll be incarcerated in a dungeon or in the village lock-up
or in a wooden cage to await trial.
A long time imprisonment is generally reserved for traitors.
Alternatively, you might be placed in the stocks with your legs trapped so you can't get away
or worse, in the pillory with your head and arms stuck in holes.
A figure of fun, in other words.
A passer's buy will throw rotten fruit at you.
When your case comes before the judge, you may be subjected to trial by ordeal.
This might mean being made to carry a burning rod of iron over a certain distance.
While you're screaming in agony, your hand will be bound up and left for three days.
If it becomes infected, you'll be judged guilty and sentenced.
If it doesn't, you'll be declared innocent and freed.
Too bad about your hand.
Even if you're found guilty of a petty crime like theft, you may face execution.
You could be executed for stealing as little as fourpence,
equivalent to two days' pay for an unskilled laborer.
Scholars have estimated that 80% of all executions in the Middle Ages resulted from theft.
Maybe you're lucky enough to come before a lenient judge who only rarely resorts to executing thieves.
Maybe the kindly old gentleman decides to commute your punishment.
What will happen to you then?
Well, the chances are that he'll have your eyes, ears, nose, hands, feet or testicles or all of the above chopped off.
That way, you'll forever serve as a deterrent to other would-be miscreants
who might take it into their wicked heads to commit theft.
Incidentally, the law treated women much the same as men
and handed out the same harsh punishments to them, though there were certain advantages in being a woman.
If, for instance, a husband and wife committed a crime together,
which was a not uncommon occurrence in the Middle Ages,
and if the crime is a hanging offence, only the man hangs
as the wife is legally under his authority, just as she was in Roman times.
A large number of the criminal fraternity were outlaws,
the most famous of whom was the legendary Robin Hood, who lived in Sherwood Forest.
Once outside the towns, a band of outlaws were a common hazard.
Let's now suppose that you serve a powerful feudal lord and work inside his castle.
As we've seen, the Normans were the first people to build stone castles in England,
both for military purposes and as visible symbols of power.
Though a gunpowder wasn't introduced into Europe until the 14th century,
castles remained important well into the 15th century.
Apart from his military personnel who comprised both infantry and knights,
the lord of a castle needs a sizable support staff to run his castle efficiently,
and that's where you come in.
Perhaps you work in the kitchen, or the brewery, or the bakehouse, or the stables.
Or perhaps you're a gardener, or a herdsman, or a skilled craftsman.
You probably don't live inside the castle itself, but somewhere in the grounds,
though you're able to shelter inside the walls in time of emergency.
If you're a member of the household staff, you'll be provided with livery,
that's to say clothing appropriate to your rank.
You're either paid daily or receive a stipend on a quarterly basis.
Let's imagine life inside the castle.
Your lord's day begins with him and his circle attending mass in the chapel.
After that, he meets with all the people who look after his castle and estate.
They include his head steward, his seneshow, as he's called,
his bailiff, his sergeant at arms, and his reeve.
The sergeant at arms is in charge of the castle's defences.
The reeve collects all the dues that are owing to his lord from his vassals.
The seneshow, the bailiff, and the sergeant at arms are all peasants.
The reeve is elected from the peasants,
an indication that some enterprising and trustworthy individuals
could rise to positions of authority in medieval society.
At regular intervals throughout the year, the lord convenes a court
to settle grievances between peasants under his charge.
The high point of the day occurs around mid-morning or noon,
when the household sits down to dine in the Great Hall.
The Great Hall is the biggest and most important room in the castle.
It's decorated with brightly coloured wall paintings,
and tapestries are depicting scenes from history or from the Bible,
along with floral and geometrical patterns.
The whole effect is a riot of colour,
but the tapestries all serve a useful purpose
by providing insulation against the cold.
Castles are extremely draughty,
and I doubt that we would have felt particularly comfortable living in one.
The Great Hall has no ceiling but is open to the roof,
which is sometimes brightly decorated,
as are the shutters across the windows.
If your lord is extremely wealthy,
some of the windows may be glazed and painted with figurative scenes,
rather like the stained glass that we find preserved in medieval churches.
More likely, however, they'll be covered in horn
that has been softened in water for a long time
before being split and then polished until it's almost transparent.
The floor is covered with decorated glazed tiles.
There are no carpets on the floor.
The carpets were imported from the east,
but they were too precious to be laid on the floor,
so they were laid on tables instead.
In the winter, there's a fire blazing away in the fireplace.
Your lord sits at what's called the high table
on a dais at the far end of the hall.
His family and closest companions sit beside him.
Their table is covered with a white tablecloth.
They eat off silver plates and have linen serviettes.
They drink wine out of fancy wine glasses.
Those lower down the picking order, like you,
if you happen to be one privileged to be at the table,
sit on benches beside trestle tables
set along the length of the hall adjacent to the high table.
The closer you are to the high table, the higher your social status.
It's much the same arrangement that prevails to this day
in colleges at Oxford and Cambridge.
That's to say, the students sit on benches in the body of the hall,
whereas the dons sit on chairs on high table.
Meat is the order of the day for people dining in the hall,
except when the church forbids the eating of it,
including every Friday when fish is served instead.
Your food is served on a large slice of coarse bread
called a trencher, from which the phrase
eat like a trencher man comes,
meaning to eat much and heartily.
Forks haven't been invented,
so you have to make do with knives and spoons,
along with your fingers, of course.
As you share food from a big bowl,
let's hope for your neighbor's sake,
your fingers are clean, relatively at any rate.
You drink beer out of a leather tankard.
Dogs snaffle up the bones you toss onto the floor.
There's much merriment, much noise,
and much jesting, too.
And if your lord makes a joke,
everyone listens and then bursts into laughter.
There's a marshal of ceremonies to keep things in order.
Minstrels play music from the minstrels' gallery above the hall.
After the meal, your lord may decide to go hunting on horseback,
especially if he's entertaining noble guests.
We use a variety of weapons, often specially made to kill specific animals.
The most popular game to hunt are deer, fox, rabbit, and wild boar.
The pursuit and killing of a single deer can take up an entire hunt,
so here we have the origin of that most objectionable of all English pastimes,
fox hunting.
The unspeakable in full pursuit of the un-eatable,
as the Irishman Oscar Wilde memorably characterized it.
Back in 1974, I worked as a kind of indentured servant
to a member of the landed gentry in Hampshire in the south of England.
I was required to clean the boots of his wife, who rode to Hounds, as the expression goes,
so I speak feelingly of foxes, as I do of peasants.
Back then, as today, women would hunt, riding sidesaddle,
because of their long dresses.
Sometimes, beaters would beat the undergrowth
and drive the prey in the direction of the huntsman.
A wild boar, reputedly capable of tearing a man in half with their tusks,
were hunted to extinction in the Middle Ages.
So popular was hunting that all the game that lived in vast tracts of the countryside,
perhaps as much as a third of England, all told,
was reserved for the king and his court,
and governed by what was called forest law.
If you, as an ordinary person, so much as cut down a single tree within that whole area,
even if that's where you live, or if you're caught poaching, you'll be severely punished.
Another very popular sport is hawking,
as is the case with hunting, both men and women participate.
Hawking is also an upper-class pastime.
The likes of you wouldn't be able to afford a hawk.
Your lord would have his hawk perch on his shoulder,
whereas your lady would have her servant hold it
and walk behind her as a way of showing off.
At night, your lord and lady retire to a room known as the solar,
which in effect was a bedroom.
The solar is located directly above the Great Hall
and is the warmest room in the castle.
Their bed has a timber frame above it so that drapes can hang from it.
The drapes are to keep out the night air, which is thought to be harmful,
but they also provide warmth and privacy.
The mattress is filled either with straw that is changed regularly
or with feathers just like today.
It's a sensible precaution to screw lavender on the bed to keep away fleas.
A servant will place a brass bedpan in their bed at night,
filled with burning embers to keep it warm.
If you're a highly trusted servant, you may sleep in the solar yourself
so that you can attend to the needs of your lord and lady at night.
Leading off from the solar is a closet.
That's to say, a small room where your lord and lady can pray or read
or simply get away from the hurly-burly of castle life.
It's the only place where they can really be alone and it's tiny.
People in the Middle Ages didn't have the same need for privacy as we do today.
Finally, if you happen to fall foul of the lord of the castle
or if you were taken prisoner, you'd end up underground
in a dank, dark and very smelly dungeon.
Your lord and lady have lucked out not only in this world,
but also in the world to come.
They'll be buried inside a church and pay the clergy to say prayers on their behalf.
A useful insurance policy in the event that their sojourn in Purgatory
turns out to be somewhat lengthy.
We talked about Purgatory in the previous lecture.
It's the place you go to pay penance before being admitted into heaven.
You, however, as one of the poor, won't cease to feel that it's comforts
and disadvantages of your poverty even when you're dead.
Your body will be consigned to a drafty cemetery outside the church.
At best, the mound of earth which you lie under will be marked by a wooden cross.
Very soon, it will become difficult to identify where you lie,
since other bodies will be buried close beside you or worse on top of you.
Think of the scene in Shakespeare's Hamlet
when the grave digger who is digging a grave for Ophelia unearths the bones of Yorick,
a fellow of infinite jest, as Hamlet describes him.
If your grave gets dug up to make way for a new occupant,
your bones or what can be found of them will be transferred to a charnel house.
That's a building generally attached to a church
where human remains are stored after decomposition has done its work.
Yorick actually did rather well to stay buried for 15 years or so.
Most of the poor didn't last that long underground.
It was quite common to disinter the dead after only five years.
We should note too that cemeteries in the Middle Ages weren't the OACs of tranquility that they are today.
Many of them served as pasture land, as a recreation ground, as a market or as a builder's yard.
So one way or another, you're not going to get much peace either above ground or beneath it, being poor.
And though some of us may think it isn't particularly important what happens to our physical remains once we're dead,
this was not the majority view in the Middle Ages.
Which takes me to my final question.
What was the attitude of the medieval church towards poverty?
Christ himself had abjured wealth, declaring,
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.
So we might expect the church to have sided with the poor.
One saint certainly did.
The Italian Saint Francis of Assisi claimed that we must get rid of all our worldly possessions in order to free the spirit and become close to God.
His belief was embraced in earnest by the Franciscan order, the order that he himself founded, known also as the Fraticelli or Little Brothers.
The Fraticelli denounced the wealth of the church as scandalous, which indeed it was in the Middle Ages,
compared with the terrible poverty that many people faced.
The church responded by denouncing the cult of poverty and excommunicating the Fraticelli as heretics.
Saint Francis deserves our attention not only because he was arguably the greatest religious genius that Europe has produced,
but also because he was a staunch advocate of those who inhabit the other side of history,
the deprived, the downtrodden and the dispossessed.
He took the Gospels literally and he lived among lepers.
At the same time, he was deeply influenced by the idea of chivalry.
He claimed that in performing acts of self-denial, he was actually serving his lady, his lady being, of course, the Blessed Virgin Mary.
We'll talk about chivalry later.
Before we do so, however, we're going to look at the lives of medieval women over a broad social and economic spectrum
and see what choices were available to them.
