So, you want to be a medieval woman? Well, let me give you a word of warning. For many,
perhaps the majority, it wasn't a whole lot better than being a woman in any of the other
societies we've investigated so far. Medieval society was patriarchal and male dominated.
Unless you enter a convent, you'll be under the authority of a man, either your father,
your brother, your guardian or your husband, just as was the case in classical antiquity.
You won't be permitted to inherit from your father unless he dies without leaving any
sons behind him. You can't participate in government or represent yourself in a court
of law. You're under tremendous societal pressure, either to marry or failing that,
if you're well to do, to become a nun. If you come from even a moderately wealthy family,
your marriage will be arranged by your parents, primarily by your father. And that's only the
half of it. Anti-feminism was rampant in medieval society. The author of a 13th century work that
was translated into English in the 14th century claims that a woman is more malicious than a man
and that she is, quote, of a feeble nature, tells more lies and is slower in working and in moving
than a man. We may be reminded of Virgil's observation, a woman is an unpredictable and fickle creature.
What sealed the deal for medieval women in the eyes of the church, however, and made them so
unpopular in its eyes, is the fact that the book of Genesis, which was taken literally,
states explicitly that it was all due to Eve that humanity was thrown out of paradise.
So as far as the church was concerned, you represented a threat to man's salvation and
had to be treated accordingly, a fact which justified the sexual prejudice of the age.
There was, in fact, nothing new about all of this, of course. The church had been
invading against women for hundreds of years. The difference in the Middle Ages, however,
was that the church was now all powerful. Adultery was deemed a sin and judged in an
ecclesiastical court, with the woman typically cast as the seducer. I have to say, however,
that your husband might want to think twice before bringing you to court charged with adultery,
because he'd be admitting that you'd made a cuckold of him. That would have been extremely
demeaning, because husbands whose wives were unfaithful to them were ridiculed. There was
a belief that they had horns growing out of their heads, and that others could see the
horns, but they couldn't. A prejudice against you as a woman was further reinforced by the
medical profession, which hadn't advanced much in its understanding of the female body since
the time of the Greek physician Galen in the third century AD. Your physician would have
advised you to have sex regularly, because if you don't discharge your seed, it'll coagulate
in your womb, and you'll become sick. Physicians believed that women like men produced seed,
but that their seed was inferior. Or this officially sanctioned belief in your inferiority as a
woman, and no doubt translated into the way men treated women. In particular, it justified
their husbands keeping them in a position of subordination and knocking them about, if necessary.
Chaucer's wife, a bath whom we'll meet in a moment, is partly deaf as a result of a blow to her
head from one of her husbands. There is, however, an important but to this picture of male domination.
For the first time in nearly a thousand years, there's a slender chance that if you're an independently
minded woman, and that if you come from a well-to-do family, that you might even become powerful.
Some women certainly did. First, there's Christina DeMarquette, 1096 to 1160, who took a vow of chastity
and ran away from home, rather than consent to marry the man whom her parents had chosen for her.
Christina even managed to resist her suitor when her parents let him secretly into her bedroom at night,
hoping that he would take her by surprise and force her to have sex with him. She then treated him to a lecture
on the virtues of chastity and sent him away with his tail between his legs. She eventually became a
hermit and spiritual advisor to the abbot of St. Albans. Then there's Marjorie Kemp, 1373 to 1440,
who had religious visions and who wrote, or rather dictated, her religious autobiography. Marjorie
claimed to have conversations with Mary and Christ. The church arrested her and accused her of heresy,
but then later released her. As well as giving birth 14 times, it was not an uncommon occurrence
for women living in the Middle Ages to go into labor this many times. Marjorie was also a businesswoman,
albeit a not very successful one. She managed a brewery and a grain mill. And then there's Margaret
Paston, who when her husband was away in London, defended his property against attackers. Right,
worshipful husband, as she said in one of her letters to him, kindly send me some crossbows
and arrows and pole axes and padded jackets. Evidently, she knew how to handle a siege.
What she pointedly didn't say was, when in God's name are you coming home, I and the children are
about to be murdered in our beds. OK, so these are the exceptions. But even if you aren't yourself,
the sort of woman who's prepared to take on the whole male establishment, you might still
take comfort from the fact that such women now existed. It might even give you the courage to
stand up to your father or your husband or your brother. Next time, one of them tried to push you
around. In all the societies we've looked at for which we have evidence, you will typically
be several years younger than your husband. And you'll probably be marrying younger, say,
in your teens if you happen to be an aristocrat. Your family will have to provide you with a
dowry. The financial details will be worked out in advance, including how much your husband will
bestow upon you in the event of his death. The church requires you not to be even distantly
related. You couldn't even have a great, great grandfather in common. Prior to the wedding,
the bans would be announced on three Sundays in a row, as they still are to this day, giving
people the opportunity to step forward and declare any impediment to the union. The marriage
ceremony itself was much the same as it is today, except for the fact that it generally took place
at the door of the church and was followed by a mass. It would be followed later by feasting,
and perhaps to buy a procession to the bridegroom's home. You were now joined for life and required
to cohabit. Divorce was not permitted unless the marriage for some reason wasn't consummated.
You certainly couldn't sue for divorce on grounds of physical or mental cruelty. In fact, your
husband was totally within his rights to beat you if you disobeyed him. In this respect, you were
no different from a child or a servant. You were permitted to live apart from him if he committed
adultery, but you still had to remain married to him. Both contraception and abortion were
forbidden, as were all forms of sexual activity that did not lead to procreation.
If you happen to get married to a wealthy nobleman, you'll be spending much of your time
doing embroidery and sewing well out of the sight of men. Your companions will be ladies in waiting.
They won't be your social equals, but they'll be refined, and that's the main thing. You'll also
have maid servants to attend you. You'll probably spend more time with the kids than your husband does.
You'll have nurses to look after them. Only the head of the household and very close members
of the family will be permitted to enter your quarters, and old men too frail to pose a threat
to your chastity. You certainly can't have a career other than being continually pregnant.
You will however be expected to act as hostess whenever your husband is entertaining.
A hosting is an important aspect of late medieval life. It enabled networking to take place and the
conspicuous display of wealth. And as the wife of a nobleman, you played an essential part in all of
that. You're also in charge of the kitchen and the living quarters, though of course you have
servants to do all the dirty work, but ultimately they report to you. It's just possible you might
be well educated. We hear of some upper class ladies who could read and write and who knew Latin
and French as well. Overall, it may seem to us a rather dreary kind of existence, but it did
have its compensations. You were well protected, warm and well fed, which is a lot more than can
be said for most of the population. And we shouldn't assume either that your marriage would have been
loveless. A King Edward I was so in love with his wife Eleanor of Castile that after her death
in 1290, he erected 12 elaborately decorated crosses to mark the 12 resting places of her body
as it was transported from Lincoln to Charing Cross in London. Charing Cross is so named because of
the cross that once stood there, denoting the fact that the body's final resting place was
Westminster Abbey just half a mile away. If you're well to do or wealthy and don't want to get married
or can't find a suitable husband, then your best option is to become a nun. You'd be more likely
to get admitted to a convent if you came from a good family. In fact, your father might be required
to pay the convent a hefty sum of money to take you off his hands, so to speak.
Bear in mind that as an unmarried non-working woman, you'd be a drain on the household,
so it'll be cheaper for him in the long run to ship you off to a convent than having to support
you at home for the rest of your days. You may eventually make it up the greasy ecclesiastical
poll by becoming a prioresse. That's to say someone in charge of a priory. A priory was
larger than a convent or even an abyss. An abyss was in charge of an abbey that was even larger
than a priory. If you're poor and you manage to get accepted, all you can aspire to be is a lay
sister performing various tasks for the nuns so they can devote themselves to devotion and prayer.
Other groups of women who were shut away in convents for life included a cast-off wise,
illegitimate children, the disabled, and the deformed. Given the many practical reasons why
women ended up in convents, it's not surprising that many of them were less than fully committed
to their vocation. The prioresse whom we meet in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, where's fancy clothes,
speaks bad French, is dainty in her eating habits, and gives herself as above her station.
Not surprisingly too, there are many stories of nuns striking up friendships with men,
particularly with the priests who had access to convents.
In the end, it's difficult not to feel sympathy for women who were shut off from the world at an
early age, in many cases without any aptitude for the life to which they were condemned.
If, moreover, you decided to chuck it all in and leave the convent, the penalty was excommunication,
and you could never marry. It's not clear how many women were nuns in England in the mid-14th
century, but one estimate puts it at only 3,500.
Let's now talk about poor women. If you marry, you'll be in charge of the household. That's to
say you'll have to cook, clean, and raise your children. Forget daycare. You'll also be in charge
of the garden, where you grow vegetables, and perhaps keep poultry. You might also make an
extra groat or two by spinning. And as if you haven't got enough to do, at certain times of the
year, you might hide yourself out as a labourer. And once your children have all grown up,
why not do a bit of thatching, or sheep shearing, or muck spreading, that we hear of women
performing all these tasks? If you live in a town, there are a lot more jobs you can choose from.
You can become a domestic servant, though it's better to be single if you are, because
the chances are you'll never see your husband or hardly at all. Even a modestly wealthy household
will employ one servant, whereas a well-to-do household might have as many as eight or ten.
Your duties will be much the same as those of the peasant wife I mentioned a moment ago, cooking,
cleaning, spinning, caring for the children, and so on. You'll receive board and lodging,
but you'll be paid only a pittance, added to which you'll be highly vulnerable to sexual
exploitation from your employer, or indeed from any of his sons. And you'll have no recourse
to compensation in the courts. Moving up the social scale, you could become a skilled worker of
some kind, a midwife, wet nurse, weaver, baker, brewer, a spinner of gold thread, soap boiler,
a candle maker, laundress, dressmaker, innkeeper, musician, butcher, a tax collector,
sword manufacturer, and so on. One of the most prestigious occupations for a working woman
was manufacturing silk for the nobility and gentry. Girls can't attend university, however,
so you won't be able to practice law or medicine, though you could hire out your services as a
surgeon. A surgeon, as we saw in an earlier lecture, needed no training.
Last but by no means least, you could become a prostitute. There were some parents who were so
desperate that they prostituted their children at an early age, as early as 12. As a prostitute,
you won't have any legal protection under the law unless you're less than 12 years of age.
You'll be a social outcast because prostitution was legal in only three English towns.
In practice, however, both the church and the town councils were fairly lenient towards
prostitutes. The church was mainly concerned to try to get you to repent and live in a
religious foundation for reformed prostitutes. We hear of a particularly colorful character
called John, aka Eleanor Reichner, a transvestite who, in his or should it be her testimony,
to a London court in 1394, said that he had had sex with many nuns as a man and sex with many
priests as a woman, though how many in each case he, she, didn't know. Reichner added that he,
she, quote, accommodated priests more readily than other people because they happened to be more
generous. Unsurprisingly, the court was at a loss how to treat Reichner, having no established
category of transvestite in its rulebook. Before you decide to throw in the towel as a medieval
woman, however, let me introduce you to Chaucer's liveliest and most flamboyant creation, the Wife
of Bath. Nowhere is Chaucer's interest in ordinary people better in evidence. The Wife of Bath is
earthy and utterly irrepressible. She's fictional, of course, like all of Chaucer's characters,
but she's clearly drawn from real life. Her appearance alone indicates that she's not one to
be cooped up in doors all day long, living under the thumb of a man. She wears an outside hat and
gory red stockings, and she's simply burst forth from the page in shameless exuberance.
Experience, as she says at the beginning of her tale, is right enough for me to spake of,
whoa, that is in marriage, of the misery that is in marriage. That, whoa, as we've seen,
includes being struck on the head by her fifth husband and losing much of her hearing in consequence.
She continues, for Lord Ling's sithai twelviera was of aja, husbands at Kerkador I have had five.
In other words, she's had five husbands since the age of twelve, the age when she first got married,
so she should indeed know of the woe of medieval marriage.
The chances that you would become a widow were extremely high, both due to warfare and to the
fact that your husband was typically several years older than you. Evidence from Yorkshire,
in the north of England, indicates that about 80% of merchants left behind a widow.
The wife of Bath, however, is what we might call a career widow. She's obviously well to do,
to judge from her clothing alone. Probably each time she married, she became wealthier.
She's audacious and fearless, with a taste for adventure that more than matches that of any man.
She's made three pilgrimages to Jerusalem. A fourth husband, who stayed at home during her last
pilgrimage, conveniently died shortly after her return, but she soon married her fifth.
She's certainly fortunate to have had so many husbands who obligingly
predeceased her, leaving her their fortunes. She's also highly unusual in that she's traveling
alone to Canterbury. Chaucer's prioress, whom I mentioned a moment ago, has three priests in
her retinue. Most women would not have gone on a pilgrimage without male escort. The wife of Bath is
clearly an exception. In fact, it's difficult to resist the interpretation that she's on the prowl
for male company. She isn't, however, the only sexual predator who turns up in medieval literature.
Another is the lady of the castle who tries to seduce Sir Gawain in the poem,
Sir Gawain and the Green Night. You are welcome to my body, your pleasure to take. I am driven by
forces beyond my control. To be your servant and so I shall, she tells him. Strong stuff.
In a rather different vein, a text written in the 12th century entitled The Life of Saint
Godoliva, a Saint Godoliva was a woman, claims that women are constantly at the mercy of their
sexual desires and that because they live together with other women, they satisfy these desires
by resorting to homosexuality, a male fantasy, but one that was fueled by fear.
What all these texts indicate is that many men would have been afraid of you as a woman,
particularly if you were an attractive woman. And one of the things that made you much more
attractive and sexually alluring from the 13th century onwards was the humble button.
Previously, you had to slip loose fitting dresses over your head. Now, thanks to the button,
you could wear figure hugging clothes that emphasized your curves. The button came back from
the east as a result of the crusades, along with much sexier fabrics than wool and linen,
such as silk, satin, brocade, damask and velvet. However, being a respectable woman,
you wouldn't dream of exposing your arms or legs. In fact, it is as much men as women whose
clothing screams look at me, not least because they wore highly revealing hoes. Further, to draw
attention to your status in society, assuming you had a status, that is, you'd wear elaborate
brooches and rings made out of precious stones. I want next to talk about the women who were left
alone when their husbands and sons went off to war, particularly to the crusades, where they'd
be absent for many years. In that case, you'd be left in charge of the home or the castle
or even the realm. That's what happened to Eleanor of Aquitaine, who was appointed regent,
while her son, King Richard the Lionheart, was fighting in the third crusade. Eleanor was both
powerful and wealthy. She is a striking example of that small band of women who broke the mold
in the Middle Ages. But you too, as an ordinary woman, would enjoy considerable power and authority
in your husband or son's absence. You'll be treated with respect by his retainers and servants,
as well as by his social equals. And over time, human nature being what it is, this respect could
border on admiration and then, from admiration, shift seamlessly into infatuation. Hence,
the birth of that most bizarre medieval phenomenon that we call courtly love.
The courtly lover, by definition, so to speak, placed himself in a state of perpetual
subjection to you, the object of his devotion, even though you were completely unattainable
and even though he didn't expect to have any physical contact whatsoever with you.
If he happened to be a knight, then he'd perform nightly deeds in your name. All very gratifying,
I'm sure. So this is how romantic love, which is so much a part of our mindset to this day,
first entered the European bloodstream. I can't emphasize too strongly how peculiar
this phenomenon was. If you'd suggested to a Greek or to a Roman or any of the people whom
we've encountered before in this course, that you were devoted to a woman with whom you would never
have any physical contact, they would have thought you were bonkers. Life is short,
so cup a dear man, they would have replied. Though courtly love, as its name suggests,
was predominantly an upper class phenomenon associated with the court, for the first time
in human history, emotional attachment was now elevated above physical desire. And there's just
a chance that it had a trickle down effect upon those lower down the social ladder. So it's just
possible that you, as an ordinary woman, would have been courted and treated with increased
deference as some lower class male who was interested in you tried to ape his social betters.
I don't want to give you the impression that medieval men were saints when it came to women,
however, far from it. There must have been lots of hanky-panky going on behind the curtains.
Take Chaucer's squire in the Canterbury Tales. He's described as a lavere and a lusty bachelor.
The reason why he has fought in battle as Chaucer tells us is in hope to stand and in his lady
in hope, in other words, of impressing his girlfriend. The squire is anything but, however,
your ideal courtly lover, because Chaucer goes on to say, so hot he loved that by
nictatal he slept no more than doth a nicting-gall, which means he spent all night every night
making love, which suggests in turn that there were women who were beddable and available outside
the structure of marriage in medieval society, as there are in any society. A courtly love was
one thing, the other side of history, quite another. So to conclude, would you have wanted
to be a medieval woman? I tend to doubt it. Certainly some women were enjoying a degree
of independence that had never existed before, but marital oppression, parlousness, and devaluation
in society's eyes dog them. And much of the blame for this, it has to be said, must be laid at the
door of the church, which had such a low opinion of women. In the next lecture, we're going to
examine other ways in which the church exercised its authority over both men and women.
