If you belong to the social elite, if you have a violence streak in you tinged with
a somewhat idealised view of the world, then being a medieval knight is the career path
for you. A knight is a word of Anglo-Saxon origin. The Anglo-Saxon word is actually
knichtars, which means simply a youth or retainer.
From the time of the Norman conquest onwards, however, it signified a warrior who fought
on horseback. The Anglo-Saxons didn't fight on horseback, as we saw in a previous lecture.
Only foot soldiers fought at the Battle of Hastings, whereas the Normans had horse warriors
as well. The Norman word for horse warrior was chivalier, from which our word chivalry
derives. Chivalry originally means knights on horseback or the knightly class, but over
time it came to mean the qualities expected of a knight, honour, courage and courtesy.
Knights were a vital part of medieval society, because in theory at least they offered protection
to those who were vulnerable to the other side of history, so that's why they belong
in our course. They were both admired and feared. It's because of his status that Chaucer gives
his knight, his knicht, pride of place in the Canterbury Tales by making him the first
of his storytellers. A knicht there was, and that a worthy man, that for the time that
he first began to ridden out, he loved chivalry, truth and honour, freedom and courtesy. What
a wonderful description. My values exactly. Courtesy. Courtesy. Of course.
After enumerating all the campaigns in which he served against the so-called heathens, a.k.a.
the Muslims, Chaucer pays the knight this glowing tribute. And though that he were worthy,
he was wease. In other words, he was both courageous and wise. And he concludes with
this wonderful line, which always moves me deeply. He was a very perfect gentle knicht.
Just an idealised portrait, of course. Knights like the rest of humanity were capable of
great cruelty. We're all familiar with the image of the knight in shining armour, riding
around, saving damsels in distress. I'm sorry to say he didn't exist. Knotted damsels in
distress exist either, for that matter. So what we're going to do in this lecture is
examine the reality behind that confected image. In effect, protecting the weak was
just a sideline at best. The main job of a knight was to fight in battle. And there was
a great demand for soldiers in the Middle Ages. The wars known as the Crusades lasted
for three centuries. We'll talk about them later. The Hundred Years War between England
and France lasted from 1337 to 1453, well over a hundred years, in fact. And then there
were the constant squabbles between rival barons, each of whom had his private army
incorporating a number of knights. Below the barons came the knights' bannerettes. These
were knights who led their own companies of commoners under their own banner, hence their
name Bannerette. And below the knights' bannerettes were the knights' bachelor, ordinary knights
who fought under someone else's banner. Knights, in other words, were professional soldiers.
They offered their services to their superiors who rewarded them with land which peasants
then cultivated on their behalf. They also depended for their livelihood on the ransom
and plunder they obtained from war, as well as on the prizes they earned in tournaments.
There were other knights who, instead of serving their lord, belonged to an order of knighthood.
Rather, as monks, belonged to different orders. The first order of knighthood to be founded
was the knight's hospitaler in 1099, very soon after Jerusalem had been captured in
the first crusade. The knight's hospitaler took their name from the fact that they were
attached to a hospital in Jerusalem to protect sick and injured pilgrims.
The next order to be founded were the knight's Templar in 1119. The Templars were named
for the fact that the headquarters of their order was on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem,
the high platform where once had stood the great temple built by Herod and destroyed
by the Romans as we saw earlier. Their official title was the Poor Fellow Soldiers of Christ.
And to emphasize their poverty, their seal depicted two knights riding on a single horse.
And we find here, in theory at least, a commitment to the simple life.
So, you want to become a knight? Let me warn you, it's every bit as tough as becoming a
US Marine. You also have to be of noble birth, preferably the eldest son of a knight himself.
As another problem, you have to start your training around the age of seven, which probably
rules out most patrons of the great courses. If you're not the eldest son, by the way,
you'll probably enter the church. That's another way to become rich and powerful.
If you do fit the criteria I've just listed, however, your father will pack you off to
a nobleman's house, perhaps to a relative, like an uncle, where you'll serve as his page.
You'll learn how to ride, how to behave in polite society, and how to fight with a wooden
sword. You'll also learn how to carry a lady's train so it doesn't touch the ground. Very
important that. We see pages doing their stuff at royal weddings and coronations.
Then around the age of 14, you'll become a squire. That's to say, you'll become the
personal attendant of a knight. The word squire comes from the French equier, meaning shield
carrier, because that was one of your main duties, carrying a knight's shield and spear.
You have to look after your knight's horse and armour and serve him his meat at the table
when he's feasting. You also learn courtly manners and how to conduct yourself in the
presence of ladies. It all sounds very proper, but boys will be boys, and some squires did
go off the rails. We hear of rival gangs of squires burning down half of Boston, a town
on the east coast of England in 1288. Your training now includes fighting with a sword
and buckler. A buckler was a small round shield, throwing the javelin, putting, as it's called,
or throwing stones, fighting with quarter staves, and so on. You fight alongside your
knight in battle and assist him if he is wounded. At the end of your period of training
at about 21, you're ready to be knighted yourself. This is a very solemn ceremony. First, you
fast and pray in the chapel. Then you make your confession to a priest and kneel before
your lord, or perhaps before your king, in full armour, but without your helmet on.
You swear an oath of loyalty, which includes the words sire, I become your man. Your lord
then dubs you a knight by laying his sword briefly on each of your shoulders and on your
neck. This symbolizes the fact that he could, if he chose, take your life. He also presents
you with a white sword belt, a token of your purity, and a pair of gold spurs. You now carry
the arms and wear the protective chain mail armour of a knight. Plate armour, by the
way, didn't replace chain mail until the beginning of the 15th century, outside the period that
we're looking at. Chain mail consists of open rings interlinked with others that are then
closed with rivets. Underneath your chain mail, you wear a padded garment. Over it,
you wear a surcoat, or tunic, with a hole that you slip over your head. Your most important
weapon is your double-edged sword, which you use for cutting. You also have a dagger to
slash your opponent's face, or cut his throat, and a mace to clobber him with. You carry
a lance when you're on horseback. You ride a high warhorse called a charger that's capable
of carrying you fully clad in armour, together with a high saddle and a pair of stirrups.
Hence our expression, to get on your high horse, meaning to push people around. Ordinary
folk just rode on ponies. The best kind of warhorse was the Destre, from the Latin Depstarius,
which is perhaps a reference to the fact that your squire, when he leaves your horse on
foot, stands to the right of it. The closest modern equivalent is a Spanish Andalusian.
If you're really well off, your horse will have armour as well. The commonest protection
for a warhorse was the chaffron, which covered his head. To uphold the dignity of your calling,
you'll have at least one squire and one servant in attendance. If you happen to be a baron,
you'll have a large retinue of knights, squires, heralds, valets and servants, a numbering perhaps
as many as 50 or more. And last but not least, you'll need your own heraldic coat of arms. A coat
of arms is a device that's painted on your shield, embroidered on your circote and emblazoned on
your banner. Your son will inherit your coat of arms when you die. The choice of colours and
motifs was strictly regulated, and the language used to describe the pattern is Old French, so
or is used for gold, argent, for silver, gul, for red, and so on and so forth. A lion or a boar,
for instance, that is shown lying down, is described as cuchon, or if it's looking back
as regardon and so forth. You also have a motto such as son tache, my motto. Originally, knights
could choose their own coat of arms. Over time however, coats of arms became standardised. The
original purpose of a coat of arms was probably to enable you to be identified on the battlefield
and at tournaments. That's because your helmet covers your entire face,
and as a further mark of identification, you wear a crest on your helmet.
You're extremely fit, as fit if not more so as any of the soldiers we've met in this course thus far.
A stirring example of knightly athleticism is recorded in the case of a Frenchman called
Marshal Boussico, who could vault onto his horse in full armour. I don't recommend trying the
exercise except under heavy supervision. Another more chilling proof of athleticism is recorded
in the case of King Richard I, Richard the Lionheart. He was said to be able to slice through
a man's skull right the way down to his teeth with a single blow of his sword.
Since knighthood was an international organisation, you might well find yourself fighting under the
banner of a foreigner, especially if you were fighting in one of the crusades. The medieval church
sought to harness all that knightly testosterone to its own advantage. It was a knight's duty
to fight for God. Chaucer's Night, a campaign for the church in Spain, Turkey, Egypt and Lithuania.
Medieval battles were highly ritualised affairs governed by strict rules of conduct.
For instance, you'd be expected to act with courtesy, that word again, towards the enemy
once you had taken him prisoner. That was one of the reasons why you wore a distinctive coat
of arms. It would indicate that you were wealthy and therefore worth ransoming.
And if you did get captured, you could expect to be kept in comfortable surroundings before being
ransomed. I need hardly point out that the same courtesy was not extended to common soldiers.
No one would fork out money to ransom an ordinary soldier. Sometimes too, when you were fighting
so-called lists, replaced battles. The word list describes an enclosure where a battle was settled
by combat between specially chosen knights. One of the two warring sides would challenge the other
to select its best knights, typically about ten in number on each side. And the two opposing groups
would then fight to the death. It was obviously a great honour to be chosen to fight in the lists,
since the fate of the conflict depended on you alone. Another way you could gain prestige and
fame was by participating in a tournament. In earlier times, tournaments involved two
teams of knights who would fight against each other on a field several miles long,
assisted by foot soldiers. This was known as a melee. From the mid-1330s onwards, however,
tournaments took the form of solo jousts. That's to say,
combats between single pairs of knights on horseback. By the way, there isn't any evidence
for the belief that knights had to be lowered onto their horses by means of winches. That idea
seems to have been an invention of Mark Twain in a Connecticut Yankee at King Arthur's Court.
You wear a so-called frog-mouthed helmet to give added protection to your head by
deflecting a direct spear thrust away from the neck and face, since the top and bottom of the
helmet meet at an angle. The slit for the eyes is very narrow so that pieces of shattered wood
from one of the lances doesn't hit you in the face. You and your opponent take up your positions
some distance away from each other and then charge towards each other at full tilt. A full tilt
is a metaphor that derives from jousting. A tilt was a prong that was attached to your breastplate
at the place where you rested and steadied your lance. To prevent head-on collisions,
there's a so-called tilt barrier to separate the paths down which the horses gallop towards
each other. In earlier times, there was only a rope that hung a few feet off the ground.
Let's suppose now you're a spectator at a tournament. People of all social classes,
women as well as men, enjoyed watching tournaments. Brightly colored banners
billow in the breeze from poles attached to the stands where you sit, indicating the coats of
arms of the contestants. The air is tense with excitement. The nobles are decked out in all
their finery. Before the tournament begins, all the knights parade before your gaze beside the tilt
accompanied by their banner bearers. After that, there's a fanfare of trumpets followed by a
proclamation from the herald announcing the first joust. The first pair of mounted knights
enters the lifts seated on their high saddles, flaunting their coats of arms. The horses winny
and snort and paw the ground impatiently. As a spectator, you feel the same kind of thrill that
anyone feels who has watched a sport or an entertainment that could result in a death
of one of the participants. A kerchief is dropped just as at a Roman gladiatorial contest.
And as it flutters to the ground, both knights dig their spurs into their horses, drawing blood and
charge towards each other with their steel tipped spears held horizontally and grip tightly under
their arms aimed directly at their opponent's breastplate. By the time they close in, their
horses are galloping at perhaps as much as 40 miles an hour. At first they miss. In fact,
they take several turns before one of them scores a hit and topples his opponent from his horse.
It's lucky for him that he does fall off, otherwise he might have died instantly from the blow.
Perhaps the contest ends there. Alternatively, the combatants continue the fight on foot.
They've now discarded their lances and are taking swipes at each other with a heavy broad sword.
Their swords are so heavy that they have to clasp them each in both hands.
They're sweating profusely inside their armor, not that you can tell, of course. And each time
they raise their swords, it takes more effort. In the end, they throw down their swords and start
swinging their axes or their maces at each other. It's all very formal. They are allowed a set number
of blows with each weapon and they deliver them alternately. Eventually, one of the knights is
struck on the head and falls to the ground. The other one removes the helmet from the fallen
knight, but let us suppose chivalrously chooses to spare his life. A tendons called Valeps,
a variant of the word valet, haul the fallen knight off the field. The victor steps forward
to receive the prize from whoever is hosting the tournament. Of course, it's great to win a tournament,
but pity the poor loser, he has been publicly humiliated and in front of ladies too.
It's more wonder that the church tried repeatedly to ban jousting. All to no avail. It was far too
much fun to watch. But that's not the only reason why jousting was so popular. It was also a highly
effective way to keep the cream of one's fighting force in top physical shape. And since women were
among the spectators, knights would be under additional pressure to equip themselves honorably.
Talking of women, there's a wonderful story that the English king Edward III was so inspired
after witnessing a particularly exciting tournament at Windsor Castle in 1344 that
he decided to found a round table of his closest knights in imitation of the legendary round table
that had been set up by King Arthur. Edward called his knights the Knights of the Garter. In
commemoration of an occasion when his mistress, with whom he was dancing, happened to lose her
garter. Edward retrieved the garter and placed it rather suggestively on his leg. There was much
sniggering from those who witnessed this act of courtesy, whereupon the king menacingly declared
Onnyssois qui m'allait bonnes, a shame to him who evil thinks of this, which hence became the motto
of the order. A Saint George's chapel in Windsor, a beautiful gothic chapel, is decorated with the
banners of the Knights of the Order of the Garter. It's dedicated to Saint George because, as everyone
knows, it's the business of a knight to slay dragons. And Saint George was famous precisely for that.
Being practised in the arts of war was, so to speak, only half the battle of being a knight.
A knight also had to adhere to the code of chivalry, a Norman word as we saw that translates
as nightliness. So in what did nightliness consist? Well, no one put it better than Chaucer when he
said that the knight in his Canterbury tales loved truth and honour, freedom and courtesy.
Courtesy means literally courtliness or courtly behaviour. In other words,
the kind of behaviour that was learned and practised at court.
A court life in the Middle Ages was extremely refined and sophisticated. There were very
precise conventions dictating how you interacted with other people. You had to be immaculately
dressed, impeccably groomed, highly cultivated and graceful in your movements and gestures.
You were expected to be accomplished in dancing, drawing and musicianship.
Courtesy, the modern term, isn't a virtue that cuts much ice these days. Some people might even
despise it, thinking that it is merely the kind of deference that you pay either to a superior
or to a woman that is insincere at best and hypocritical at worst. But in the Middle Ages,
courtesy was the mark of a civilised, sophisticated and moral man, a man who promoted the virtues of
truth and honour. I say man because it was predominantly, though not exclusively, a masculine
virtue, a central and defining part of the Code of Chivalry. So how did you manifest this quality?
Well, you manifested it in part by looking after those who were defenseless and in need of help,
those who were on the other side of history. And this is where the ideal of knighthood
commands our special attention. In the book of the Order of Chivalry, which was written by a
certain Raymond Lowell in 1276, you were expected to defend, I quote, women, widows, orphans,
the sick and the weak, and those who work on the land. Well, did knights actually display such
admirable virtues to widows, orphans and the like? Well, sometimes no doubt, but by no means invariably.
Both on the battlefield and off it, infringements of the Code of Chivalry were commonplace. Some
knights, scorned those who were weak and defenseless, were foul-mouthed and abusive towards women and
acted brutally towards their enemies. There's a story even that some of the knights who participated
in the first crusade went so far as to eat the bodies of their enemies. If we want to be thoroughly
cynical, we could, with some justification, say that knighthood merely provided an outlet for
man's natural tendency for violence, and worse, that it justified that tendency by dressing it up
in fine-sounding language. The Age of Chivalry lasted from about 1100 to 1500. Long before that,
however, knights in armour were becoming militarily obsolete. Chaucer's knight is already one of a
dying breed. It's estimated that in his day there were no more than 1000 knights in the whole of
England, supported by about three times as many squires. That was down from 6000 knights in the
reign of Henry II, 1154 to 1189. One of the factors that had brought about a reduction in their
ranks was a phenomenon that derived from the other side of history, the common soldier, provided with
nothing more sophisticated than a longbow and a quiver full of arrows. The first battle to be
decided by the longbow was Cressy in 1346, which the English won against the French.
It's been estimated that in the first five minutes of the battle,
the English bowmen were able to unleash 5000 arrows, thereby creating havoc in the
ranks of French knights. The French bowmen were armed with the crossbow, a much more powerful
weapon. Whereas the range of the longbow is about 500 feet, the range of a crossbow is
three times as great. To draw the crossbow, however, you have to hold it down on the ground with your
foot while pulling the string with your hands as you straighten your legs. You hold the string
taught by a catch, which you release by pulling a kind of trigger just like a gun. The problem
was that whereas the longbow man could fire off about 10 arrows a minute, a crossbow man
could manage only about two or three. Archery, as we'll see in the lecture on relaxation and
entertainment in the Middle Ages, was an important pastime among men and women of all classes. It
spelt the end of the age of chivalry and the new dominance of the common soldier in battle.
So was knighthood all bad? Was chivalry all bad? Of course not, though I should like to hear from
the other side of history, notably the people who expected protection from their knights. I'd also
like to hear from the so-called infidels from whom they rested the Holy Land in the wars we call
the Crusades, the wars which are the subject of the next lecture.
