Here are the opening nines of Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales, written in beautiful middle
English. One that, April, with his showers soothed, the draught of March hath perced
to the router, and bided every vine in switch liqueur, of which virtue engendered is the
flower. Then longen folk to go on on pilgrimages, and, specially, from every shire's ender of
Engelond to Canterbury they wender, the holy blissful martyr for to sake, that hem hath
hulpen, a one that they were saker. In other words, but no words, of course, are better
than Chaucer's, every April, folk, that's to say, people of all different social classes,
get a desire to go on pilgrimages. The most popular destination in England is Canterbury,
which people travel to from every shire's ender, from the furthest parts of England,
because that's where the shrine of Thomas a Becket is, the archbishop who was murdered
by those four knights in 1170 at the instigation of Henry II. A Becket had been canonised just
three years later because it was he who healed them when they were sick, as Chaucer says.
It's estimated that in its first ten years Becket's shrine attracted about 200,000 pilgrims
every year from continental Europe as well as from all over England, though we should
note that the fashion for going on pilgrimages had begun much earlier, but it was the tenth
century which really witnessed the beginning of the boom. Canterbury remained England's
most popular pilgrimage destination for about 350 years. Then in 1538, King Henry VIII leveled
it to the ground, smashed its relics and had all its treasures carted off in what we call
the Protestant Reformation. In actual fact, the shrine only attracted pilgrims from the
continent for about ten years, after which reports of the miracles performed by its
saint began to dwindle in number, which makes the prominence that Chaucer gives it seem
slightly ironic. Very few pilgrimage sites remained popular throughout the Middle Ages.
Like most things in life, they were subject to the vagaries of fashion. A new cult always
created a bit of a splash in the first years of its existence, after which it often faded
into obscurity. I'm going to build this lecture chiefly around Chaucer's description of a
pilgrimage, because there's no better witness, even though he presents a pilgrimage as something
of a jaunt. Whereas for many pilgrims, it was an act of penance which was believed to
grant them indulgence from sin. The host of the Tabardin, where Chaucer's pilgrims
spend their first night on the road, says that he, I quote, ne saw this year so merry
a company. He never saw such a merry company all year. It hardly suggests that they saw
their pilgrimage as a deeply spiritual exercise, which it undoubtedly was for many people.
The fashion for going on pilgrimages received its initial boost in the reign of the first
Christian emperor, Constantine the Great, 306-337, whose mother, the emperor's Helena,
claimed to have discovered pieces of the true cross in Jerusalem, the cross you'll record,
on which Christ was crucified. For a thousand years, devout, and sometimes not so devout
Christians, travelled to pilgrimage sites, many of them risking their lives to do so.
It wasn't the Christians who invented pilgrimage, however. We've already encountered the phenomenon,
or a fact similarly thereof, in the lecture about being sick or disabled in ancient Greece.
If you were sick in ancient Greece, you might have journeyed to one of the 200 or so healing
sanctuaries dedicated to the god Asclepius. And in fact, many miraculous cures were claimed
in both belief systems, pagan as well as Christian. As we've just seen, it's the main reason
that Chaucer gives for going on a pilgrimage. There were, however, other reasons for you,
as a Christian, to undertake a pilgrimage. You might want to give thanks to God or to
a saint for having helped you survive a terrible ordeal, or you might want to atone for a sin.
It's also possible that your pilgrimage was imposed upon you by a court of law as an alternative
to punishment for a crime. So if, for instance, you had committed a really serious crime,
like bestiality or murder or sacrilege, a civil court could send you on a particularly
long and arduous pilgrimage, the equivalent in our terms to months of community service
and a lot harder too. The Inquisition too could decide to punish you in the same way,
especially when it didn't have conclusive proof that you were a heretic. It made good
sense to punish criminals in this way. The discomfort, the cost and the inconvenience
of the journey would have had a salutary effect on many near-duels who would have no doubt
returned suitably chastened, if not actually spiritually uplifted. On the lighter side,
there were more worldly incentives for undertaking a pilgrimage, such as the desire for a change
of scenery or the desire to relieve boredom. The motive one suspects that drives the majority
of Chaucer's pilgrims to head for Canterbury. If you're going abroad, you'll have to settle
your affairs before leaving in case you don't come back. Many thousands of pilgrims died
en route from disease, exhaustion, natural catastrophe or violence from humans as well
as wild animals. All manner of hazards might be awaiting you. We frequently hear of pilgrims
being murdered in their beds by unscrupulous innkeepers. I don't want to put you off,
but you need to know the facts. They're a test of your faith. Before you set off, you'll
have to ask permission of your Lord, your parish priest, and last but not least, your
wife. Your parish priest will bless you in much the same way that he blessed crusaders
before they set out for the Holy Land. You're expected to wear special attire. This comprises
a long tunic made out of coarse material known as a sclavane with a mantle thrown over it.
You carry a staff, preferably with a metal tip and a small leather pouch known as a
script for your food and money. You wear a broad brimmed hat, turned up at the front.
So, let's imagine you're a pilgrim on your way to visit the Shrine of Thomas Beckett.
It's early spring, the time that Chaucer's pilgrims have chosen to set out, though it's
worth noting that the busiest months of the year for wending one's way to Canterbury were
December and July. That's because December was when Beckett was murdered, and July was
when he was canonized. That's to say, when he was elevated to the rank of saint. You're
leaving from London, however. London is a walled city, and its gates are closed at night.
So, if you want to make an early start in the morning to avoid the rush hour traffic,
you certainly don't want to get caught up in a medieval rush hour. It's a nightmare.
You'd best stay at one of the inns on the south bank of the River Thames in the parish
or village called Southwark. Southwark is joined to London by London Bridge, the only
stone bridge over the River Thames at this date. In fact, the only stone bridge over
the Thames until 1750. It has a drawbridge and a double row of shops along it, some 140
in all. You'll have to leave London before the bells are rung to sound the curfew at
dusk. Everyone has to be indoors after that in any medieval town. If you're caught out
and about by the Night Watchman after the curfew has sounded, you could be arrested.
I recommend you stay at the Tabard. That's the inn where Chaucer's pilgrims are staying
and where they meet up. It's named for the short, brightly coloured surcoat that a knight
or a herald wore over his armour. The Tabard was a real inn. Sadly, it's long since disappeared,
though a plaque marks a spot where it once stood. Southwark is on the main road to Canterbury,
a distance of about 60 miles. I say main road, but bear in mind that most roads are little
more than dirt tracks. So if it rains, you're going to be ankle deep in mud. We've come
a long way from Roman Britain, and though the outlines of Roman roads have for the most
part been preserved, their surfaces haven't been. Chaucer's pilgrims travel on horseback.
The most sincere penitence, however, travelled on foot, preferably bare foot. They would
probably have covered about two miles an hour, perhaps a bit more in the summer. So as we
see, there's a great deal of variety in the seriousness and sincerity of pilgrims, and
I wouldn't presume to imagine which category you happen to fit into. If you're a rich
noblewoman, you'll probably travel in a covered wagon, though in the absence of any
suspension, that'll be quite an ordeal in itself. While staying overnight at the Tabard,
you fall in with other pilgrims at dinner, and you all decide to proceed to Canterbury
in convoy. You come from all social classes, like Chaucer's pilgrims. It's obviously a
wise decision to travel in convoy for mutual protection. There are plenty of robbers and
high women, and you'll be a ready target even on the road to Canterbury. You might want
to hire an armed escort if you can afford one. You're also going to be vulnerable to
unscrupulous individuals eager to fleece you of your money, like the partner whom we met
in the lecture on being religious and heretical in the Middle Ages, who sells
papal indulgences, arguably the most unpleasant of Chaucer's characters. It's noticeable that
Chaucer's pilgrims all dress very differently from one another. The poet has a sharp eye,
but in addition, there were strict codes of dress for both men and women in medieval
society to enforce social distinctions. A merchants, for instance, were required to wear
long gowns trimmed with fur. Doctors and lawyers wore robes with long open sleeves, male
courtiers wore satin and silk doublets with a cloak. And there were heavy fines for infringing
the rules and not wearing the proper uniform in medieval society. It's their attire that
gives away the statuses of Chaucer's pilgrims. In real life, it's unlikely that people of
such different social classes would have mixed together, though social distinctions would
have been less in evidence on the pilgrimage trail than they were back home. So to some
extent, however limited, a pilgrimage is helped to erode the distinction between the privileged
classes and the other side of history. Unfortunately, Chaucer's pilgrims never make it to Canterbury.
The poet died before finishing his great work, so we'll just have to carry on as best we
can without him. You probably spend two nights on the road. You might stay in Inns along the
way. There aren't many, however, and since if it's a popular time to go on a pilgrimage,
they may be full. So you might try to stay in the guesthouse of a monastery. It'll be
a bit spartan. You'll have to sleep on straw, but at least you'll get a good square meal.
And at least they have latrines, even though you'll be sitting alongside other people just
as was the case in ancient Rome. If worst comes to worst, you'll have to sleep in a hedgerow
beside the road or a deserted barn. Come to think of it, you might want to bring your
own accommodation with you. All you need is a piece of canvas to shelter under. If you're
a member of the aristocracy, you might erect an elaborate pavilion en route. It'll be made
out of canvas again, brightly painted and decorated with your coat of arms. If you're not from
the other side of history, you might have made arrangements in advance to stay with a fellow
aristocrat. You're not required to maintain an air of synemnity en route. A Chaucer's pilgrim
certainly don't. John Wickliffe, a leading figure in the movement called Lollady, which
we talked about earlier, complained that pilgrims frequently played the bagpipes and sang
bawdy songs and that they made more of a ruckus than the king and his court when passing through
a village. As you get closer to Canterbury, the number of pilgrims on the road increases
and a mile or so out of town, you have to slow down. You descend from your horse, take
off your shoes and cover the rest of the way barefoot. You have to shuffle forward for
several hours, perhaps sleeping rough overnight before you get admitted to the cathedral. The
crush is frightful. There's no control of crowds back then. People who are sick are
carried in on stretchers. You may not make it to the shrine and if you do, bear in mind that the
relics are on display only certain days of the year. But let's suppose you do make it. Let's
suppose that you're a VIP. The site of the shrine takes your breath away. It's plastered
with gold leaf and bedecked with jewels of every description. Even so, it's an intensely
spiritual moment and I don't wish to minimize its effect upon you. If you're sick, you'll also
want to visit the well in which the martyr's body was washed after he had been murdered
and drink some water from the holy well containing a drop of the martyr's blood, the blood that had
been mopped up off the floor of the crypt where Beckett was murdered. That doesn't sound too
savoury to us perhaps, but over time, of course, it would have been progressively diluted. It goes
without saying that every pilgrimage site generated revenue for the local economy. You have to pay
one penny to see Beckett's tomb, though if you happen to be a visiting dignitary, you'll
be expected to pay a good deal more. You'll obviously want to buy a souvenir to take home
afterwards or rather something to prove that you've actually been to Canterbury. Pilgrims were
the medieval equivalent of modern tourists. The most popular souvenir is a badge made out
of pewter, lead or tin, which depicts either the saint being killed or the sword that killed him.
You'll also want to purchase a tiny ampoule or flask filled with water from the well I mentioned
a moment ago, which you can wear around your neck tied by a cord. It's stamped with a Latin motto,
Thomas is the best physician for good people who are sick. And indeed, many of the pilgrims are sick.
They'll probably stay in some cases until they're cured or until they die. Some of them have been
debilitated by their journey and are incapable of leaving, as too was often the case at the sanctuaries
of Asclepius in the Greek world. The environs of Canterbury Cathedral, like the environs of Epidaurus,
present a somewhat mournful spectacle with hundreds of sick pilgrims camped out, many too sick to move,
but filled too with an unshakable conviction in Beckett's healing powers. They live in conditions
not unlike those of a refugee camp. Priests looked after them as best they can. And just like at Epidaurus,
many of the priests who attended the sick at Canterbury and other pilgrimage sites, a practice medicine.
The Canterbury Cathedral had a vast library of medical books. So we should think again of that potent
combination of faith and science that we talked about earlier.
Talking of sickness, the Black Death, which we described at the beginning of our lecture on the Middle Ages,
generated a particular kind of pilgrim. Small groups of flagellants would travel for days,
praying silently while they whipped themselves and one another in imitation of the passion of Christ.
They did so in the hope that they might be able to alleviate the ravages of the plague.
They whipped themselves with ropes that were knotted at the ends with pieces of metal embedded in them.
The movement was rare in England and largely confined to continental Europe.
To us it seems like a sickness of the mind and in fact the church thought so too,
eventually condemning flagellants as heretics. Flagellants were a product of the numbing terror
that the Black Death instilled, coupled with the belief that it was sent as punishment for man's wickedness.
A slightly less painful way of undertaking a pilgrimage was by walking buff naked,
a form of penance no doubt reserved for men.
Pilgrimage has been aptly described as devotion in action. It was central to the medieval mindset
and it was a mindset that taught you to believe that your hope of salvation was dependent on your belief
and that to prove you believed you had to undergo hardship and danger.
But religion as we've seen wasn't the whole story. As an ordinary man or woman for most of the year
you never left your town or village. No wonder Chaucer says that folk long to go on pilgrimages
when springtime rolls around. This after all was your one opportunity to meet new people
and have fun away from the prying eyes of the neighbors. Preachers delivered excoriating sermons
condemning pilgrimages for providing an excuse for pleasure and immoral behavior. All to no avail.
If you wanted a more challenging spiritual exercise you would visit one of the great pilgrimage sites in Europe.
The foremost pilgrimage destinations were Santiago de Compostela in northwest Spain
where the Apostle James was buried, the Shrine of the Three Kings or Magi in Cologne Cathedral Germany,
Rome principally the Church of Saint Peter where Saint Peter lay buried
and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem the primary sanctuary in all of Christendom
where the resurrection was alleged to have taken place.
Only if you were relatively well off however would you have the time and the money to visit any of these places.
Some people would virtually bankrupt themselves in order to undertake a pilgrimage abroad
particularly if they had their sights set on the Holy Land.
In the 11th century pilgrims actually covered the 3000 miles to Jerusalem on foot
and no doubt many of them perished.
But Europe was relatively safe at that time for pilgrims because most of it was ruled by Christians.
By the 13th century however the situation had changed and pilgrims no longer travelled by land the whole way.
Instead they went by land to Venice or Pisa or Genoa and then they took the boat to Jaffa the nearest port to Jerusalem.
The voyage from Venice to Jaffa took a month to six weeks.
In fact the Venetians were the first to come up with the all-inclusive package tour.
Your fare as a pilgrim to Jerusalem included all your food and lodging.
Watch out however you may be beset by pirates in which case it will be all hands on deck.
Piracy was commonplace in the Mediterranean in the Middle Ages
and if infidels capture you they'll either sell you into slavery or perhaps ransom you.
In 2010 brigands off the coast of Somalia took nearly 1200 people hostage.
The high seas certainly weren't any safer in the Middle Ages
and the boatload of pilgrims was easy meat and perhaps rich pickings too.
The food you'll be served on board is pretty disgusting.
Mainly salted beef, dried fruit and stale biscuits crawling with maggots.
You're advised to take laxatives and restoratives with you.
The wealthy could buy a passage on an oared galley the equivalent of business class
but the ship you'll sail in trust me will be small, leaky and unstable.
You and your fellow passengers will be packed like sardines in cramped quarters below deck.
You'll be provided with a small vessel into which he or she urinates or vomits
as a Dominican friar called Felix Faber of Aln graphically puts it.
Since there's always a lot of coming and going in the night
and since too the boat will make sudden lurches many of these small vessels will get knocked over
so the stench down below where you sleep will be awful.
And in the morning when you want to empty your bowels over the side of the ship
there'll be a long queue of people in front of you.
Penance indeed.
The voyage is extremely tedious.
The only way you can relieve your boredom is by reading and praying.
Occasionally someone might give a sermon.
On some ships it was permissible to play cards or dice or chess.
It depended on the composition of the passengers.
But there certainly wouldn't be that atmosphere of joviality that Chaucer evokes.
And once you dock at the port of Joppa in modern day Israel
another sort of ordeal awaits you.
If you have a phrase book with you so that you can converse with the locals
there's one that's called how to ask for the necessities in life in Arabic.
As soon as you've got your bearings you'll obviously want to relive Christ's passion
by reenacting the stages of the cross culminating in a visit to the church of the Holy Sepulchre
and you'll also want to visit Christ's burial place and his birthplace.
You probably stay a few weeks everywhere you want to go.
You have to wait in line.
Your ears are assailed by a jumble of foreign tongues.
The press of people is particularly overwhelming at festival time at Christmas and Easter especially.
You're in the crowd and you're desperate to get into the church like thousands of others.
Perhaps the crowd gets out of control and then panics which is what happened in Mecca in 2006
when 346 pilgrims who had undertaken the Hajj
the pilgrimage to Islam's holiest city where the prophet Muhammad lies buried
were crushed to death.
Much the same religious fervour would have gripped you as a pilgrim
having travelled far and risked all to reach Jerusalem.
Finally after a few weeks you're ready to return home.
You've had a change of scenery, met some new people,
gathered some interesting life experiences
and let's hope our feeling spiritually refreshed.
But you're also feeling exhausted and run down.
If you're a woman you may well have had to deal with physical abuse
or at least the threat thereof.
Male or female for days perhaps months on end you didn't have any privacy.
You only took one or two changes of clothing with you and your apparel,
a rain drenched and sun dried many times over has become tattered and torn.
The journey has taken its toll on your health.
Very likely it was a test of endurance both mental as well as physical
and yet the discomfort and the danger were an intrinsic part of your experience.
They intensified the spiritual value of the exercise
and that after all was why you went for the spiritual value of the exercise.
So to conclude going on a pilgrimage was worth it in the end
because now you're no longer buried in guilt and introspection.
Your life may well have been changed in consequence though
I can't say with much confidence that this would have been true of Chaucer's pilgrims
that you might even decide to renounce the world by entering a monastery
or a convent on your return as the church advocated.
In the next lecture we're going to look at less demanding ways
through which people living in the Middle Ages found distraction from the daily grind
namely through pastimes and entertainments.
Though as we shall see even distraction was not without its dangers at times.
