What were the Black Death raging and the all-enveloping fear of eternal damnation?
You might be excused for thinking that the Middle Ages was a particularly cheerless period
to have lived in. Then throw in the wars and the crusades and the subsistence level
standard of living enjoyed in quotes by the majority and the barbaric punishments that
were meted out for trivial crimes. Well, let's just say that life was rough on a number of
counts. But the Black Death, the fear of eternal damnation, the wars, and so on, were not the
whole of the story. Life couldn't have sustained itself if that had been all it consisted of.
The other side of history would have said, sod it, I'm chucking it all in. But of course it
didn't. Ubladi, ublada, life goes on, as I've quoted before, the words of that wonderful
Beatles song. And no matter how tough life got for you at times, you as an ordinary person would
never have lost your sense of life's wholeness, or at least collectively you wouldn't have done.
So what we're going to do in this lecture is to examine the various ways in which you found
relaxation from toil, hardship, fear, and oppression, a very human instinct in any age.
It goes without saying that there was a sharp division between you on the one hand, and the
gentry, and the aristocrats, and the court on the other. First, in the amount of leisure you
possessed, and second, in what you did with your leisure. The wealthy, as we've seen, led highly
privileged lives, which permitted them hours of idleness each day. We've already talked about
two of their favorite pastimes, namely hunting and falconry, or hawking. So I won't be saying
anything more about them here. And besides, you don't belong to the hunting and falconry set.
You'd be more likely to enjoy a wrestling bout, perhaps joining in yourself for a bit of rough
and tumble if the opportunity presented itself as you were cheering on the participants.
In general, however, there were many medieval pastimes that crossed social barriers,
and were not specific to one class or another. The chief difference was that peasants and the
poor only had leisure time on days that the church determined should not be given over to labor.
That included every Sunday and the many festivals throughout the year. Epiphany,
Annunciation, Good Friday, Easter, Ascension, Pentecost, Midsummer, just to name the major ones,
all the way round to Christmas, with the year ending with the Festival of St Thomas Beckett of
Canterbury on December the 29th. Even on festival days, however, you could only relax after you'd
done your Christian duty by going to church, and services lasted much longer in those days
than they do today. Most fun was to be had on Saints' feast days when fairs would be held.
Merchants would set up their booths around the church or cathedral and do a very lively trade.
It was a bit like having a big shopping mall arrive.
A lot of eating and drinking would go on, and there'd be plenty of street entertainers as well.
There'd be a weekly market too, and not unlike the so-called farmer's market that is held
in my hometown of Hamilton in upstate New York, but a lot more rowdy and boisterous.
Hamilton, by the way, is delightful in the summer, especially when summer falls on a weekend.
The local fair also provides an opportunity to take in some bear or bull baiting. The bear,
or the bull, will be tied to a post and beaten with sticks to rile it up.
Once it's been aroused, a pack of ravening dogs will be set loose upon it.
The fun, quote-unquote, is to see which side gets the better of the exchange.
Depending on the number of dogs involved, it'll be a good long time before the fight ends.
The cock fighting was also very popular. We haven't talked about animals much in this course.
In the Middle Ages, wanton cruelty was meted out to them on a daily basis in the name of entertainment.
Animals, too, belong to the other side of history.
A part of the so-called fun is that you've placed a bet on which of the animals will survive and
tear the other one to bits. Almost every sport and game that was played in the Middle Ages
involved a wager. There's also a wide variety of sports to choose from. Some
still very popular today. In fact, many of our present day sports were invented in the Middle
Ages. There were medieval equivalents of soccer, rugby, golf, bowls, cricket, tennis, field hockey,
badminton, and wrestling. Baseball and football, which derive from cricket and rugby,
therefore have their origins in the Middle Ages. There was a good chance, if you played a medieval
sport, that you'll suffer permanent injury or even death. That's because there are virtually no
rules. It's all just rough and tumble. Take soccer for a start. The soccer pitch, if we can call it
that, it's actually just a tract of land, maybe anything between a few dozen yards and a few
miles in extent. If two villages are playing against each other, then the goals will be placed in the
two different villages. Any number of players can take part. Each team can field hundreds of
players if one village takes on another village. The ball is very small about the size of a baseball.
It was maybe made of leather or else it could be a pig's bladder filled with dried peas. Incidentally,
pigs' bladders were used in ball games in ancient Greece 2000 years earlier and possibly
long before that. You could either throw or kick the ball and be as violent as you like.
There's no referee or doctors or paramedics waiting on the touch line. It's quite possible
that the game will degenerate into all-out warfare. Perhaps that was the point.
So the origins of soccer hooliganism go back hundreds of years, though today it's primarily
the spectators who are the hooligans. One theory as to why medieval sports were so violent is that
people were bored by the monotony of life. And so when it came to having time off,
they needed to let off steam. Well, that's not to say that we banished real violence entirely from
the public gaze, of course, in our society. Think of wrestling or boxing or ice hockey,
all of which have their origins in the Middle Ages. And not to mention car racing with some people
hoping to witness a pile-up. A variant of wrestling was what we call today chicken fighting. You
and your opponent would sit on the shoulders of men supporting you and each of you would try to throw
the other off by punching or pulling your opponent's ears or twisting or breaking his arms and so
forth. A more harmless variant of the sport is still played today in swimming pools.
I suspect that you as a time traveler from the Middle Ages to the modern era would have taken
a great deal of pleasure in watching American football, though you would no doubt have preferred
to see it being played without all that girly men defensive armor. Cricket 2 and hence baseball
originated in a game called stool ball, which was played by both men and women. You sat on a
stool which you tried to defend from being hit by the ball that was thrown at it by your opponent.
Initially the batters had to defend their stool with their bare hands. Probably that resulted
in too many broken fingers even for medieval taste. So later the batter was permitted to hold a sort
of frying pan or skillet. The most popular sport of all in the Middle Ages was archery. Both men
and women and people of all ranks in society practiced archery. In fact if you're a man
you're required to practice it. That's because archers as we saw in the lecture about being a
knight became the backbone of the English army in the 14th century. It won't cost you much money to
get kitted up. All you need is a longbow, a quiver of arrows and a target. Usually the target is in
the form of a straw wreath just like archers use today. Your longbow is made of U and is about
six feet in length. Your arrows are iron tipped and made of poplar or ash. They're about three feet
long and an inch thick. Once you're in the army you'll be expected to hit a target 500 feet away
and you'll have to shoot up to 10 arrows per minute. All that requires tremendous physical
strength as well as coordination and no wonder then that boys began practicing from the age of
seven upwards. Other martial sports that prepared you for the army include fighting with quarter
staves. These were staves of hardwood about five to seven feet in length, fighting with cudgels,
short sticks and fighting with swords and bucklers. A buckler was a small wooden shield.
In the winter months you might go skating on a frozen pond. Your skates will be made of bone
and you'll use poles to propel yourself along. There's a wonderful painting by Hendrik Averkamp
in the National Gallery in London depicting people of all ages skating near a castle.
It's dated 1608 but the scene is timeless. People of all ages are joining in and having
loads of fun. Skating would have been a very social event in the Middle Ages as indeed it is today
with lots of people participating. Let's now suppose that it's raining and that you have to stay indoors.
Maybe you'll pick up a book and either read or be read to. Remember however there are no printed
books available. The printed press wasn't invented till around 1440 so you'd have to be well to do
to own any books and there'd be a limit too to what you could read if you did have a book. You
could read the Bible of course and you could read various devotional works plus epic poems,
romances, poems about courtly love and satires. Very likely you know how to play chess whatever your
gender or social rank. Chess has a fascinating history. It probably originated in India
sometime in the 6th century. From India it entered the Muslim world from which it travelled to
Spain in the 10th century and then to France and from France via the Normans it entered England.
If you were a knight you'd be expected to play chess because it was thought to help you develop
tactical skills on the battlefield. One of the earliest books that William Caxton the first
English printer printed in the late 15th century was entitled The Game and Play of Chess.
The church which in this period disapproved of just about everything which could be construed as fun
naturally disapproved of chess. We don't know for certain why this was so but
it may be because men and women played against each other. This meant that they could flirt in
public without attracting too much attention. There's a wonderful medieval chess set made
out of walrus ivory dating to the 12th century that was discovered off the Scottish coast
on the island of Lewis. Chess pieces reflect the hierarchy of the medieval court. Poor old king
he can only move one square at a time and he has to be on constant guard against attack.
He may be the most important piece on the board but he doesn't have anything like the mobility of
his bishops his knights or his castles. What a subliminal reality did that represent. The queen
by the way in the medieval game can only move one space at a time so she isn't very powerful either.
Other board games that you can play include drafts and backgammon.
If you happen to belong to the upper crust of society you might play cards a card playing
also originated in India. The card playing however was largely confined to the upper crust
of society because cards are costly to produce. They're made out of either ivory,
parchment or wood and hand painted. Unfortunately none have survived from the middle ages.
As a member of the lower classes you play dice instead. A dice after all are inexpensive and
easy to make and both card playing and dicing like all other games and sports involve gambling.
As for indoor entertainment you enjoy listening to music or music making or dancing. Music
accompanies many of your daily activities including feasting, religious devotion, laboring
activities and so on. If you're an agricultural worker for instance you sing songs when you're
threshing or treading grapes or harvesting. If you're a priest you chant the liturgy
in a single key a type of singing known as plain chant. What appears to be the oldest surviving
secular English song is entitled Summer Is It Coming In. It survives in a manuscript dated
about 1240. Music hasn't played much of a role in this course but that's because
we know so little about it for most periods of history preceding the middle ages.
It's a given though that all the societies and all the cultures we've been investigating from
prehistoric times onwards practice something which they at least regarded as music even though it
might have sounded very strange to our ears. Many of the musical instruments that were in use
in the middle ages are still in use today in modified form. You'd hear the flute, the recorder,
the pipes of pan, the lute, the lyre, the table, that's a handheld drum, the hurdy-gurdy,
that's a stringed instrument played by a hand powered wheel, the zither, the sackbutt, a forerunner
of the trombone, the organ and the bagpipe as well as early versions of the violin.
It's difficult to characterize a whole era but medieval music always sounds to my ears
very jaunty if somewhat stilted. I'm going to play you a little and I'd like you to imagine
people dancing to the music.
People danced in a circle or in a chain often facing one another but they also danced in pairs
perhaps for the first time in history. If we happened to be at the court or reside in a castle
or a great manor house there would probably be a group of minstrels permanently available wearing
the livery of their king or their lord that's to say a clothing that bears elements of his coat of
arms like other servants in his employ. Other popular entertainers included acrobats, conjurers,
jugglers and tumblers. Some acrobats were women. One famous example is Matilda Makejoy who danced
in the nude before King Edward the First. She's described as a salto tricks which is the Latin
for an acrobatic dancer indicating that the origins of this profession are very ancient.
You could also become a fool or a jester since fools were entitled to mock their superiors like
the fool in Shakespeare's King Lear. They provided an avenue by which the other side of history could
without upsetting the social order get its own back on the elite.
There was even a festival held on or around January the First known as the Feast of Fools
when a lord of misrule so-called a peasant like yourself was appointed to act the buffoon.
I can't refrain from pointing out that some entertainers had rather recheche skills.
One such was Roland Le Fartier who as his name suggests had the enviable ability to be able
to break wind on command. Roland was immensely popular with King Henry II who was so enamoured
of his talents that he provided him with a house and 99 acres. In return Roland was required to
perform one jump, one whistle and one fart in Henry's presence every Christmas.
One of the most important kinds of professional music makers for our focus on the other side of
history was the troubadour. A troubadour is a word of uncertain etymology though it's probably
connected with the modern French word trouvet meaning to find in the sense here of to improvise.
Troubadours earned their living by travelling from one great house to another composing and singing
songs that they wrote or improvised on the themes of heroism and courtly love to the accompaniment
of a fiddle. So there's an arc to our story, an arc extending over 2,000 years because wandering
bars who delivered recitations in verse to the accompaniment of the liar were a feature of life
in Greece in the 8th and 7th centuries BC. Time of Homer.
The first troubadours composed in the southern French dialect known as Ossitan.
The fact that they composed in a French dialect was in its own modest way revolutionary. Previously
Latin had been the preferred language in educated circles but the songs of the troubadours came
to have widespread appeal among people of all social classes. In some ways they were the
forerunners of Chaucer's Canterbury Tales also composed in the vernacular.
And while we're talking about Chaucer let me point out that the poet has his colourful cast of
characters occupy themselves on the way to Canterbury by telling all manner of different
sorts of tales. Boardy tales, chivalric tales, a drawing from courtly love, stories about the
lives of saints, animal fables and so on reflecting the popularity and variety of narrative verse
in the Middle Ages. So we see through the troubadours and through Chaucer the other side of history
fostering the development of a vernacular language that is comprehensible to everyone in the land.
Let's talk finally about drama of which there were very many kinds. A short plays based on
folk stories were one form of drama that was popular in the Middle Ages. Puppet plays were also
popular. It may be that the puppet show known as Punch and Judy has its origins in the Middle Ages
yet another form of drama was mumming plays. There are a number of theories as to the origin
of the word mumming and mumma. They may be related to the English word mumble or to the
German word mum meaning mask or even to the Greek word momo meaning a frightening bug
bear. We have no medieval examples of the kinds of plays mummas performed but scholars believe
they may have involved the death of a hero who was later brought back to life by a physician.
They may well be pagan in origin. Mumming plays are still performed to this day in some villages
in England. All these forms of drama were performed by strolling players. That's to say by
entertainers who would make their livelihood by touring around the countryside and the towns.
Just like the players who turn up at the court of Elsinore in Shakespeare's play Hamlet.
Even though it was deeply suspicious of both the theatre and the theatrical profession the church
couldn't ban drama altogether. It was far too popular. So instead it decided to get in on the
act so to speak. From the late 14th century onwards the very end of the period that we've been
looking at mystery plays were being performed in cities throughout England. We don't know for
certain why they were called mystery plays. The most obvious explanation is that their subject
were mysteries in the sense of miracles. There's a problem with this however because there's another
genre of drama known specifically as mystery plays. There's another genre of drama known specifically
as miracle plays. A play based around the intervention of saints and the Blessed Virgin Mary
into the lives of ordinary people. Some scholars believe that the name derives from mysterious
meaning craft because it was craftspeople organised into what were called guilds who actually put
on the plays. Guilds were extremely important in the Middle Ages throughout Europe. They were like
unions today. There was the guild of tanners, the guild of carpenters, the guild of armourers,
the guild of masons, the guild of glove makers and so on. Their main purpose was to secure
decent wages and control of business for their members. If you didn't belong to the guild of
glove makers for instance you couldn't sell gloves. The guild would make sure of that.
Members of guilds associated together in guild halls and paraded through the town on special
occasions. They like to show off and one of the ways of doing that was by putting on plays.
The guilds of the city of York joined forces to put on a cycle of 48 mystery plays which
dramatised stories from the creation down to the last judgment. They performed the plays annually
at the feast of Corpus Christi which was sometime between late May and late June.
It's very unlikely that all 48 would have been performed in a single year but if you'd watch
them over a period of several years you'd get a comprehensive exposure to Christian teaching
and theology. Mystery plays were encouraged by the church because it saw them as a way of
stimulating faith. They were originally performed in Latin but later to make them accessible to
a wider public in English. So the English theatre is in its very earliest manifestation
performing a very egalitarian function. It is serving the whole community and it is involving
a large number of people. As one of the actors you'd be on stage so to speak from dawn till
dusk that's to say from around 4 30 a.m. in the summer months in England until about 9 p.m. around
the time that the plays were being performed in other words except there isn't a stage because
there are no permanent theatres at this state. Instead you'll be performing in a cart rather
like a modern day float decorated with a backdrop that is appropriate to the subject
of the particular scene or play in which you're acting. You'll help wheel the cart to various
locations in the city so that different audiences will be able to catch the performance in their
own neighborhood. Since there's no barrier to separate you from the audience you'll be able to
interact with the audience many of whom you'll know personally. In fact you'll go out of your way
to encourage their participation by directly addressing them and inviting them to respond
to what they're seeing. Although mystery plays were religious in tone and intent they were
anything but solemn affairs. There would have been a lot of good nature banter between actors
and audiences. There'd also be a lot of eating and drinking going on both before and after the
performance and possibly during it as well. To conclude life in the Middle Ages was by no means
unreleavably gloom and doom quite the contrary. There were many ways to distract you from the
dangers the uncertainties the misery and the toil even if you were at the bottom of the socio
economic ladder. Though it has to be said that many of those distractions presented their own
dangers to the participants. We've almost come to the end of our course. We've taken in an enormous
suite of history from Neanderthal times to the late Middle Ages. We've been entertained so to
speak by many people some very like us others less so but all of them human all of them us in a very
profound sense. In the final lecture I'm going to draw some conclusions from the scope of human
activity and the variety of human types whom we've encountered and I'm going to ask what it is
that both links and divides us from the people who have brought us to the place that we are at today.
