Hello, and welcome back to our final lecture on the other side of history.
You have now accompanied me on a vast journey through ancient time and space.
We have employed all the resources of history, archaeology and recent technological advances
in an attempt to recreate the experience of the daily lives of those who have gone before
us and to understand how they looked at the world and how they saw themselves and others
in it.
Starting at the edge of a tenderly furnished neanderthal grave and ending with a joyful
medieval pageant, we have used both science and imagination to put ourselves in the sandals
of many ancient peoples and to try to understand what their lives were like.
Our special interest and concern has been with what we've called the other side of history,
the lives not of the rich and famous, but of the common people.
We've shared a meal with an Egyptian family, gone sightseeing with a friend in Alexandria
and watched a devout Christian being fired up with zeal to recover the Holy Land.
But we've also taken time to experience the lives of history's most disadvantaged.
We've visited a destitute Roman in his tiny rat-infested firetrap of a tenement, joined
a Greek refugee ship on its way to an unknown future and watched a heretic burned at the
stake.
I hope you feel some affinity for all of them.
I know I do.
Someone said, there is no period of history so remote as of the recent past and I tend
to agree.
I hope that when you next gaze down at a mummy or admire the contours of the finely wrought
Greek bars, you will feel connected to the glorious dead as indeed you are connected,
perishably and indissolubly.
Along the way, we've seen how environment has in a variety of ways profoundly shaped
the lives of human beings in all cultures.
And of course it's still continuing to do so today, sometimes with devastating effect.
To go back to the very beginning of our story, it's a sobering thought that if the last
age, Ice Age hadn't ended as it did about 12,000 years ago, the human race might still
be clutching on to life very much as a drowning man clutches a straw following the animals,
living day by day but in a real sense going nowhere.
But the change in climate was the greatest determining factor in why human culture evolved
because nomads can create nothing, they can remember nothing and can only keep moving,
their elderly and their infirm behind.
If it hadn't happened, if the earth hadn't warmed up, there would have been at best only
one side to history because everyone would have been in the same boat, so to speak.
We've seen how the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers provided the mud to enable bricks to
be fashioned and settled life to develop, thanks too to the invention of the plough,
how the annual inundation of the Nile gave rise to history's most stable and enduring
kingdom to date, how the Mediterranean, coupled with the barrenness of the Greek landscape,
enabled a large number of people to seek their livelihood abroad and in so doing, provoked
them to develop the mental flexibility to create one of the most sophisticated cultures
the world has ever seen.
Now a tiny city, state, located around the banks of a river on the Italian peninsula,
came to dominate most of the countries around the Mediterranean and beyond by implementing
a policy that combined brute force with enlightened inclusiveness.
And finally, how a small island just 20 odd miles from the coast of Europe underwent successive
invasions before establishing a centralized authority that made it impregnable for a millennium
and counting.
And now our long journey together is nearly at an end, and I want to ask you a question.
Were those people more like us or more unlike us?
As you enter their lives, did you feel empathy with their struggles, their hopes and disappointments,
their joys and ways of coping?
Did they seem strange and alien to you, or is it a mixture of both?
And could you see yourself as them, as the other?
One thing that may have seemed very alien to you is that all the people we have studied
accepted the subjugation of one person or people to another as both normative and proper,
as the hallmark of an orderly and well regulated society.
We've seen subjugation take many forms.
We've seen one people get the boot in the other, like the Persians getting the boot
in the Eurartians.
The economic exploitation of slaves worked to the death 24-7 in silver mines in Greece.
The unfathomable cruelty of the rich Roman who wanted to toss his slave to the eels for
breaking a crystal goblet.
The Celts being conquered serially by Romans, Anglo-Saxons, Vikings, Normans and yet surviving,
despite all and producing the Brits who then said enough's enough and stopped being conquered.
The strict hierarchy of the Middle Ages where everyone was ground under by someone above
him with the king at the top.
There are many other ways in which ancient lies were very different from ours.
To begin with, all the peoples had a very different sense of the passage of time, not
least because their life expectancy was much lower than ours.
This meant that their bodies aged much more rapidly than ours.
At 63, I still consider myself just about to enter the prime of life, not there yet
but nudging up to it, whereas in the case of most, if not all of the societies we've
looked at, if I'd survived into my 60s, I would have been in a small and highly respected
minority.
Added to which due to the inevitable effects of astigmatism, I'd be groping around the
recording studio, while some of you on the other side of history so to speak might well
be cupping your ear to try to make out what I was saying.
But in another way, time moved very slowly, largely because for the majority the pace
of life was so much slower.
Imagine a world without email, I actually don't think I can.
Think of those farmers in Mesopotamia and Egypt or indeed the farmers in medieval Europe.
Their lives largely dominated by the great seasonal cycle.
It wasn't that they could be idle far from it.
It was a backbreaking life, but a life that passed at a snail's pace, compared with life
today.
Or imagine a being the monk who laboured for months on end, years on end, over the Book
of Kells, his work interrupted only by the call to prayer and then of course violently,
fatally interrupted by the arrival of the Vikings.
Ancient peoples also endured much more pain and discomfort on a daily basis than we do.
Many of the diseases we suffer from today were around then, such as tuberculosis, cancer,
arthritis, but you had to deal with them without painkillers.
Think of being paleolithic and having toothache.
You couldn't even dull the pain with alcohol.
Or think of a Greek or Roman soldier or any of the soldiers we've talked about, undergoing
an amputation without any anaesthetics.
They were also more subject to disability and disfigurement.
It would be extremely distressing to travel back in time and observe any of the populations
we've talked about because of the much higher instance of disability and deformity among
children as well as among adults.
Remember that Greek cemetery in Metapontum, which recorded 56% bone damage skeletons?
If you're seriously deformed, expect to be laughed at.
Think of the exploitation of hunchback dwarves as entertainment at drinking parties.
The ancients had to suffer the loss of children on a depressingly regular basis.
The infant mortality rate of all ancient and medieval cultures is estimated to be at
least 25%.
If you'd been an Egyptian or a Mesopotamian or a Greek, you'd know there was a very good
chance that either your newborn child or your wife or both would die in childbirth.
At the same time, you didn't have the resources to raise a sickly infant.
Imagine being that Spartan mother or father handing over her newborn child for inspection
and learning the child was to be exposed, cast out and to be devoured by animals.
That may be an extreme case, but most of the societies we've talked about had so little
surplus that they had to make decisions of this sort every day about children, about
girls, about the infirm and about the elderly.
There just wasn't enough to go round.
They had to deal with far more filth than we do.
There was dirt everywhere, unless you were extremely wealthy or unless you were Roman,
you probably wouldn't have washed from one month's end to the next.
And you wouldn't have thought twice about the fact that rats would be scavenging the
food that you'd be eating at your next meal.
Their lives were much less secure than ours are.
If you were a neanderthal hunter, you faced dangerous animals on a daily basis.
It was kill or be killed.
Either find prey for your family or become prey yourself.
And above all, you had to keep on the move.
If you were a Mesopotamian farmer, you'd face flood and famine.
All societies, once they reached a level of urbanization, were visited almost indiscriminately
by killer diseases like the plague.
Think of Athens in the late 5th century, or think of the whole of Europe in the 14th
century.
There were other man-made hazards, of course, such as the Inquisition in the Middle Ages,
which might result in you, an innocent woman, being burned at the stake as a witch, just
because someone didn't like the colour of your eyes.
In terms of violent death, however, I might add that the riffraff were in some ways better
off than the royalty.
So if you do decide to travel back in time and someone offers you the job of king, politely
decline.
Manuel Eisner, a professor of criminology, has estimated that kings were 700 times more
likely to experience violent death than their subjects were.
Fourteen of the fifteen kings who ruled Northumbria in the 8th century were either assassinated
or killed in battle.
And remember, there's no life insurance back then.
There are also some things about ancient cultures that you'd find very different from ours,
and yet quite likely you'd be envious of.
For starters, communities tended to be smaller and were certainly, in the majority of cases,
more closely knit.
So think of the Egyptian worker living in a house with his extended family, whose son
will learn the same trade and follow in his footsteps and look after him in old age.
No matter what, because not to do so would be unthinkable.
Or think of the Athenian citizen hanging out in the agrar, socialising, gossiping, talking
politics, talking philosophy, bathing, exercising, doing deals, serving on juries with people
he has known all his life.
Think of the camaraderie among Viking raiders as they set off on one of their truly heroic
voyages, perhaps to Iceland or even Newfoundland.
Think of the medieval nun living and cared for in the same community, from her teens
to her death, and supported in death by her fellow nuns.
Another striking aspect of all ancient societies is that everything that everyone owned was
individually handmade.
Even the thousands of shabties that were placed in the tombs of dead Egyptians and the millions
of coins that were struck by the Roman emperors were individually made, and therefore unique.
Everyone handled each of them, if only to take them out of the mould.
Everything was unique, and almost invariably lovingly produced, from a stone age axe to
a medieval manuscript.
On the other hand, some things we have experienced in these ancient cultures are still very familiar
to us, though we might wish they weren't.
War is as terrible as it always has been, and I can't see it becoming a thing of the
past anytime soon.
From the atrocities committed by the Assyrians in the 8th century BC down to the atrocities
committed in the Darfur region of Sudan in the 21st century AD, we can trace an unbroken
line of ruthless and indiscriminate violence.
When we imagine the life of slaves in the ancient world, we feel compassion for the
enslaved human, and anger at the society that condoned the practice.
But whether you were a Greek slave, a Roman slave, or a medieval peasant, you had to deal
with the fact that slavery was a law of nature, immutable and eternal.
And that said, though we now officially abhor slavery, the institution is still alive and
well in some parts of the world.
For instance, human trafficking, often of young children, for sexual exploitation, and
for forced labour, is the fastest growing criminal activity in the world, and second
only to the drug trade in total revenue.
And then there's the issue of gender inequality.
Gender inequality is far too mild a phrase.
Women in every culture we've studied were denied basic human rights.
They were looked down upon, they were exploited, they were told to stay indoors and mind their
peas and queues or else.
Think of the Greek woman confined to the inner or upper part of the house with no rights
who rarely appeared in public and are never unaccompanied.
Or think of the Roman woman, a subject from birth to death, to her paterfamiliars who
had the right, in theory at least, to kill her if she disobeyed him.
And even if he didn't kill her, he could beat her up with impunity.
For at least two millennia, women have been told that their brains were too feeble, their
wombs too volatile, their blood too cold.
It's only been since the 1970s that society in the West has come to believe that gender
is not a limiting factor.
In many countries of the world however, women are still treated as second class human beings
with as few legal rights and as subject to male domination and control as any Greek or
Roman woman of the ancient world.
But for all the differences between us and our long ago ancestors and for all the likenesses
that we wish we didn't have in common with them, there are also many things that we share
with these ancient people on a deep and humanly meaningful level.
Like us, they loved their children and their friends.
Some scholars have suggested that ancient peoples didn't feel the same tenderness towards
infants that we do because of the high incidence of infant mortality.
But I'm not convinced that the death of a young child would have been any less devastating
than it is today.
I may be wrong, it's just one of those subjects we can't investigate and yet it's central
to our understanding of ancient people.
Like us, they believed in God or the gods.
They may have been pretty frightening gods like the Mesopotamian goddess Ishtar but they
were gods all right and they were sanctified.
Think of the Egyptian priests tending the statue of a deity, spending the whole day
keeping it free of all contamination as if it were in intensive care.
Think of the Greek gods who were so horribly, nastily, despicably human, even subhuman,
morally speaking, always quarreling among themselves.
Think of the Jewish resistance fighter in 70 AD determined to take on the whole might
of Rome to prove that his god was mightier than anything that the Romans could throw
against him.
Think of the pilgrim arriving in Canterbury in the 14th century entering the crypt where
the crushed skull of Thomas Becketley and praying for a miraculous cure in his sacred name.
Like us too, they honoured their dead, even the Neanderthals honoured their dead, placing
them in pits and honouring them with branches and flowers 65,000 years ago.
So too, of course, did the Egyptians. Please don't forget my friend Ginger who believed
that yes, you can take it with you, all of it, and enjoy it in the world to come.
So did the Mycenaeans, deep down in their shaft graves. So too did the Greeks, symbolically
depicting the unbreakable tie between the living and the dead in the handshake that
they depicted on their funerary monuments, a most moving symbol of continuity across
time. So too did the Romans, wearing the masks of their ancestors at funerals, delivering
a funeral oration on their behalf, calling them the greater ones, which of course they
are. And let us not forget it. So too did the Vikings, solemnly interring their dead
in ships for them to travel. Who knows where, because they never told us.
All these people, like us, marked important events with feasting. Travel back in time
and we'd find Neanderthals gathered around a fire after a successful hunt, chewing the
cud so to speak, or Greeks reclining at a symposium, talking the hind legs off a donkey
and pawing the flute girls. Or Romans sitting at a convivian, gorging themselves on those
sows udders stuffed with kidneys. Anglo-Saxon warriors, hearing tales in a mead hall, getting
blind drunk, and no doubt too, getting into bloody fights from time to time, competing
about their prowess or about the beauty of their girlfriends. Like us, they used animals
for companionship, for food, for labor, and for clothing. If you were an Egyptian, you'd
definitely want a kitty or two to chase away the rats and snakes. If you were a Mesopotamian
or a Greek farmer, you'd want an ox to plow with. And of course, if you were a medieval
knight, you'd want a very sturdy horse to support the weight of you and all your armor,
not to mention your horse's armor, and to be able to charge full tilt into battle. A
man had been riding on horseback since around 2000 BC, and it's likely that they were using
horses to ride into battle back then as well. In fact, organized warfare may have been invented
by nomads on horseback. Like us, they enjoyed relaxation from toil and had set occasions
in which they all, as a community, participated. Religious festivals for Egyptians, the theater
and athletic games for Greeks, chariot racing and gladiatorial competitions for the Romans,
and pageants and mystery plays for those in the Middle Ages. And there are many artifacts
that reach us from ages past with a shock of instant recognition and genuine pleasure.
We find toys and games from the very earliest cultures that remind us of the children in
our own culture and of the child in each of us. From Egyptian graves, we have rattles
and tops and board games from Greek graves, miniature carts, models of art and art, and
horses on wheels, spinning tops, and perhaps most beloved of all, dolls with movable arms
and legs. From the island of Lewis, off the coast of Scotland, a 12th century chess set.
We find artifacts that show that the creative impulse and the love of beauty have been alive
and well from earliest times. We see that in cave paintings of the animals that were
objects of fascination to cave artists. We see that in Egyptian bling, the brightly
colored but essentially cheap jewellery that every Egyptian gal had to possess. Or in the
frescoes at Akratiri that depict the natural landscape of Santorini in all its ravishing
beauty. In the extraordinarily delicate lines of Greek pottery, which though a miniaturist
art achieves true monumentality, and not least in those vases which stood as grave markers.
Or in the subtle shading of Roman mosaics and in the semi-naturalistic, semi-abstract
decoration found in Celtic jewellery. And ancient peoples like us, delineated,
in music. Bone flutes are among the earliest man-made objects to have survived, the earliest
being dated 35,000 years ago. Music, as I've noted before, has not featured prominently
in our course, but only because very little of it has survived until the Middle Ages.
But it was there constantly, accompanying the rituals of daily life, providing motivation
to accomplish tasks, offering an outlet for the expression of both grief and joy, helping
to promote group identity, and last, but by no means least, providing pleasure. And it
was doing so at the beginning of the human story. When I was preparing for this course
I visited the Ashmalian Museum in Oxford, and there were the members of a self-styled
bronze age band belting out what they believed to be bronze age music, something on the lines
of what we call heavy metal. And talking of music, one of my very favourite
artefacts is a marble figure of a harp player, dated about 2800 BC. It's an example of
Cycladic art. Cycladic culture takes its name from the islands we call the Cyclades in
the Aegean Sea. They're called the Cyclades because they circled the Holy Island of Delos,
the island where the god Apollo, god of music, and his twin sister Artemis were born. The
island of Santorini, which as we've seen, experienced a volcanic eruption, sometime
between 1650 and 1500. That's in the Cyclades. My figure is seated with a harp between his
arms. His right thumb is raised. He's just struck a note, and he's listening with upturned
face. He's in ecstasy. He's telling us that no matter what your problems might be, whatever
the uncertainties in your life, whatever the traumas that you have had to face or will face,
you can still escape to another world, a world of beauty, serenity, and yes, of joy.
For me, the harp player is a symbol of survival in more ways than one. He's survived whatever
tragedies may have beset him, his survival to tell his tale or rather to sing his song.
And if we listen carefully, if we attend, we will hear him. My harp player, he's mine,
yes, but he's yours too, no less, is in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. And
it is at this point that I'd like to pay a public debt of gratitude. I've leaned heavily
on museums and on the people who work in them in preparing this course. One of my proudest
moments was when a museum attendant at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York recognized
me from the previous course I'd recorded for the great courses. I'd like to acknowledge
the immense inspiration that I've derived from museums, beginning with my first encounter
with the naturally mummified ginger 50 or more years ago. Thanks, Ginger, old son. I
wouldn't have become a historian without your constant friendship, support, and inspiration
over the years. This has not just been a course about the daily life of the peoples we have
encountered, even though the rhythms of daily life have been a recurrent and insistent theme
throughout. It's also been about the cultural construction of their minds, about how they
thought and why they thought the way they do. It's been about the impact of historical
change, often violent change, upon the structures of daily life. It's been about our enormous
debt to those who led lives that were, for the most part, immeasurably more uncomfortable,
and more dangerous than ours are. We wouldn't be here without them. It's been about the
courage, the resilience, and persistence of the human spirit in difficult circumstances
and against extraordinary odds. And it's been about shining the spotlight on those whose
lives have been unsung and unrecorded. At the end of Plato's Symposium, Socrates
speculates upon what we have to look forward to after death. He doesn't come up with a
definitive answer. He says that death is either nothingness or conversations with people like
Homer and Hesiod. I wouldn't mind that. But I just as soon converse with ordinary people,
the people we've been talking about in this course. I'd like not just to talk about them,
but to talk to them, my ancestors and yours, the greater ones, greater, not because of
their status on earth, but greater because they've gone before us. There's a humanistic
value in standing back, in synthesizing their insights and discoveries, and in taking stock
of the whole, or of at least as much of the whole as is humanly graspable, and doing so
by blinding hindsight as much as is humanly possible. Incidentally, on the dangers of assuming
that hindsight can teach you everything, I'd like to quote the Chinese politician,
Chu Enlai, first president of the People's Republic of China, who when he was asked what
was his view of the historical effect of the French Revolution on Western civilization,
after giving it some thought, replied, it's too early to say. And there's a deeply humanistic
value too in exercising our imaginations to think ourselves into the hearts, the heads,
the minds, the bodies, and yes, the sandals of those who blaze the trail for us and helped
fashion both our world and our minds. Wherever we go, and however far back we look, we find
everyday people struggling to make sense of their world, struggling to bring beauty into
their lives, struggling to make a better world, both for their children and for their children's
children. That's to say, for us. I'm not ready to let you go, but I know I must. It's been
an immense privilege to stand before you for these 48 lectures and accompany you on what
I believe is as thrilling a journey through time as any imaginable, a journey that has
taught us something of the range of possibilities of what it has meant and what it means to
be human. As William Faulkner put it, the past is never past, it's not even dead. Thank
you for sharing the journey with me.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
