So today with us is Wolfgang Smith.
He has majors in physics, mathematics, and philosophy.
He contributed a theoretical solution
to the reentry problem for spaceflight
during his work as an aerodynamicist.
He has a doctorate in mathematics
and pursued a career as a mathematician
until his retirement in 1992.
He devoted himself to the publication of books,
mission to correct the fallacies of contemporary
scientific belief, by the way, of insights derived
from the perennial wisdom of mankind.
These works focus primarily on foundational problems
in quantum theory and the problems of visual perception.
Welcome, Wolfgang.
Well, thank you.
Glad to be here.
Very, very glad you're here.
Very excited.
With us also today is Brian Murphy.
Now, Brian, could you please introduce yourself
while you're here?
Hi, Jack.
Thank you and hello to your audience.
I'll make my comments brief, and then
I'll turn it back to you and Wolfgang,
because that's really where the money is in this conversation.
And I came to know Wolfgang after seeing the documentary
about him called The End of Quantum Reality.
And after that, I ordered one of his books.
In that case, it was Science and Myth
with a response to Stephen Hawking's The Grand Design.
And after reading that book, I reached out
to the producer of the documentary on Facebook.
And I asked him if he had thought about creating
an educational initiative in the foundation.
And that led to a conversation and introduction
to Wolfgang and a friendship that has developed
over the past three years.
So we're now developing educational outreach
and hopefully a lecture series under the banner
of Project Scola.
And we have a number of prominent and highly skilled
and educated scholars from around the world who
are committed to this endeavor.
And so I have to say, when I read that book,
and I mean in the first chapter of that book,
the entire edifice of the worldview
that I had imbibed over the many years
just sort of melted into oblivion.
And I think we're all familiar with that worldview.
It's the one that purports to be scientific.
It generally comes from PhDs who tell us
we're sums of parts or composed of atoms or particles
speeding through space and time to no purpose.
And some might even say we have no free will
or that our actions and decisions
are determined in advance by these forces of physics.
And so, but I'm like one of your audience members.
I'm a lay person.
I don't have a PhD.
I'm not a physicist.
But I'm very interested in this topic
because I think it goes to the very heart of reality.
It goes to the very heart of what it means to be human.
And so in Wolfgang's latest book,
Physics, A Science and Quest of Ontology,
which you're gonna talk to him about,
Wolfgang really offers a new cosmology,
which is really an ancient cosmology.
And I think it'll really open people's eyes
to things they haven't heard before
or maybe haven't heard in decades.
So the bottom line is what I want your audience to know
is that Wolfgang Smith is not just another guy
with some interesting ideas among many.
No, I really feel there's no one like Wolfgang Smith.
And he has resolved the quantum reality problem,
the measurement problem.
And what he shows with amazing simplicity
is that our world is full of irreducible holes
of beings imbued with qualities
that transcend the world of physics.
And so like Plato's analogy of the cave,
he invites his readers and he invites listeners
to make that ascent out of the cave.
So I would invite you to listen to this man
and become a member of his foundation,
the Philosophia Initiative.
And with that, I'll turn it back to you too.
Thank you.
That was a great introduction.
Thank you.
Probably much better than I would have done.
Now, as I said just before we were in life,
Wolfgang kind of flew under the radar for me.
It kind of surprised me.
I got an email from his publicist and I had to check him out.
And they sent me a book.
This is Physics Assigned in Quest of Nontology.
And it was actually much more interesting
than I initially expected, Wolfgang.
You have a beautiful way of writing, honestly.
But I'm not bad.
But you also take no prisoners.
And I kind of like that.
Let me give you one example here.
And you said, I came upon the words,
there is no way to convince an expert that he or she has
done nonsense for 30 years.
I realized instantly that this person has something to say.
When I read that, I instantly realized
that Wolfgang has something to say to.
So it was kind of tongue-in-cheek, but I like it.
Well, the people who are listening right now
are from the idealist space, metaphysical idealism.
So we're already not really convinced of scientism.
But it doesn't mean that we have to talk about idealism.
But there's this little thing about,
I haven't read, I haven't come across this in this book.
So before we start, I'm actually kind of curious.
Just what are your thoughts on just consciousness?
I haven't seen the word in this book.
Maybe if you wrote about it, maybe you haven't.
But physicists have a lot to say about consciousness.
And idealists have a lot to say about consciousness.
But I haven't heard Wolfgang say anything about consciousness.
Is there anything you'd like to personally
or professionally say about that topic?
Well, I think the topic of consciousness
is obviously very central, very major.
And what I have to say about it, I think,
can best be described as being the very opposite of what
is nowadays involved regarding the subject of consciousness.
Because I am persuaded that instead of coming somehow
up from the bottom by some process of evolution,
consciousness is ultimately, in the final count,
what used to be called a Norman day.
It is actually rooted in divinity itself.
And by way of explication, let me mention
that the oldest tradition, intellectual tradition
in the world unquestionably is a Vedic.
And in the Vedic tradition, consciousness
is indeed a Norman day.
And it is part of the Sanskrit word satchitananda.
So satchitananda, these are three words put into one.
Sat means being.
Chit means consciousness.
And ananda means bliss.
So being consciousness and bliss are, so to speak,
the three aspects or faces, if you will,
of the divinity, the very, very first principle.
And I honestly believe that there is no other way
of really understanding consciousness.
It's not an epiphenomenon.
It has nothing whatsoever to do with neurons.
And in fact, it is rooted in the very, very first principle
of all, which is God.
So I think these remarks may suffice
to show that my thinking is really very far removed
from the contemporary, because the contemporary thinking
is characterized by the fact that almost instinctively,
contemporary Western man wants to understand everything
from the bottom, which he conceives more or less
in terms of quantum mechanics.
And this is, to me, the epitome of error.
And in fact, I would justify this claim
by pointing out that the contemporary metaphysics is
really nothing new, but it is a revival
of the philosophy of Democritus, who famously
said the Golger believed in qualities, color,
the sweet and the bitter.
But in reality, there is only atoms and the void.
So this is basically not only one
of the oldest philosophical positions of mankind,
but it has been revived in the 17th century,
and it has become our modern cradle.
And let me mention that very soon after Democritus
propounded his theory concerning atoms and the void,
Plato attacked it, and I believe rigorously disqualified
this position once and for all.
And so for 2,000 years thereafter,
the well-informed regarded this atomistic metaphysics
as a heresy.
And so what happened in the 17th century
under the aegis of people like Descartes and Galileo,
that ancient heresy was revived and became
the foundation of what we nowadays call the Enlightenment.
So this is, so to speak, the historical overview of where
we find ourselves today.
And needless to say, I have been an opponent
of the current Weltanschauung since the age of 14, really.
Really, what happened when you were 14?
That made that happen?
Well, I think the decisive event was that somehow or other,
I came across a very important book,
a book by Alfred North Whitehead entitled
Science in the Modern World.
I read this book with great interest.
I don't think I understood that much because I was very young.
But I understood enough to be fascinated and, in a sense,
to be devoted to these questions for the rest of my life.
So Whitehead, as it were, awakened my philosophical interest
and instincts, if you will, instinctively
when I read about the fallacy of misplaced concreteness
and these things, I realized that this must be true.
And so this started me on a career which
put me in the position of the outsider
from the very beginning.
I always felt myself as an outsider
in the contemporary Western culture.
And the reason was that I felt myself as an insider
when it comes to the ancient philosophies, primarily
Platonism.
So in Platonism, I felt that I was an insider.
Not that I understood it that well,
but instinctively I was drawn to it.
And something within me assured me
that this must be the truth.
And incidentally, Platonism doesn't stand alone.
It is inherently the same as the Vedic tradition.
There are certain differences.
But in essence, it is the same doctrine.
And as I said, the contemporary Weltanschauung,
which is regards particles of some kind or another
as a very basis from which everything else evolves,
that Weltanschauung is really nothing new at all.
As I said, it goes back to the Democritus.
And you might say it is one of the oldest heresies
in the history of human thought.
You're not a fan of atomistic thinking.
That's certainly what I got it from reading your book.
And you even go as far as to say that there are no,
that particles do not exist.
Yes, when you really pursue the Platonist metaphysics
and apply it to the contemporary panorama of physics
with its division between classical physics and quantum
physics, you find, and this came to me as an amazement,
you find that everything falls into place.
And you can, in fact, understand this division
between classical physics and quantum physics
in a brand new way, which finally makes sense.
I really like you to go deeper into that,
or at least explain your solution to this problem.
So if you can briefly state the problem,
and then your solution.
Yes, let me just say by way of introduction
that the Platonist metaphysics is, in a sense,
the diametric opposite of what contemporary intellectuals
believe, because contemporary intellectuals
believe that it all begins with atoms.
Nowadays, this is conceived evidently in quantum mechanical terms,
but metaphysically speaking, it's just atoms and the void,
very much as the democratus conceived of it.
It's the beginning of the fifth century BC.
So in a sense, you can say there's nothing new under the sun,
because stripped of its technical aspects,
the contemporary worldview is basically
democratus all over again.
And it is as much a heresy today as it was in the early days
of democratus.
In other words, it is simply false to say
that everything arises from particles.
There's no evidence to that effect.
People may think so, but if you dig into it a little bit more
deeply, you find that all these purported scenarios really
prove to be baseless.
And if you go into it with any kind of mathematical depths,
you find quickly enough that this contemporary scenario, which
tries to reduce everything to aggregates of particles,
actually proves to be impossible.
And in fact, it may interest many people
to know that starting in the year 1998,
this philosophy, this Belt and Schoen,
has really been disproved.
It turns out to be mathematically impossible.
And it is very simple.
I think I can explain that in a few words,
comprehensible to the non-specialists.
If you start out with particles, then you need to talk about evolution.
You need to introduce this term, because somehow these particles
have to give rise to all that there is,
beginning with the planetary system and the simplest organic structures.
So everything has to arise by way of quote unquote evolution.
This is the given, because obviously we live not in a world of particles,
but in a world of something which may conceivably reduce
an aggregate of particles, but it certainly is not what appears to us.
So what I'm trying to say is that if you base yourself on an ontology
of particles, then evolution is an absolute necessity
to go from these particles to the world which we inhabit.
Because the world which we inhabit is more than some of its parts.
It's also one of the things you seem to keep pressing on in this book of yours,
that there is an irreducible hole that you cannot take apart,
you cannot atomize it, and this is also one of the things you stress.
Yes, yes, I do stress this, but the point, Jack, is that
according to the contemporary scientific mindset,
everything does reduce to a sum of parts.
This is what our Weltanschauung insists upon.
Physics by its very modus operandi assumes this much.
The only reason physics can understand an object, whatever it may be,
is that object is a sum of parts, because that's how physics operates.
That's where differential equations come into the picture.
So our contemporary science is predicated upon this assumption
that the world consists of sums of parts.
And now I wanted to point out that it turns out,
and incidentally that's another way of introducing the idea of evolution.
It's the same thing.
If you start with particles, then the world and everything in it
is a result of evolution.
These parts come together to form holes,
and so you get ever more complicated aggregates of particles.
And this is the explanation of the world in which we find ourselves.
But it turns out that this basic premise is untenable.
And that is a direct consequence
over a rigorous mathematical theorem
proved in the year 1998 by an American mathematician named William Demsky.
And what Demsky proved is really very, very simple,
although the proof is not very simple, but the idea is very simple.
Demsky proved that if you have something sufficiently complicated,
then it becomes mathematically impossible to suppose
that this entity came about by chance.
If you have some stochastic random process like tossing a coin,
the likelihood that this will somehow spell out all the volumes
in the Library of Congress in their chronological order
is so small that it is rigorously impossible.
And this is what Demsky proved in this so-called intelligent design theorem,
which was published in a book in Cambridge University Press in 1998.
So what the theorem of Demsky affirms is that
a causality operating in time, which is a causality of physics,
cannot produce what is called complex specified information.
And with this causality, you specifically refer to horizontal causation.
Yes, so horizontal causation.
So when I saw this term for the first time, or this vertical causation,
and I've never heard of it before, immediately I thought,
okay, so what does Wolfgang mean?
Because by that point I had not read your book,
and I can imagine you have on the one hand a cause,
which leads to an effect, and that effect can be another cause.
And we imagine this, at least in the Western world,
because we do not have circular time in our Western thinking.
We have a linear time going,
and it usually is imagined from the left to the right.
So that seems to me the horizontal causation,
but you introduce an idea which is vertical causation,
which might explain some instant annuity.
Sorry, but I just wanted to...
You're absolutely right.
What Demsky's theorem affirms, to put it in my language,
is that horizontal causation,
the causation upon which physics is based,
cannot produce complex specified information.
And since even the simplest forms of life, an amoeba,
as it were, embodies huge quantities
of complex specified information,
it follows from Demsky's theorem that a natural process,
a process that physics can understand,
could not have formed that organic organism, that amoeba.
So the point that I'm making is that, actually,
with Demsky's theorem, evolution, as we normally conceive of it,
has become mathematically impossible.
And the fact that this basic discovery is very much suppressed,
this is not what you will learn at any reputable university.
There are no courses in Harvard or Princeton
that will tell you these things.
It shows that when it comes to Weltanschauung,
the matter is not based on pure simple logic.
I mean, we are human.
Ideology comes into play.
So as a general statement of what I discovered rather early in life,
is that our so-called scientific Weltanschauung,
which entails the idea, for example, of evolution and life
springing from the mental particles, ultimately,
that this is not a scientific fact.
There's no proof of this.
On the contrary, I've just said there are mathematical theorems
that disprove that possibility.
But the point is that our Weltanschauung, which claims to be scientific,
and if you will, objective is, in fact, ideology-driven.
I agree.
Yeah, Brian, go ahead.
I just wanted to add something.
Wolfgang uses the word Weltanschauung, which
is a German word that just means world view
or how one looks out upon the world.
But just going back to your question, Jack,
if I could reintroduce, you had the question
about the Wolfgang's resolution to the quantum enigma.
And Wolfgang, before you came across Dempke's theorem in 1998,
you wrote a book called The Quantum Enigma, Finding
the Hidden Key, in which you pick up on Heisenberg's description
of what quantum reality is.
And this is what leads you down the path to your resolution.
So maybe you could talk about where you picked up from Heisenberg
and how you came to this resolution.
All right.
Quantum theory was discovered in the early decades
of the 20th century.
And very soon after its discovery,
a problem confronted the physicists, which
they were unable to resolve.
And that is the following.
Quantum theory describes a physical system
by a so-called wave function.
And in that wave function description,
the physical systems behave in a very weird way.
Particles, for example, multilocate.
And you are in a realm totally different from the world
as we know it in our daily life.
But when you, for example, set up an experiment
to measure the position of this, say, multi-locating particle,
you find that at the instant of measurement,
the particle ceases to multi-locate
and actually presents itself at some particular location
in space.
And this, of course, is very puzzling.
How does this miracle arise?
That in an instant, a system completely changes
and becomes something that it was not before.
This is called the measurement problem.
And I became very interested in that problem.
It was about 1995, the abouts.
And I finally became convinced that I
see the one and only way to resolve it.
And I wrote a book to that effect on that subject
called the quantum enigma, where I start from the ground up
and develop the idea, ideas, actually two of them,
that are needed to resolve this problem.
And there are two ideas that you need.
The first idea is the fact that the perceptible world, which
is really the world in which we find ourselves,
happens not to be a quantum world.
It happens not to be even just the physical world.
So the world as a physicist conceives of it
is not the full world.
There's more.
And if there were not more, for example,
there could be no perception, there could be no life.
So I made the basic ontological distinction
between a corporeal entity and the physical entity.
Now a corporeal entity is a kind of entity
which we encounter in our normal daily life.
It's something that we perceive as our senses
and something that has a reality, transcending what
the physicist can describe in abstract mathematical terms.
Now every corporeal object X has associated with it
a physical object, call it Sx.
In other words, the physical object
that classical physics deals with are corporeal objects
as conceived by the physicist.
So there's a difference between the corporeal object
X and the object Sx, which is the physicist's conception
of a corporeal object.
I would say that the corporeal object will be not
reducible to each part.
And the physical object S, or at least an abstract object,
will be decomposable into parts the atomistic way.
Yes, you're absolutely right.
Only at this point in the quantum enigma,
I had not yet introduced this idea of irreducible wholeness.
I simply distinguished the object
that we know in daily life through our normal senses
from the corresponding physical object,
which is reduced.
It is limited by the physicist's assumptions.
So you have to distinguish these two objects.
They're not the same.
So there's a distinction between a corporeal object X
and the physicist's concept of that, which
I call the corresponding physical object.
But does its physical object actually exist,
or is it just an abstraction?
The abstraction of the corporeal objects.
It does exist.
I mean, the physicist does not deal with non-entities.
Yes, it has an existence.
The important thing is that you need
to distinguish between the two.
They're not the same thing.
And as long as you don't see that distinction,
you will not be able to solve the measuring problem.
And this is why this measuring problem has been kicked
around by top scientists, top physicists,
for close to 100 years now.
And actually, it has not been solved by these considerations.
Because in fact, it cannot be solved on that basis.
And the reason it cannot be solved on that basis
is that the crux of the matter is this distinction
between the corporeal entity X and the associated physical
entity Sx.
They're not the same.
The corporeal is more.
And it is this more that is the decisive factor
in the measurement problem.
And so I think physicists are still
thinking of the measurement problem.
The fact is that they cannot solve it
on the basis of physics.
So what I showed in this 1995 book, The Quantum Enigma,
is that in a sense, physics is limited.
It doesn't deal with everything.
And it is, in fact, so limited that it
is incapable of recognizing its own limitation.
The fact that the physicist's world is not the entire world,
that's a basic fact.
And unless you understand the basic facts,
you will not be able to correctly understand anything.
But this basic fact is invisible to physics,
by definition, if you will.
Could you say, I was going to ask Wolfgang,
could you say that Sx exists insofar as it participates in X
or partakes of X?
Yes, it derives its being from X.
And this is a major factor.
But this being that the physical object derives
from the corporeal is something entirely invisible
to the physicist.
Because in fact, being as such is invisible to the physicist,
because being is not a sum of parts.
And all the physicists can ever see is sums of parts.
That's why differential equations come into play,
because when you deal with things that do reduce the sum of parts,
these things then are amenable to study
by means of differential equations.
I used to always have trouble with the concept of something
being more than the sum of its parts,
until I heard an example by John Feveki.
He's, I think, a cognitive scientist, not sure.
And he gave the example of the Necker cube,
the two-dimensional drawing of a three-dimensional cube
in a wire frame.
And you can flip that inside and outside.
And he said, well, you have this two-dimensional drawing,
but the three-dimensional projection
you have in your head, that's the thing that is more
than the sum of its parts.
So only until then I kind of understood
what it really meant for something
to be more than the sum of its parts.
It's not something emergent, or there's
something that is not, you can't reduce the three-dimensional
image in your head to the lines on the paper.
And there has to be something more.
Anyway, I just wanted to add that.
Well, this example that John Feveki gave you
is very, very interesting and very fascinating.
But let me point out that it is not necessary to go to something
as high-falutely as this example,
because take, for example, any quality, say, color,
the color red.
The color red, obviously, is not a sum of parts
because it doesn't even have parts.
That's a good one.
It was Aristotle, really, who recognized
the difference between quantities and qualities.
And the point is that qualities are characterized
by the fact that they have no parts.
So the upshot is that physics and our physical sciences deal
with a very limited aspect of reality.
And in fact, this is where its power comes from.
I always like to quote Goethe, who has said so many wise things.
And one of them is, quote, you understand it,
in the Beschränkung zeigt sich der Meister.
In limitation, the master shows himself.
So the point is that physics gains its power
through the enormity of its limitation.
And what is that limitation?
The limitation is that it will concentrate entirely
upon quantities.
The physicist has no eye for qualities.
He sees no color.
He sees nothing but quantities.
And therefore, he sees nothing but sums of parts.
This is an enormous limitation.
And it is the enormity of this limitation
that gives physics its equally enormous power.
So this, if I had any influence upon universities, which I don't,
this is what I would like to convey to the students,
because it makes for wisdom.
It makes for real understanding.
Our scientific Weltanschauung is bought at a cost.
We pay something to get that Weltanschauung.
And what we pay, in other words, what we lose in the process,
is the qualitative side of the world,
which we completely leave out of account
in our physical sciences.
So actually, if you want to be very precise, very rigorous,
you could say that there is no contemporary scientific Weltanschauung
for the simple reason that our sciences are based upon physics.
And the physical world cannot really be looked upon at all.
The only way you can deal with it is through mathematical equations.
And so in order to make a Weltanschauung out of the findings of physics,
we have to add something to that,
which cannot in any way be based upon physics.
So in a sense, our contemporary Weltanschauung is a fake.
It is a fallacy.
It's a contradiction in terms,
because if the world were really what the physicist takes it to be,
that does not give rise to Weltanschauung.
This is nothing that you can tell the non-physicist,
aha, that's what the world is like,
because all that remains basically are equations.
And the non-specialist doesn't understand these equations,
nor does it make any sense to say that in reality,
the world reduces to equations.
This is really nonsense.
And this is why I like the saying of Goethe so much,
because this Goethe's dictum really tells us why the physicist's Weltanschauung
is not a Weltanschauung at all,
unless he added something, an ingredient which is not part of physics,
he couldn't speak to the non-physicist.
Can I quote you from your book?
I just remind me of something you wrote.
Please.
Please.
You said that people today model along and don't even know anymore what is model
and what is fact, and it's something that I find is really a good quote.
It made me chuckle a bit.
I had the same thing when I was younger.
It almost feels like the scientific worldview,
which isn't actually a worldview,
but it pretends to be one, at least.
But it doesn't tell you it is.
I had to find out later that there is a distinction between modeling the world
or describing the world and the world in itself,
and the model of the world is not the same thing as the world.
And I can understand why people get confused, let's say,
and we need people like Wolfgang and other people
to reintroduce this classical idea, actually.
We seem to have forgotten that.
So I just wanted to add that.
Yes, as a result of this dominance of physical science in our time,
our intellectuals have become very, very confused.
And in these days of mass communication,
these ideas remain not only amongst the intellectuals.
It pervades our civilization.
I think nowadays, even in grade school,
we would give more information about atoms and particles and so on.
So we are very, very confused people, seriously confused.
And it, of course, affects our entire civilization profoundly.
I mean, for example, the arts are profoundly affected
by this so-called scientific Weltanschauung,
which is, I have just tried to explain, is really a fake.
It is really a fake.
But these things are not easy to understand intellectually.
It requires certain qualifications, which are apparently quite rare.
And so the confusion remains and, in fact, perpetuates itself.
And it's getting worse and worse.
We are very, very confused people.
And it is affecting our culture as a whole.
And to the extent that one actually sees what is going on,
one cannot but be very worried.
Wolfgang, you introduced a concept as a correlation to horizontal causation,
it's vertical causation.
And you picked up on where Heisenberg said something about quantum particles,
that they're somewhere between being and non-being.
It has such a reminiscent of Aristotelian potentiae.
And this is something you picked up on.
And you said something interesting, you're quoted in your documentary,
saying that no one on either side of the Copenhagen debate
seemed to have realized that it was the role of quantum particles
not to bestow, but to receive being.
And so this plays into your idea of vertical causation,
which Jack had alluded to earlier.
Yeah. I want to respond to what you have just said, Brian,
because it touches upon something very, very major.
Heisenberg was a very, very unusual physicist.
He was different from all the other physicists by the fact that he was the son of a classicist.
His father was a classicist and Heisenberg himself was very
worth in, say, the philosophy of Plato, the philosophy of Aristotle.
He had a high degree of insight into these ancient doctrines.
And that set him off from the rest of the physicists.
And he was really alone among physicists to recognize that
these so-called quantum particles really had no being.
Physicists by and large regarded these particles as the ultimate building blocks of the world
when, in fact, Heisenberg, due to his knowledge of ancient philosophy,
recognized that they could not be that because, in fact, they lack being.
You cannot build a world out of things which don't exist, which don't have being.
So on the other hand, Heisenberg never managed to
take these recognitions all the way and build what might be called a complete
philosophy of physics, which puts everything in its right place.
He never managed to do that, but he did recognize the fact that quantum particles
are potentie, that means they don't really exist, but they are
material in relation to form.
So I picked up, as it were, on this note and I recognized
very clearly that this is what the measurement problem is all about.
When you measure a quantum system, you give being to some entities which previously were mere
potency, and if a measuring instrument were itself a quantum system, you obviously couldn't do that.
Somewhere along the line, you need to bring into play some entities which have being
so that they can then affect the transition from the potency of a quantum particle
to the actuality of a measurement of a measured system.
So I realized that there is an ontological difference between an ordinary corporeal entity,
the kind of entities that we encounter in our conscious life, a chair, a table,
or anything that you can pick up, anything that you can actually perceive.
So these are corporeal entities and they are ontologically different from a mere quantum system,
because they do have, being a quantum system does not.
So based upon this very, very simple recognition, I found a very, very simple solution
to the so-called measurement problem. The point is, in order to measure a quantum system,
you need, which is a mere potency, a mere potency, you need something that is more than a potency
and these kind of entities are called corporeal entities. The chair I'm sitting on is corporeal,
otherwise I couldn't sit on it. So the first new idea that I introduced and that needs to be
introduced, if you want to solve the measurement problem, is the distinction between a corporeal
entity and the associated physical entity, so the corporeal entity is more and this more
is essential in the act of measurement. But that was not enough in order to
to complete the argument, you need to recognize that if measurement is a transition from potency
to act, you need a corresponding causality, because the transition from potency to act
cannot take place in time, it can only be instantaneous, because there's nothing in between
the potency and act. So it is an instantaneous effect. Now physics deals with a causality,
which I call horizontal causality, which itself takes place in time. That's why you can write a
differential equation, because this is a causality which is really a process in time. But the causality
that you need in order to measure a quantum system cannot be a causality that takes place in time,
because as I said, it has to be instantaneous. And so this led to the discovery, if you will, of
so-called vertical causation. Vertical causation is an entirely different kind of causation,
and it is characterized by the fact that it takes place instantaneously.
And so these are the two ontological ideas that I introduced in 1995,
in connection with the measurement problem. And let me just point out that it was very
interesting that three years later, exactly, William Demsky wrote his book on intelligent design,
in which he proved that theorem, which I have just mentioned, to the effect that it takes
vertical causality to effect, to produce complex specified information. So I guess the time for
the discovery of vertical causality had come, because two independent books demonstrated
the need for that kind of causality. Where does that causality come from, this vertical causality?
Excuse me, Jack. Where does this vertical causality come from?
Ah, well, that is a wonderful question, because actually it turns out that you can have vertical
causality only in a Platonist cosmos. You need a cosmos as Plato himself conceived of it,
because the Platonist cosmos is inherently tripartite. It consists of three levels, if you will,
in which the first level, the highest level, what Plato called the intelligible,
is not subject to either space or time. And it is this intelligible, I call it,
eternal level from which vertical causation emanates.
Can you please help me with the word eternal? My spellchecker keeps telling me this word doesn't
exist, and I was just curious. I've never come across it. I think it's a beautiful word, but it's it.
Well, the word goes back to the Christian middle ages, where
the scholastic philosophers recognized that there is a level in the cosmos
beyond space and time. So then your question is, what is it that distinguishes this kind of eternity
from what theologians want to call eternity? And the answer was given by Thomas Aquinas,
who said that the eternal realm is not subject to time, but time can be added onto it.
These are the words. That means, even though eternity has no time,
it is really part of a cosmos in which time does exist. So it's a very sharp distinction,
but very, very essential from a metaphysical point of view, because the eternity of the
highest cosmic sphere is not to be equated to the eternity that, properly speaking, belongs to
God himself, who is the creator of the world. So the eternity of God is more than the eternity
of the highest cosmic sphere. Right, and this is where the this eternity is, where the vertical
causation comes from. Exactly. The vertical causation in so far as it does not happen in time,
it therefore comes from the eternal plane. It emanates, let's say. It doesn't emerge.
Emanates, is there any metaphor we can use for this?
There really is not, because here we are dealing with the deepest metaphysical problems,
which being basic cannot be further reduced, so to speak. Fair enough.
So after writing this book on the quantum enigma, I began to realize that the key
to all these metaphysical questions relating to the nature of physics and the physical world
need to be resolved on a Platonist basis. I've always instinctively been a Platonist,
but it was after this rather intense work I put in on the quantum enigma,
that it became more clear to me than ever before that in order to understand physics,
we need to go back to the Platonist philosophy. This is really the key, this is the right way
of doing it, and let me say that in light of my latest book, where I actually carry out,
if you will, that plan, I am very gratified and in a way amazed to see that if you look at physics
from a rigorous Platonist point of view, everything becomes very, very simple.
And not only does it become very, very simple, but you also at the same time realize
that the actual story is the very opposite of what physicists nowadays believe. It's
the very opposite because basically physicists start with particles and then they want to
from particles step by step build a universe. And it turns out from the Platonist point of view
that I've just alluded to, that the true story is just the other way around. Particles come at
the very end and they even have no being. So the real anthology starts from just the opposite
direction. The true anthology is top down, it is not bottom up.
Interesting. Wolfgang, if I could ask a question, you introduced a reminder that it was reported,
reportedly said or written above the Platonic Academy at Athens, let no one ignorant of geometry
enter here. And I think this informed your concept of the tripartite cosmos and a tripartite man.
And it takes shape of an icon of a circle with a center point. And would it be fair to characterize
this icon reflecting the human person, let's say, or any created entity? Well, in particular,
you introduced the intellect, the idea of the intellect. So you reintroduced a distinction
between the intellect and reason and then the corporeal. The intellect is instantaneous. It's
not constrained by time or space and it's how we perceive things. And this is, you did quite a
bit of research into James J. Gibson's theory of ecological perception which supported this.
And then there's the distinction between the intellectual moving into the rational, which is
discursive thought that takes place in time but requires no space. And then being terminates on
the level of the corporeal, let's say, where the person manifests him or herself in space and time.
And so each person has these three aspects to their nature, the intelligible,
they have access to this where there's no space, no time, they have access to the
reason and the rational discursive thought in time, no space, and the corporeal. So maybe
I know Jack was interested in your research on James J. Gibson and how this ties into that concept.
Well, you raise a very fundamental question. I think the first thing that I should point out is that
it is very enlightening to associate the Platonist doctrine of the three levels of the cosmos
with the bounds of space and time. And incidentally, I don't see this
talked about in the Platonist philosophy.
They must have known it because they were very wise and this is very basic,
but I don't find it written about, say, in the Timaeus or the other relevant dialogues.
The point is this. Platonism distinguishes three levels of the cosmos. The supreme level,
which is beyond time, is called the intelligible, I call it the eternal.
The second level, which the Platonists call the psychic or the vital, I call it the intermediary.
The second level, I say, and this I do not find explicitly in the Platonist dialogues,
the second level is subject to time but not to space. So the intermediary level, which is a psychic,
is subject to time but not to space. And then, of course, as you would expect,
the third or lowest, what we call the corporeal level, is subject to both time and space.
So you have these three levels of the cosmos and you can, if you will, define them in terms of the
two bounds, time and space. There is a level that is subject to neither, there's a level that is
subject to time but not to space, and then there's a level that is subject to both. So this is very
simple. And amazing consequences fall there and so from this way of looking at the matter.
And I think perhaps the one that will interest our listeners the most is the fact that the existence
of a time-only level of the cosmos, the existence of what I call the intermediary plane,
in itself disproves or disqualifies Einstein and relativity. Einstein and relativity, which
it is, were fuses space and time in what is called spacetime. If Einstein were right,
there could be no cosmic realm, subject to time but not to space, because space and time are,
so to speak, two different aspects of a spacetime, which includes both. So one of the obviously
most interesting consequences of this recognition of the Platonist ontology as affirming an intermediary
realm, subject to time alone, one most amazing consequences of this is that it disqualifies
Einstein and relativity at a single scale. So sorry, and sometimes I agree.
Well, that was something I would like to, before I forget, I didn't have many questions, but there
was a paper you mentioned by J. Gibson. I just mentioned it yourself too, and I haven't read
papers simply because I'm not really good at reading papers, but I hope you can summarize the
general idea behind it, because all I understand from it is that we see reality how it is.
That's what I read in your book or in the key points, that we see reality as it is.
What does Gibson mean by that? Well, I'm so glad you brought up the name of James Gibson,
because I really think he is one of the absolutely most important scientists of the 20th century,
because he has single-handedly corrected a major mistake of post-Cartesian science
by rediscovering the fact that in visual perception, what you actually perceive
is not inside the head, it's in the external world itself. We do perceive mountains and trees,
and we do perceive color. So in my language, what we perceive is exactly the corporeal world
as distinguished from the physical. It is an amazing achievement on the part of Gibson
to have actually formulated in rigorous empirical terms a theory of visual perception,
which completely breaks with the so-called retinal image theory, which as we know,
think of perception as a process originating in the retina. These
rods and cones are stimulated by light impinging upon the retina, and so then there are nerve
currents set up into the cortex, and a very, very complicated process ensues in which
involves something on the order of 20 or 21 visual centers in the cortex, and libraries have been
filled with the product of that research. But the fact of the matter is that
when all is said and done, we can just trace the process of seeing, the process of visual perception
to a bunch of visual centers in the cortex, none of which actually
contains that image that we see. And so it turns out that
the so-called retinal image theory of visual perception doesn't really lead to perception.
It leads in a sense to the very opposite in the sense that these different visual centers
take the image apart, and as Sir Francis Crick said famously, we see how the image,
how the brain takes the image apart. We do not yet see how the brain puts the picture back together
again, and the obvious fact is that the brain does not put the picture back together again.
In fact, it can't. And the fact that it can't has come to be known as a so-called binding problem.
The problem is you've got, say, a million neurons in these visual centers of the brain,
and as a result of light striking the retina, these are in various modes of on and off position.
How do you make a picture out of this vast multiplicity of neuronal states?
And in other words, how does the brain put the picture back together again?
And the answer quite obviously is the brain can do no such thing. And so this has become known
in the world of, this has become known as the binding problem. And the fact of the matter is
that the binding problem really has no solution on a neuronal basis. The neurons
take the picture apart, they do not, they cannot put it back together again. And so
at one point, I simply stated the obvious fact that the binding problem cannot be
solved on the corporeal level. In other words, the only way the binding problem can solve,
can be solved, the way it is solved, is that in our integral being, we are not
subject to the condition of space. In our corporeal nature, yes, on that level,
we are subject to the condition of space. And this is where all that neurophysiology takes place.
But the actual binding takes place on the next level up, which is the level of the
intermediary or psychic plane. So the answer to the binding problem is this,
it is resolved not on the corporeal level, but on the psychic.
So if we were purely corporeal creatures, we could not see anything. There could be no perception.
And incidentally, so we have these three levels of the cosmos, the
intelligible, the psychic and the corporeal. And I just want to point out that in days gone by,
every child really knew that the human being himself
consists of three levels. In Latin, it's anima, soul, psyche, mind, and intellect or spiritus.
So corpus anima spiritus, this trichotomy of man, is simply, simply
tells us that man is a microcosm. Man is the cosmos in miniature. So even as the cosmos is
tripartite, the anthropos is also tripartite. And if we were not tripartite, for example,
visual perception would be impossible. And this is what has now baffled
the neurophysiologists. This is the binding problem which no one has solved. And no one
can solve on the corporeal level. The binding problem would be impossible to solve if it were
not for the fact that man is more than a body. Man has not only a body, he has also a soul.
And then there's the third component, above soul there is spiritus. And we need all three,
actually it turns out, excuse me, it turns out that in addition to the intermediary,
the eternal level in man is also needed for ordinary perception, because there could be no
perception of motion. If you think about it deeply, the perception of motion
is possible only because within man there is a level above time itself.
So if we were completely immersed in time, we could not perceive motion.
And this is what Gibson discovered, didn't he, is that perception didn't take place as a series of
points in time, but was required constant motion and was instantaneous. Yes. The point about Gibson
is that he was all empiricists. He was one of the greatest empiricists, I think the world has ever
seen, but he was not a metaphysician. And when you read his papers, he expresses himself
in purely empiricist terms. He won't talk to you about, he doesn't write about
matter and form or a psychic realm subject to time and not to space. This is not the language he
uses. He was an empiricist of absolutely first rank. I'm very happy that he has been recognized and
acknowledged. I think the academic community has honored him and made him a member of the
Academy of Science and so on. They have greatly honored him. And I think they have done so
because they have not recognized how dangerous he is to everything that they stand for.
Because if they would really understand Gibson, they would realize, to quote my friend Alexander
Unziger, they would realize that for 30 years they've been talking nonsense. Because he destroyed
that materialist ontology, which underlies our academic sciences as the assumption that nobody
really wants to talk about. You assume it, it is not talked about. I think this is a good place to
end it here. Well, unless you want to go on. I mean, I don't want to text you too much.
As you know, from reading this latest book of mine, I have still many things, basic things to say,
but I'm happy to end at any point that you, I still have some energy left in me.
If you can go, we'll just go on. I just, I want to be considerate here. Because
then we just will go on a little bit. We'll see how far we can go. The reason I asked for Gibson,
for your explanation of Gibson's argument, because I wasn't necessarily familiar with it,
is we also had on Donald Hoffman, and he's a mathematician, and he said, well, he said the
opposite. But now that I heard your argument, I'm not sure if that's just, I'm not sure if it's
just semantics or not, because his argument was that we almost certainly do not see reality
as it is. But that argument was based on evolution. I'm not sure if you're familiar with Donald Hoffman.
Well, let me tell you quite frankly, that I'm not familiar with most of the contemporary
thinkers who have made a name for themselves, because as you can see from what has already
transpired in our conversation, I stand really on the opposite pole of the contemporary worldview.
I'm a Platonist. I've always been a Platonist. And the older I get, the more deeply I value
Plato. And the more instinctively I look upon our issues from a Platonist point of view. And this
point of view is quite evidently the very opposite of the modern or contemporary way of looking at
things. The contemporary way of looking at things is basically Democratian. From a Platonist point
of view, we're repeating the Democratian heresy. And in a way, priding ourselves on that.
The point being that we are trying to understand
complex things, corporeal things and mental things, except being something
supramental, that too, we're trying to understand everything on the basis of atoms and the void.
In other words, in modern terms, this would be quantum particles. And I think it already emerges
from what we have been talking about this morning, that you do not understand anything ontologically
if you imagine that things reduce the quantum particles. Because in point of fact, quantum
particles have no being. They're not really there. They are near potences. And obviously,
the universe is not a potency, but an actuality. So from my Platonist point of view, contemporary
thought regarding the nature of cosmic reality is upside down. We are standing upside down. We
are trying to understand actuality in terms of potency. And it's a hopeless process.
And so I have read comparatively few contemporary authors. And the only
contemporary authors that I've really read with great interest, like, for example, James Gibson,
is due to the fact that he opposes the contemporary point of view. Gibson interests me so enormously.
Because he says the opposite of most other cognitive psychologists.
Wolfgang, what could you say specifically that Gibson discovered about perception, meaning
what was it about the nature of perception that was so distinct from the retinal image version?
Well, he discovered something that practically no one in the contemporary scientific world
was prepared to believe. Namely, that what we see in visual perception is not inside the head,
it's outside. We actually perceive a mountain or a rose. If the rose is red, we actually perceive
that redness in the rose. This is what, of course, the ancients believed. This was in Plato's day,
everyone would have agreed. But it goes completely contrary to everything that the
Western intelligentsia has believed since the days of René Descartes. And so
it comes as an enormous shock, or should come as an enormous shock to the educated world of our day,
that someone like Gibson has made these discoveries, and in a way which cannot really be refuted.
You introduced René Descartes, and one of the topics that you like to talk about is the notion
of bifurcation, which was a term coined by Alfred North Whitehead to describe Descartes' bifurcated
world between thought and extension. And I have a feeling that that plays a role in, let's say,
Professor Hoffman's conception of perceiving the world as conjecture in our mind as opposed to the
world as it is. Yeah, I'm glad, Brian, that you brought up the idea of bifurcation, because it is
really very, very basic. Descartes introduced it in the 17th century, and it is simply the postulate
that the world, the realm of existing things splits into two categories. There is the first
category is what he calls res extensé, which means extended entities. And these are entities which
exist in space, and they have no other attributes than the fact that they exist in space and time.
Everything that is not a res extensor is what Descartes calls a res cogitans, which means a thing of
the mind. So having split the entire universe into extended entities on one side and mental entities
on the other, he has set the world up, ideally for the mathematical physicists, because it tells
the mathematical physicists that the real world, the world that exists outside and not inside the head,
consists of only extended entities. So this suggested to Sir Isaac Newton and to physicists
really ever after, that the real world is precisely the world as the physicists concede of it.
These are the things that can be described in mathematical terms.
It began in a crude way with mechanisms that are somewhat like a clockwork. And you remember
in the 17th century, in fact, they built these mechanisms. You see them in Venice.
And they built them because they really thought that that's what the real world is like. It's a
world of cogs and wheels interacting mechanically. And so the physicists were delighted because Descartes
left them with an exterior so-called external world of the kind that really is made for
mathematical analysis. It's ideal. The physicist was in his paradise. And however,
it turns out that by reducing the external world to res extensé, making out of it a kind of clockwork
universe, Descartes misrepresented the external world. He oversimplified it. And we have been
paying the price ever since. Now, this Cartesian dichotomy into res extensé and res cogitantes
has become, so to speak, second nature among physicists.
Every physicist learns this bifurcationist outlook very early in life. And then he
learns it so deeply and so naturally that he doesn't recognize it as a postulate.
Most physicists, it turns out, are really incapable of grasping bifurcation as a philosophical
axiom, an assumption which may or may not be true. And so it was Alfred North Whitehead
who coined that term bifurcation. And then he went to all the finest universities in
the UK and in the States, lecturing physicists about this assumption that unwittingly they
have made. And he pointed out to them that it has created an incredible model.
And in the hope of waking them up as it were, but the fact of the matter is that
it's uncertain whether there exists even one famous physicist who is not
instinctively bifurcationist. So bifurcation is then a metaphysical axiom which physicists
almost without exception or perhaps actually without exception believe in. Now, the important
thing is that bifurcation is ultimately untenable. It is not true. It is a metaphysical error.
And in a sense, we know that since the days of Democritus, because in a sense,
Democritus is the first philosopher in history to introduce bifurcation into the
into philosophical discourse. So the upshot of the matter is that physics,
as it is understood in our day, is bound up with this axiom of bifurcation, which it assumes
rigidly. And once you have assumed that axiom, you are committed to a kind of crude materialism,
which cannot possibly be true. It's an error that invalidates your wealth and show.
In fact, Heisenberg spoke about it as well, didn't he? He wrote about it. I had a quote here,
and he wrote, if one follows with great difficulty, which even eminent scientists like
Einstein have an understanding in accepting the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum theory
one can trace the roots of that difficulty to the Cartesian partition. And he goes on to say
that this partition has penetrated deeply into the human mind during the three centuries following
Descartes, and it will take a long time for it to be replaced by a really different attitude
toward the reality problem. That was from Heisenberg, which might come as a surprise to me.
The interesting thing about Heisenberg is that here and there in his writings,
you will find passages like the one that you just read. But I've made a rather thorough study of
Heisenberg because I regard him as among all the physicists, he was the most enlightened
metaphysically far more than anyone else that I can name. But the fact of the matter is that
there are other passages, you can quote in the writings of Werner Heisenberg,
where he is in fact placing himself on a bifurcationist basis. So he was not completely,
he was far more enlightened metaphysically than any other well-known physicist of our time.
And I say this is due to the fact that he was a son of a classicist. Through his father, he came to
know Platonism and philosophy of Aristotle and so forth. But he was not altogether consistent.
And I think if he had
comprehended non-bifurcation more deeply, he would have resolved the
leading problems in the philosophy of physics, which he did not actually resolve.
He gives us clues, occasionally very perceptive clues, but he did not carry through to solve.
For example, he did not give us a solution of the measurement problem.
The so-called Copenhagen rule, which he and Niels Bohr proposed, was a way, gave us a way of doing
physics without getting into trouble. But the reason for the Copenhagen cut is something
that he never articulated explicitly, which he could have based upon the recognition that bifurcation
is false. I have a question from the audience. When I read your book, you seem to have a lot of
quote from Unsikker. Unsikker, I'm not sure how you pronounce it. How do you pronounce it?
Unsikker. Unsikker. Okay. And Ben Moffo asks, what does Dr. Smith think of Unsikker's variable
light speed theory? Well, Unsikker is a great admirer of Albert Einstein. In fact, in his
recent book, just published a short while ago, he goes into the Einsteinian physics in a very
interesting way. And it clearly reveals that he regards Einsteinian physics as the key to a deeper
understanding of the subject. And so on this point, Alexander Unsikker and I are completely on
opposite sides of the issue. I regard Einsteinian physics as fundamentally misconceived.
The reason that this is not universally known or accepted resides in the fact that
Einsteinian physics differs from classical physics, mathematically, by a square root for one minus
v squared over c squared, where b is the velocity of the system of the object that you are speaking
about. And c is the velocity of light. Now, since the speed of light is about 300,000 kilometers per
second, one minus v squared over c squared is so incredibly close to one, unless you get up to speeds
which approach the speed of light, which is very hard to do in an empirical setting.
So on account of this fact, the deviation between Einsteinian physics and non-Einsteinian physics
is so small as to be practically unmeasurable. There is one, what is regarded as an Einsteinian
formula, which is not covered by this observation. And that is a formula E equals mc squared,
called the atom bomb formula. Now, it is true that Einstein derived this formula from his 1905
paper. What is generally unknown, even among physicists, is the fact that the formula E equals
mc squared can also be derived from classical physics. In a word, it has nothing to do with
relativity. And this is one of the reasons why Einsteinian physics has been just about
universally accepted, is because if you regard E for mc squared to be a relativistic formula,
well, that certainly and unfortunately has proved itself to be absolutely correct.
So what I'm saying is that
Einsteinian physics has not really passed the empirical test. People think it has, but
if you actually go into the details, about 50 different experiments that can be listed,
which were designed to test relativistic effects, not one of them really stands up,
understood the name. And the exception, the parent exception, the E equals mc squared formula,
that does stand up on the scrutiny, but it has nothing to do with relativity theory at all.
It can equally well be derived from classical physics. So therefore, I believe that our present
addiction, if you will, to Einsteinian physics is misconceived. And I think the time will come,
perhaps very soon, when this will come to light, and Einstein will be discredited.
Right. But this person was asking about variable light speed, or at least the variable light speed
theory. I'm not acquainted with the theory, but I'm imagining that light can go different speeds,
and that would probably solve some problems.
Yes, I'm not an expert on these things at all. I have done some inquiry into Einsteinian physics,
because for various reasons, this has interested me a lot. And I did, as I have just indicated,
come to the conclusion that the theory has been accepted on spurious grounds, that a lot of
ideology enters into it. It's a very complicated story. I would love to read a book,
which has not yet been written, which, so to speak, gives the inside story of what stands behind
Einsteinian physics and that fascination, that love affair, if you will, that we've had with
Einsteinian physics. I'd be very interested to know more about that. All I know is that
there has been a lot of misconception on this subject, and in particular, I do disagree with
Alexander Unziger on this point. Fair enough. I don't have, it's not a question, but a statement
someone made. Could be me, he said, many of the comments Dr. Smith has made and his attention to
Plato seems to align with ideas we hear from John Furveki. Well, could be me, there is a,
as far as Dr. Smith has done an interview with John Furveki, at least one, I think, right?
I've had two conversations with him, yeah. Well, there you go. So, if you're listening,
check it out. They're probably very, very good. John Furveki is an excellent speaker,
very creative mind. I love the dear doctor. Very pleased when I saw that one. I was like,
okay, there's got to be some interesting things in there. Yeah.
Yes, he's a very, very erudite man and a very deep thinker. And I think what I admire most
is truly a seeker of truth. Truth is important to him. Not for any ulterior motive, but
it is important because it should be important. What is more important than truth?
Should we end it here? This way has been, we have been going on for two hours already.
And my voice is, I've actually been sick as a dog and I'm trying not to cough.
And what is acting up right now? So, I think for my own sake, I have to stop this time.
Well, I thank you so much, Jack, for this interview. I'm very happy to have had an
opportunity to discuss these matters because I think they are very, very important.
Important in a very broad sense. I think our civilization is, has been under the influence
of certain materialist conceptions which prove not to be true. And I think it is very,
very important that these things be rectified. And I think your program is doing a lot of good in
the sense that it is helping to bring clarity into these issues. All right, thank you. I really hope
so. And thank you so much for having the stamina to talk for two hours. Brian, thank you for joining
us for helping me. Anybody who is listening, thank you too for your comments and for listening.
I wish you all a very good night and I will see you guys the next time. Good night.
Thank you and alles Gute. Thanks, Jack. And Jack, if you ever go to visit Wolfgang, you can,
you better have more stamina than that because he'll go to three in the morning.
Oh, that's good to know. I did not expect this. I did not expect this, honestly. Okay, guys.
It was a good conversation. Good night. Good night. Good night. Thank you so much.
