You
You
You
Renowned astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson is the first Frederick P. Rose director of the Hayden
planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History
after receiving his BA in physics from Harvard University and his PhD in astrophysics from Columbia University
Tyson received 14 honorary doctorates and the NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal
from 1994 to
2003 he served as a visiting research scientist and lecturer in the Department of Astrophysical Sciences at Princeton University
Dr. Tyson has written 10 books including space chronicles facing the ultimate frontier
His contributions have been recognized by the International Astronomical Union in its official naming of asteroid
13123 Tyson
you
Know all the amazing things about the universe I think to stand above all the rest one of them is that
We know so much about the universe
but another is that there's even more that we don't know and
what I want to focus on for this lecture is
The inexplicable universe from a time gone by that is now explained
Human cultures have for a long time
Harbored scientific mysteries in fact in a pre-scientific error that would be before Galileo
400 years ago
Before then many of the nature's most unknown mysteries were thought to be the work of divinity
Take for example epilepsy
There's someone writhing on the ground your best friend
Frothing at the mouth if you have if you're driven by Christian theology
Your first thought is the person is possessed by the devil
That's the natural explanation for what's going on there in the absence of any other knowledge about
Neurosynaptic processes
In another example you could go out to the woods one morning one damp cool morning, and you'll find this circle of
Mushrooms
No one knew how they got there you were there the day before there was no trace of mushrooms
And now there's a perfect circle of them
these were known as fairy circles and
people imagined sort of woodland
Woodland nymphs woodland fairies
Coming to have a jamboree, and these were their chairs
Little fairies of course these were their chairs where they celebrated whatever were their rituals of the night
We would later learn that of course mushrooms are are they're not solo
Organic entities there in fact that that one spore can generate many many mushrooms and if a spore drops in one spot
It can work its way out and get ready for just when the conditions are right
Just the right temperature just the right humidity and then they all pop up
Equidistant from where that spore first dropped
So explanations came later to these phenomena
And of course we know epilepsy is the result of random firing of the brain uncontrolled firing
That is that leaves you helpless in the presence of a brain gone awry
so
What we found is that things started to change in the rise of the experiment
If you go back in time to Aristotle's day
people
Imagined that you could just sit in a chair and just think about the universe
Didn't have to go out and test it. You just thought it up
Aristotle imagined that heavy things fell faster than light things
Of course, yes a rock falls faster than a feather the feather feels the air resistance on its way down
But take a heavy rock and a light rock. They'll actually fall together at the same rate
Aristotle however said that the heavy one will fall
Faster than the light one in direct proportion to its weight. This is patently false and it would take Galileo
1500 years later to demonstrate that this was the case
He describes the experiment of dropping two balls from the side of the leaning tower of pizza and
They're both falling at exactly the same rate hitting the ground at the same time
Of course that would happen with a rock and a feather
You just have to evacuate the air from where you're doing the experiment in fact that was indeed done that very experiment on the surface of the moon
So what I want to do for this lecture is focus on several stunning examples of
Profound mysteries that plague the deepest thinkers of their day, but ultimately got explained
There was a single biggest scientific mystery of the 19th century
It preoccupied the greatest minds of that period and what it related to was at the core of our understanding of space itself
What's behind it well, we know that waves
Requires some kind of material medium through which to travel and the best and most common example of a wave is sound
Sound moves through air, but if you take away the air it cannot propagate
You may have remembered this experiment. It might have happened in your high school
Science class you have a ringing bell and you enclose that bell in a glass container
And you start pumping the air out of that glass container and the ringing bell gets dimmer and dimmer and dimmer to here
And at some point you don't hear it at all yet. You still see it clanging away
That's evidence that sound cannot pass through the vacuum that you just created
well if light is a wave then
Then it too must require some kind of medium through which to travel
Here's the problem
Empty space is a vacuum and we know
That light reaches us from empty space
The moon is in space the sun is in space the stars are out in space and there's a vacuum between us
So it was hypothesized that no there's not air out there. There's got to be something
some some substance some
Medium that light requires for it to propagate and we gave it a name. We my
By my science ancestors of that period. We gave it a name. It was called the ether
the ether
We ought to be able to measure it
Two scientists came along. This is in the late 1800s the physicist Albert Michelson and the chemist Edward Morley
to American scientists and they got together collaborated and
Perfected a new kind of tool called the interferometer
It's a special instrument that allows you to measure with high precision
distances and speeds and
So in 1897 they conducted what came to be known as the Michelson-Morley experiment
So here's what they did. They said all right. Here's earth
I'm going to measure the speed of light
with the movement of earth around the Sun
Then I'm going to measure the speed of light
Against the movement of earth around the Sun and if there is an ether out there. I ought to be able to show
that the light
added to the added to earth's movement and
I measure the speed of that I'll get the speed of light plus the speed of the earth and
Coming back the other way if I make that measurement. I'll get the speed of light minus the speed of the earth
That makes complete sense
Of course it does if you're riding in a train back then it would have been a train not a car you're riding in a train that's going
30 miles an hour and you send something forward 10 miles an hour you add them that object is moving
10 30 plus 10 40 miles an hour relative to the ground
Come back the other way and you throw it out the back end of the train
That speed will be 30 minus 10 20 miles an hour relative to the ground. That's that it's that simple
That's all they were trying to do with the speed of light
Upon conducting this experiment what they found is that the speed of light was the same no matter where they made the measurement and
This was astonishing. It was the greatest null result ever found for a scientific experiment
A null result is you expect to find some kind of measurement and you don't
Usually those are those those experiments are like not interesting, but this was the most interesting null experiment ever conducted and
so
What do you do?
Everyone knew there had to be an ether
so
There were a couple of guys who said I we can solve this
There's a fellow named Lorenz and another one named Fitzgerald and they
Got together and said we know what's going on because there's got to be an ether
Your measuring tools have contracted in the direction of motion
They've
Physically contracted to fool you into thinking that you're getting the same speed of light
That must be going on
Just think about that
So embedded were they in the existence of the ether the ether this this traditional
Concept that a wave requires a medium that they would not even entertain the possibility
That there was no such thing as an ether they would rather assert that something odd was happening to your measuring devices
They were trying to rescue the hypothesis of the stationary ether
Now we happen to know that physical materials can't just physically contract. That's not how they behave
They never behave that way
What we would later learn
Not just a few years later is that light in fact does not need a medium after all
Through which to propagate it is a self-driven wave a combination of an electrical wave and a magnetic wave
It was an astonishing revelation of the day
no ether and
What what what what what state of mind though allows us to recognize that the speed of light remains constant
Albert Einstein to the rescue
1905 special theory of relativity
What he noticed was that those equations that would shrink
Your physical objects that are doing the measurements to conspire to give you the same speed of light
what Einstein showed is
No, they don't actually shrink
What happens is the speed of light is actually constant
It's actually constant and what's going on is that the rules of special relativity
change
How you end up making that measurement
while you're doing it and
When that comes about you find that the ether is not necessary the speed of light is constant and we have
Walked through a prosinium in the history of science
Where the ether was the last
grasp the last the last
Bastion of classical physics before the 20th century would open its doors
Because in the 20th century what we came to learn is that whatever was your common sense that you were invoking
about how the world must be
20th century science and onward
Entered a time where in fact in order to understand the universe at least some of the time you had to abandon your senses
Next up is the discovery of the planet Neptune
But first let's go back in time to 1781 for the discovery of the planet Uranus by Sir William Herschel
he's the only one in town with the big telescopes at the during that day and he
Found Uranus by accident actually he thought he had found a comet
Nothing else would have moved against the background stars except comets
It was inconceivable to him that he could have discovered a planet because nobody had ever discovered a planet before
Mercury Venus Mars Jupiter and Saturn in the sky are visible to anyone who looks up. They don't require a telescope
He was in denial for so long
He thought he thought he had seen a comedy and he would say things like curious comet
This is it refuses to show any fuzz as any good comet ought to
Fact is the man discovered Uranus
So here's the question
Does Newton's law of gravity apply that far out in the solar system?
Newton's laws of gravity had been tested between the earth and the moon and and and all the inner planets in the Sun and and
It was working. It was good. It was powerful. It was predictive and
So here we are at the outer reaches of the solar system. Let's test that
We're in the era of testing ideas. So
let's wait
70 years and over those 70 years we're gonna get data on where
Where Uranus is in its orbit?
Okay, how long does it take Uranus to complete an orbit 84 years?
So 70 years is most of 84. So you're doing good. You've got a lot of good data to compare
You say, where should Uranus be according to Newton's laws and where do I measure it to be?
In the solar system. Is there a difference or not? If it's bang on we're good. Newton's laws work out there. We're fine
What we found is that they didn't match
Do we throw out Newton's laws, you know, they're pretty good. They're working for us
No one really wanted to abandon them. If you don't abandon them, what what are your options?
Maybe there's another source of gravity. You haven't reconciled with your efforts
All the other sources of gravity you factored in you're missing one
And if you included it, maybe that would have would would would account for why it looks like
Uranus is behaving badly
so
Thus began the hunt
British mathematician and astronomer John couch Adams. He was a specialist in celestial mechanics
These are these this is the physics and the mathematics of the movement of bodies in the solar system and a French mathematician
verbayne John Joseph Le Verrier did exactly the same thing and
it's a it's a tricky problem because
Typically you would use Newton's laws by saying here's a body and here's a body calculate the force between them
This is different here. We have the force between them, but there's some body out there and we don't know where it is
Or how much mass it has
So it's an inversion problem with Newton's laws
You have to calculate things backwards from what you're accustomed to and that takes pages and pages of data and
Calculations to get it right
So each of these brilliant mathematicians predict where and when you should find the perturbing object
That was out there. It happened to be Le Verrier who?
Was friends with
Johann Gottfried Gaul in the Berlin Observatory. He was an astronomer there
Le Verrier assisted him told him here's where you should look and
Here's when you should look
Johann Gaul looked where and when Le Verrier said he should find it within one degree of the predicted position
He found a new planet
the planet to be known as
Neptune
This was a triumph of mathematics and the laws of physics
It was a case where you weren't using the past history of rhythms to predict the next event
You do that with like the phases of the moon and eclipses and things where you have a good good record of what it was doing before
This was a case where there was no previous record a
planet was
predicted and discovered simply by laws of physics and
and
understanding the operations of nature
This
Would shape the expectations of all subsequent discoveries in the solar system
Because Newton's laws were working and next we would apply those very same laws to the orbit of Mercury
Nature
Can be subtle. I
Don't know if that's a good thing or a bad thing just yet, but it's certainly true
I'll give you some examples. Take Newton's laws
Newton's laws of motion and gravity are powerful tools that enable us to understand and decode the movement of objects in the solar system
And it's worked in every place we'd ever applied it
So why not be cocky about it and say it'll work even in places we have yet to imagine
these methods and tools are
Empowering our capacity to understand objects in the solar system
Okay
That that I'm with you on that that Newton's laws. They're good. They're good
But let's see what happened over the centuries
Careful timing of the movement of Mercury around the Sun. That's the innermost planet. It orbits in any lips
It turns out the ellipse
precesses around the Sun we've known this this is not news
Right while Mercury is orbiting the entire ellipse precesses ever so slightly
All right
We're fine
Turns out when you calculate how quickly this should process and
Then you observe how fast its procession processing those two numbers do not match
They differ from each other, but if your angle fluent 43 arc seconds per century
That's small and it took a long time to establish that baseline of measurement to say that these two do not agree
All right. Well
What's causing it nobody knew
But in 1859
Riding high on his successes with the planet Neptune Le Verrier said I got this look I've been there before
How do you think I helped you find Neptune out there?
There must be some other source of gravity
We've yet to tally in our inventory of objects in the inner solar system
So he said I got it. Maybe there's a belt of asteroids a second asteroid belt in the solar system
Between Mercury and the Sun and the collective gravity. That's what's giving an extra tug on Mercury
Within a few years of that there was an astronomer who made a measurement of a planet moving across the Sun's surface a planet
That was not Mercury
Le Verrier said, okay, I don't need the asteroid belt. It must be that object. In fact, I'll name it
I'll call it
Vulcan
Awesome name for a planet anything that close to the Sun. That's the name. It has to have that's the root of the word volcano
So that became the escape goat for this extra tugging on Mercury to create that difference in the procession
Problem is
Another person with a better telescope observing the Sun at the same time as this other astronomer was making his measurements said
I saw nothing go across the Sun
There must be something wrong with your measurements and
practically overnight Vulcan
Disappeared from the data. It was a faulty measurement that had been reported
So now Le Verrier was left with nothing to credit for the movement of Mercury
But maybe you can still get away with it. Maybe it's so close to the Sun. It's always lost in the glare
Plenty of people were happy with that explanation and we went on saying yep, it's Vulcan never found it
We don't know where it is, but surely it's there
Enter Albert Einstein
1916 he publishes the general theory of relativity the modern theory of gravity
In it space and time is a fabric
It's a think of it as a as a deformable fabric and gravity is not the
force between two objects gravity is the shape of that fabric and
bodies move according to where that shape tells you to go and
When you factor in all the tenets of relativity
What we found is that Mercury was following the
severely curved fabric of space and time in the vicinity of the
Extremely significant and strong source of gravity that is the Sun
in fact
Newton's laws do fail when you are that close to an extreme source of gravity
This shocked the world and
And
It's a reminder that here. We were invoking Newton's laws
We were ready
We invoke Newton's laws to discover the planet Uranus and
In our cocky ways, we said we're gonna fix the mercury problem the same way
Only to find out no
Mercury required an entire new branch of physics to be invented just to explain it and
So yes
Nature can be subtle
That is the beauty and
The challenge that the modern scientist faces
You
Know not all investigations of the universe involve
pieces of the unknown
Occasionally people are challenged to take it all in and come up with a
Coherent complete understanding of the known universe
In fact the people who get to do this are part of cultures that value deep thought
That actually have the luxury of time to invest in trying to deduce the nature of the known world
One of my favorite examples of this is Claudius Ptolemy
He was an Alexandria and astronomer and mathematician
And he was around at second century AD
He came up with a
Coherent complete
understanding of the known universe and
He put it all in a book called al-Majest
Al-Majest is actually Arabic for the greatest
aptly named I think
Now his ideas happen to be wrong
He put the earth in the middle of the known universe. That's the geocentric model of the cosmos
but
When you think about it, that's what the world looks like
Everything orbits earth and does it feel like earth is moving under your feet? No
So his model was what made common sense to everybody
But deep down inside. I think he was still
Still didn't feel like he grasped at all
Because he would follow the movement to the planets in the night sky
They would slow down stop and then reverse call it retrograde. This is complicated motion to try to explain
In his greatest work, he penned in the margin
My favorite quote of all time
He said when I trace at my pleasure the windings to and fro of the heavenly bodies
I no longer touch earth with my feet. I
Stand in the presence of Zeus himself and
take my fill of
Ambrosia
That's Claudius Ptolemy
Basking in what he understood about the universe
But was humble in his ignorance
Because deep in that quote was the recognition that I don't think he really believed he fully understood what was going on
Why else would he bask in the presence of Zeus?
Well, it would be 1400 years
Where people just accepted the geocentric model again, that's an era where
experiments on ideas is not yet an understood thing to do
1400 years ago by Nicholas Copernicus
1543 on his deathbed would propose
The heliocentric model of the universe
He wasn't content with what Ptolemy had to the hoops
Ptolemy had to jump through to account for what we saw
How else do you get planets to go forward and backwards and forward and backwards?
Ptolemy had systems of of multiple orbits on top of orbits called epicycles
Things orbiting nothing in space
In fact, the word orbit wasn't even quite defined back then. This was just movements and
And and Copernicus said there might be an easier way
Let's put the Sun in the middle of the known universe and if you do that earth becomes one of the planets. That's heretical
Copernicus waited to his deathbed before he published this knowing the kind of retribution that would be exacted upon him in
That period of Europe the mid-16th century did not take kindly to heretics
So you can't kill him. He's already dead
So he puts out the heliocentric universe on his deathbed
It was right in every fundamental way except he had the orbits as perfect circles
It would take a take a few years to iron that out
but what's important here is that
The world embraced an idea that was wrong, but made sense
Wrong, but it made sense that ought to tell us something that not everything in the world that makes sense is
correct and
if that's the case
then
Who are you?
What of Ptolemy's Zeus?
What of the reverence he's showing if he actually understood it all would Zeus have even shown up in his quote and
If you're prone to assert that God is the influence of all that we don't understand
Because the hand of God is greater than anything your mind can comprehend
Then what of God?
Throughout history the urge has been strong to upon recognizing your area of ignorance in the universe
To assign the handy work of God
To those ideas to those phenomena
If you feel that way about prevailing ignorance that you're actually in pretty good company
Isaac Newton
Did just that in his most famous work?
Principia Principia Mathematica
The translation from the Latin is the mathematical principles of natural philosophy
That's the full-up title of that book published in 1687 in which he discovered the laws of motion
The universal law of gravitation and in it it represents the fruits of his effort
For having discovered calculus to solve some of the problems that he engaged in
All right, so in this great work
he tries to
Understand the solar system as a total
Collection of objects and he applies his universal law of gravitation. That's it. It calculates two bodies at a time
Earth in the Sun Earth in the moon Earth and Mars when you do this the calculations come out just fine
But of course the solar system is the sum of all the tugs that go on with all the planets
His attempt to do that with his two-body
Equations failed
What did his calculations show that these multiple tugs on all the planets by all the other planets?
Would render the solar system unstable and planets would fly out into interstellar space
Well first of all he knew that that wasn't happening and that his universal law of gravitation worked
So he concluded that divine providence must be at work
The hand of God is stepping in every now and then to correct things
Okay, well a century would pass
Before the publication of a great work of mathematical physics by the French mathematician
Pierre-Simon Machide Laplace
He came out with a five-volume tome called Celeste machinique celestial mechanics
This is at the turn of the century from the 1700s to the 1800s a
Contemporary of Napoleon by the way, but I'll get back to that in a moment
So in this volume he develops a new branch of mathematics
That allows you to take one major source of gravity and a lot of other little sources of gravity
It's called perturbation theory. It is the exact kind of math necessary to calculate what the entire solar system is doing all at once
When he does this he shows
That the solar system is stable
Contrary to what Isaac Newton attempted to show a century earlier
Napoleon
Summoned up this work read it from cover to cover
Napoleon himself. He wasn't just a tyrant general the guy read everything he could in physics and engineering
Two major branches of study that help you win wars
He also calls in Laplace and said sir
You make no mention of
A designer of this system
That's direct reference to Isaac Newton's
Crediting the hand of God for fixing things
Laplace in reply
Said sir. I had no need for that hypothesis
So there's a lesson in there the lesson is
We're always surrounded by ignorance on some level or another
If you're going to assign God to that ignorance and you lose your curiosity to investigate it
solutions
elude you
Isaac Newton said God did it and stopped working on the problem
Laplace
Whatever he thought of God what is certain is that he saw it as a really cool problem that needed a solution and
so as
We go forward I look at the problems that existed in the past that got solved
I look at the problems that surround us today on the frontier of the advance of science. I
Imagine we'll solve most of those some maybe we're not smart enough as a species to get there and
Then of course, there are the problems yet to be identified
Because they only show up
After we've learned that much more about the universe to even ask such questions
That's what excites me about the entire the entire moving frontier of science
You
