Today, I want to talk about explained but nonetheless mind-warping facts about phenomena
and objects in the universe.
Some of them are actually downright spooky, and I'm going to begin with the basic constituents
of matter.
You know, by 1900, the very existence of the atom was still a hypothesis.
Atom, you may remember, is Greek for indivisible.
1897, the electron, the very first atomic particle, was discovered by British physicist
J.J.
There it is, discovered no other particle is known.
So what does he say about the electron?
He says, in toasts that he would give at dinner time, he would say, to the electron,
may it never be of any use to anybody.
So what is an electron?
We can measure its charge.
You can measure its mass.
It actually has something that we call spin, and you can measure its effect on other particles.
You can measure all of this, but do you know something?
The electron itself has never actually been observed, not ever.
In fact, the electron is smaller than anything ever measured ever.
Whatever is its size, we have yet to figure out how small it is.
And as far as we're concerned, it could be infinitesimally small.
That's the electron, the particle that we all know and love.
Then you've got the proton, discovered in 1911 by New Zealand physicist Ernest Rutherford.
How did he discover it?
Well, he beamed helium nuclei.
So what's a helium nuclei?
It's got two protons in it and two neutrons, but the neutron wasn't discovered yet,
but he knew they were the nuclei of helium atoms, sometimes called alpha particles.
He hammered gold real thin and suspended it in a thin gold foil curtain,
and he sent helium nuclei, alpha particles, into that gold foil.
And he checked to see how many of them are deflected, how many of them go straight through.
And what did he find?
Nearly every single helium nucleus that he sent into that gold foil passed right on through unperturbed.
This is solid gold foil, what we would call solid.
He would conclude that atoms are mostly empty space, a staggering amount of empty space.
In fact, the volume of the atom is a quadrillion times larger than the volume of the nucleus itself.
If you want to censor that scale, take a BB, stick it in the picture's mound of a baseball stadium,
and the size of the BB is to the stadium as the size of a nucleus is to the atom.
So Rutherford, who discovered this, he is rumored the next morning after he realized that matter is mostly empty space.
He is rumored to have been afraid to step out of his bed onto the floor,
out of concern that he might pass through the solid floor of his residence.
This is the consequence of being the very first person in the world to know some truths about the nature of matter.
Another particle, we have electrons, protons, neutrons.
That was discovered in 1932 by British physicist James Chadwick, neutron.
That took a little longer to discover because it has no charge,
and if you have no charge, it's hard to find ways to interact with it to discover that it's there.
We would later learn that the neutron and the proton, they themselves are not fundamental,
but they're made up of quarks, three quarks each.
Well, if they each have a charge, an electron is minus one, a neutron is neutral, a proton is plus one,
and if the neutron and proton are composed of quarks, then the quarks must have fractional charge.
In fact, they do.
The quarks come in charges of one-third and two-thirds.
These are the charges that quarks have, and you can combine them in different ways
to recover either zero charge or the charge of plus one for the proton.
Quarks were theorized in 1964 by American physicist Murray Gelman and George Swig.
Four years later, they would be discovered at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, 1968.
1968, the most turbulent year in American history since the Civil War.
Assassinations, Ted Offensives, Vietnam War.
Yet, the march to understand the universe persisted, such as the challenges of a nation.
Where did this word come from?
Murray Gelman had been reading James Joyce, Finnegan's Wake.
And he came upon a passage, three quarks, for muster mark.
Sure, he has not got much of a bark, and sure any he has, it's all beside the mark.
Knowing that three quarks are in your neutron and your proton, he figured why not call them quarks?
There are three regimes of quarks, low energy, medium energy, and high energy.
High energy ones, we call them up and down, two quarks, up and down.
Medium energy, charmed and strange.
High energy, top and bottom.
The total number of quarks in this universe are six, six, six quarks.
So Murray Gelman got it wrong.
He thought there were only three, but there are six.
They're still called quarks.
Alright, here's what's spooky about quarks.
You can never isolate one in free space.
You can't.
You know why?
Because here's a pair of quarks that are bound together, and you're going to go try to separate them.
So alright, I challenge you to do that.
So you grab one side and the other, and you start pulling and pulling and pulling.
Well, quarks have a particular property that the force that brings them together gets stronger the more you pull them apart, not weaker.
That's spooky unto itself.
But here's what happens.
You pull them together so far, you're pumping energy into it at such a level that the moment you successfully separate them,
the energy you put in them spontaneously becomes another pair of quarks.
So the one you pulled out here, another quark gets manufactured out of the energy you pumped in.
E equals MC squared, the equivalence of mass and energy.
The other quark, the energy you pumped into that, it makes a second quark.
So you start it with one pair, you separate them, now you have two pairs.
And at no time did you ever isolate a single quark.
That's how quarks behave.
They don't ever want to be lonely.
That's spooky to me, quarks.
Always in pairs.
Now you got another particle, the neutrino.
That's a spooky one, the neutrino.
That was predicted in 1930.
It would take 26 years to discover it.
Why? Because the neutrino hardly interacts with anything.
It comes out of a nuclear reaction and the particle just escapes.
It is fast moving, it is ghost-like.
It's made in abundance in the Sun's core.
And it's made in even higher quantities when a star dies in an explosion, a supernova explosion.
Now, the neutrino hardly ever interacts with matter.
And I'll give you a quantitative measure of that.
If you take an entire light year of lead, a light year of lead,
that's 5.8 trillion miles of lead spread out through space.
Go ahead, get that.
And send a neutrino through one end.
You might block the path by the time your light year of lead has been traversed.
That's how unsociable neutrinos are.
And because of how many are made in the center of the Sun,
you can calculate how many these are.
65 billion neutrinos pass through every square centimeter of your skin every second.
All from the Sun.
Neutrinos.
Ghost-like particles.
No charge.
Traveling nearly the speed of light.
So these particles do not, we don't experience them in everyday lives.
They reveal themselves to us in particle accelerators.
So you can say, oh, that doesn't make sense.
Oh, that doesn't.
Well, how can it not have no size?
None of that makes sense.
They're under no obligation to make sense,
because they've been revealed through the methods and tools of science
which themselves transcend your senses.
And so some of the spookiest features of modern physics reveal themselves
as we probe matter on its deepest levels.
One of the towering great achievements of the human mind
and our understanding of the universe is Einstein's theories of relativity.
It's actually, the tenets of it are quite simple.
Almost scary simple.
It makes only two assumptions that the speed of light in a vacuum
is constant no matter who is doing the measurement
and no matter what direction you are moving or how fast.
You'll always get the same measurement for the speed of light.
That's assumption one, which by the way experiment has shown to be true.
Assumption two, that the laws of physics as you measure them
are the same for every observer who would be doing the measuring.
Provided you are on a vessel that's either moving at a constant speed
or not moving at all.
Those are the only two tenets that you have to buy into.
And all experiments have shown that both of those two tenets are correct.
Given those two tenets, extraordinary spooky phenomenon derive from them.
For example, as you travel faster,
or if you find yourself in the vicinity of a higher source of gravity,
time ticks more slowly for you than it does for other people who are not.
It's not just your clock, it's everything about you and your environment slows down.
You don't notice this because everything is slowing down including your neurosynaptic thought rate.
So it goes unnoticed to you, but it's patently obvious to everybody else observing you.
And this leads us to the famous twin paradox.
So here's how it works.
Let me get a pair of twins.
They're born the same time, they're the same age.
And now one of them, I will send off at 90% the speed of light.
And the other, I'll keep down here on earth.
So we can ask, how does their aging rates compare?
Turns out, this twin that I've already sent, his clock ticks 44% as fast as this twin's clock,
our clock, here on earth.
So this twin is aging more slowly than this one.
That's at 90% the speed of light.
Let's pump it up some more.
How about 99% the speed of light?
Now the time ticks at only 14% the rate, as it does back here on earth.
How about 99.9%?
We're getting closer and closer to the speed of light itself.
And at that speed, the clock ticks only 4.5% as fast.
So, what does this mean?
Tell you what it means.
This twin that travels for five years and comes back,
if they went at 99.9% the speed of light,
after five years, they're five years older, we have aged 110 years.
It's called the twin paradox.
It's only a paradox if you think about it in sort of classical terms.
How could that be?
But in relativity, there is no paradox at all.
That is a fundamental feature of what happens
when all you do is presume that the speed of light is the same for everybody
and the laws of physics remain constant.
That whole phenomenon is called time dilation.
And if you take it to the limit, let's take it to the limit.
Is there anything around that actually moves at the speed of light?
Sure is.
It's not a material matter.
It's light moves at the speed of light.
Photons, the carriers of light,
move at the speed of light.
So if time slows down as you approach the speed of light,
then the equations tell us that at the speed of light, time stops.
That means if you were a photon, time does not pass for you at all.
Now that has some freaky, spooky consequences.
What that would say is that the instant a photon is emitted anywhere in the universe,
typically they come out of atoms or they'll be sent out by a star,
the instant it is emitted, it gets absorbed at its destination, if you're the photon.
For the rest of us, we're watching it move at the speed of light across the galaxy or across the universe.
But to the photon, time does not elapse.
Hundreds, thousands, millions, billions of years of our time are zero time for the photon.
And I've reflected on this often.
I've been on mountaintops with my telescope and a detector observing the center of the galaxy.
That was the subject of my PhD thesis, what was going on 30,000 light years away.
These are photons that have been journeying for 30,000 of my years.
And they come through the vacuum of space, enter Earth's atmosphere,
come down, they happen to hit my telescope mirror, focus down on my detector, there they are.
And I'm using their existence to help me deduce the nature of the galaxy.
Then I asked, did the photon want to hit my detector?
If it didn't, where would it land?
There's some people laying out on a beach.
Some of these photons are hitting people's bottoms, okay?
I don't know if that...
Imagine being emitted and that's the first thing you hit.
Someone's rear end who's sunbathing on a beach.
So I felt kind of proud that I could take some of those photons and use them to deduce the nature of the universe.
Because plenty of other photons would have passed Earth by
in search of where they would end up becoming absorbed.
And so, such is the plight of the life of a photon.
Because in fact, since time doesn't tick for it at all, it actually has no life.
All that exists about it is what we...
What we say, what we do with it when it arrives here.
That's a curious duality in the existence of this particle.
From its own point of view, the universe goes by in an instant.
And for us, we bask in the time it takes for the photon to reach us.
What else is spooky in the universe but true?
Quantum physics.
That wins all prizes for just the weirdest things about nature we have ever discovered.
This is a theory of the universe that's been around since the 1920s.
In that decade, which by the way was a watershed decade for physics,
that's when Edwin Hubble, not the telescope, the space telescope,
but the man after whom the telescope was named,
that's when he discovered that our galaxy, the Milky Way,
is just one of countless other galaxies in the universe.
And in that same decade, he discovers that those galaxies themselves
are rapidly receding from one another, telling us that the whole universe is expanding.
Had they given Nobel Prizes to astronomers back then, he would have gotten two, at least two.
Edwin Hubble, he started out as a lawyer and then became an astronomer.
Interesting character in the history of my field.
At any event, that decade gave us quantum physics,
which it turns out is the most successful theory of the universe ever put forth.
There is no known edge of its applicability to any problem we've ever encountered.
It has worked in every place we've ever used it.
Its predictions have shown up to be true every time we've ever invoked them.
Meanwhile, there are other what we call successful theories like Newtonian gravity.
It works to a point, but then you need Einstein gravity to take it to regimes that Newton never experienced.
Quantum works everywhere, everywhere.
They're weird things that go on. Particles also exist as waves,
and they can pop out of existence and into existence somewhere else.
They don't exist in any tangible way. They exist statistically.
Very weird things go on in quantum mechanics,
and it is a regime that falls outside of our common sense.
So you can't invoke your common sense to decide that what it is you just learned should or shouldn't be true.
Take, for example, a sphere that I might pass through a sheet of paper.
That's an interesting experiment. Suppose my entire life is just that sheet of paper.
What will it look like to me if I pass that sphere through it?
First, I see a dot. That's the point of contact of the sphere with the page.
I don't know that there's a sphere. I just see the page and there's a dot.
That dot, what next? It becomes a small circle, and a bigger circle, and a bigger circle.
The circle gets to the diameter of the sphere. After that, it gets smaller and smaller again,
ultimately becoming a point, and then disappearing altogether.
That's just weird.
If I describe that to you, and I don't know that a sphere is passing through the sheet of paper, you'd think I was crazy.
So I'm left wondering, and I'm not alone in this state of mind,
whether so much of what we see is quantum mechanics that defies our common sense.
That is just crazy, loopy, weird, is actually some sensible thing going on in a higher dimension
that happens to be passing through our low dimensionality.
I stay awake at nights wondering that.
An interesting feature of quantum physics is called tunneling.
We learn that a particle can also be a wave.
A particle has an existence in a spot. Here's a particle right now.
But when you think of it as a wave, the wave can be in multiple places at once.
And when you measure that wave, it becomes a particle.
If you measure that wave over here, the particle shows up over here.
If you measure the wave here, the particle shows up here.
So there's a chance you can measure the particle in any location in the vicinity.
Turns out, the particle can tunnel through a barrier that it would not otherwise be able to penetrate.
That's like me standing next to a mountain, disappearing and reappearing on the other side of the mountain
without having to cross over it and invest any energy doing that at all.
That's called quantum tunneling.
Turns out, the very mechanism that drives the energy production of the sun requires it.
We had known long ago what the temperature of the center of the sun is.
It's about 10 million degrees, give or take.
10 million. At those temperatures, particles are moving very fast.
Hydrogen atoms, the sun is made of mostly hydrogen.
And their nuclei are protons. They are moving fast.
The protons want to resist one another. They're the same charge.
And most of the time, they do.
But in order to fuse them, in order to engage in thermonuclear fusion,
thermo is hot, nuclear is nucleus, fusion is bringing them together,
in order to engage in thermonuclear fusion, they have to overcome that repulsion,
get close enough to each other until a strong force takes over.
In fact, we call it the strong force, the strong nuclear force.
That's an attractive force that bonds nuclear particles together,
creating bigger and bigger atoms.
How do you do that if it's not hot enough to accomplish it?
There is a famous British astrophysicist named Sir Arthur Eddington.
He said, you know, 10 million degrees is not hot enough, folks,
but that's still the hottest place in town.
So if we're going to cook elements, figure out a way to do it in there,
because I don't know any other place.
Turns out, tunneling was the answer.
Something discovered in the 1920s when quantum mechanics was fully fleshed out.
Some of these nuclei will tunnel across that barrier,
even though the temperature isn't high enough to accomplish this.
Some of them tunnel through the barrier, they bond, they make the heavier elements,
and energy is released.
A star is born and a star is sustained.
So if you look at a cross-section of the sun, right in the center,
that's where it's hottest, the 10 million degrees.
Some of those nuclei are giving us energy.
Credit quantum tunneling for that.
High mass stars do this shell by shell by shell.
Hydrogen goes to helium, helium goes to carbon, carbon goes to nitrogen, oxygen, silicon, neon.
It goes right on down the periodic table of elements all the way to iron.
And there's an onion shell structure of all these elements.
It happens that those stars go unstable at that stage,
and they explode, scattering their enriched ingredients across the galaxy,
and those are the ingredients of planets.
Those are the ingredients of life.
Those are the ingredients of us.
All enabled by quantum mechanical tunneling.
Just showing up across a barrier where you had no business being.
When I think of light,
we know light has a speed in a vacuum.
It's a constant. Einstein told us that. All measurements show this.
Did you know, however, that when you put light into a medium, a transparent medium,
the speed of light slows down.
It slows down.
Not only that, it bends.
And the bending of the light, we call that refraction,
can send the colors of the light into different angles
because those different colors themselves travel at different speeds.
That's how you make a prism.
That's what goes on in a raindrop when sunlight through the raindrop makes a rainbow.
Isaac Newton showed that white light is composed of seven colors.
We call it Roy G. Biv.
Red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet.
Actually, I only see six colors.
He had a mystical fascination with the number seven,
so he threw in a seventh color just around, and that was indigo, of course.
But it's really red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet.
So there are these colors.
White light is composed of those colors.
You take that white light, pass it through these media.
The red travels at a different speed from the orange, from the yellow, from the green,
and it all spreads out and out comes the beautiful rainbow.
Beyond light and the colors that it makes,
what is most astonishing to me,
and we've known about this since 1905.
So this is not new, but every day I think about it, my jaw drops open,
and that's the equivalence of mass and energy.
The equation first written down by Albert Einstein in 1905,
you learned it in elementary school, E equals MC squared.
The C is the speed of light squared.
It's a constant.
Don't worry about that.
What all matters in that equation is that energy sits on one side and mass sits on another.
And we've known about this in Cold War politics
because our entire nuclear arsenal depends on that formula,
creating energy out of matter in a bomb.
Okay, and the sun does it every second of its life.
So does every star you see in the night sky.
We don't have an everyday experience with E equals MC squared.
That's a good thing.
But if we had very sensitive measuring devices, we would.
For example, if I take a spring and I stretch it,
I'm actually pumping energy into the spring to hold it in a stretched position.
If you figured out how to weigh that spring in before and after situations,
you'd find out that the stretch spring weighs more than the unstretched spring
because I pumped energy into it and that energy has mass.
The energy has mass.
It'll show up in a spring.
It'll show up in a rubber band.
It'll show up when you stretch a rubber band.
It'll show up in chemical powders like gunpowder
that stored energy in the molecules of gunpowder.
Gunpowder weighs more because of that stored energy
than it otherwise would if you broke apart those molecules.
Not only that, gasoline weighs more simply because it has stored energy.
And so when I think of all that drives the universe,
when I think of what makes the universe tick,
you part the curtains, what's behind it all,
you will find the equivalence of mass and energy.
That equivalence of mass and energy drove phenomenon in the early universe,
in the Big Bang itself.
It drives the energy production in every star you see in the night sky.
It was responsible, like I said, for the geopolitics of the Cold War,
all by that one little equation,
making so much sense of what goes on in the world.
And of the many things that prevent me from getting a good night's sleep,
one of them is, is there another equation like E equals mc squared
just beyond our reach because we are still steeped in profound ignorance
of what's going on in the universe.
There's a lot we know, proud of that,
but there's even more that we don't know.
Is there some equation like E equals mc squared that we haven't seen yet?
If it's there, is it just out of our reach or is it not just out of our reach?
Do we have to climb several mountains before we even get to the point
where we see the next equation that can transform
this generation's understanding of how this universe works?
I don't know, but what I do know is,
E equals mc squared explains so much of what's going on in this universe,
it actually makes us feel a little cocky about it.
It's like, yeah, we're there, we got it.
But the March of Science tells us,
just when you thought you understood something,
the universe throws you a curve.
