You know, Hollywood is not the first place to start dreaming up aliens and wondering
what they might be like.
We're all entertained by them, of course.
Some amount of intellectual energy goes into asking, what do they look like, where are
they from, how do they get here, do they eat, but they're not the first.
This is a long time-honored pastime.
It's been going on for centuries.
In fact, let's go back to an example of this in the 17th century.
Brilliant scientist, Christian Huygens, he's a Dutch physicist, astronomer, mathematician,
philosopher, a renaissance man, and his resume includes the fact that he invented the pendulum
clock.
Somebody had to do it.
Not only that, he was the first to study Saturn's rings through a telescope, to the
point where he identified them as rings.
Before Huygens, people just saw this blobs of light near the ball of Saturn, not knowing
what they were, not knowing how to interpret what they saw.
Just two items on a very long resume that this fellow has.
Now, the late 17th century was a time when Newtonian physics was just taking root.
It had been around for a few decades, but it was well-tested, and everybody was, like,
had bought into it.
Yet biology was still a fledgling academic field.
In his great work at the end of the 17th century, published 1696, the celestial worlds discovered.
He drew an analogy between Jupiter and the Earth.
In that analogy, he noted, of course, that Jupiter has an atmosphere, just as Earth does.
And if you have an atmosphere, then maybe you have weather.
Well, if you've got weather, you're going to have rain.
And if you have rain, you might have oceans.
And if you've got oceans, you can now think about what life might want to do in the presence
of these oceans.
If you were life on Jupiter, you'd want to get around somehow.
So what would you do?
You'd have boats, of course.
And how would you navigate?
Well, you'd have sails.
How would you control those sails?
You would need some mechanism to do so.
You'd need rope.
Well, if you've got rope, what would that rope be made of?
So from all this line of reasoning, he deduced that any life forms on Jupiter would be growing
hemp.
It's charming, but it shows a deep sense of caring for what life might be like elsewhere
and built into it is actually a cultural bias that we almost can't avoid, because all we
know is ourselves when we think about other life in the universe.
And that cultural bias puts our own values and our own technologies onto what others
might have to enable them to get around.
Not only this, you'd look at the opening chapter of the celestial world's discovered,
and it's a celebration of Newtonian physics.
It's complete with very well-understood planetary orbits.
It's got the sizes of the orbits, their shapes.
It talks about how bright the planets are, and it makes some judgment about how rocky
they might be.
And not only that, the book has like a fold-out chart that actually gives the layout of the
entire solar system.
And in that discussion, in fact, there's no mention of God.
Even though just a century earlier Newton's laws of physics, Newton's understanding of
gravity and motion had not yet been invented, had not yet been discovered, and so the planetary
orbits were mysteries back then.
So here, where there is no mystery to Huygens, there is no mention of God.
Meanwhile, when he speculates about life in the solar system, he raises questions he cannot
answer, and he lists the biological mysteries of the day, such as the origins of life's
complexity.
Now, sure enough, because 17th century physics was more advanced than 17th century biology,
Huygens invokes the hand of God only when mystery prevails.
I suppose nobody will deny, but that there's somewhat more contrivance, somewhat more of
miracle, in the production and growth of plants and animals than in lifeless heaps of inanimate
bodies.
For the finger of God and the wisdom of divine providence is in them much more clearly manifested
than in the other.
I think the lesson here is, yes, we'll always be confronted with mysteries, always.
In this particular case, he's imagining what life would be like elsewhere.
He knows he likes to get around, and what's the way you get around back in the 17th century?
You travel vast distances by taking a ship, a sailing ship.
He's imagining aliens with sailing ships.
Today, what do we imagine our aliens do?
They're not sailing, they're taking space ships.
Because today we have space ships, leaving me to wonder several centuries from now, what
new aspect of our culture and our civilization will we be imparting upon the priorities and
transportation needs of aliens of the future?
The most challenging question you could ever ask in a scientific inquiry is, what is the
origin of a thing?
And it's challenging whether or not the question involves life.
It's for an obvious reason, nearly everything we ever study already exists.
And so you can study its past, you can look at it in the present, and you can maybe extrapolate
to the future, and in so doing, you build a timeline of its life.
So that works.
But how about the start of it, how about the beginning, how about the transition between
it not existing and existing?
In the universe, knowledge of our sun's birth would ordinarily be completely inaccessible,
because how are we going to get back there, and then?
We can't. Fortunately, billions of stars in our galaxy exist in all phases of life
and death.
So we can use them as proxy for our thoughts about the sun.
We can infer how the sun was born, and we can infer how the surrounding planets were
born here by looking deep within massive clouds of gas and dust in our own galaxy.
That requires special telescopes, of course, to not only see the surface of the clouds,
but use wavelengths of light that dig deep down and see where all the action is.
But with life on Earth, as far as we know, there was only one genesis.
And if there's only one, there's not another way to compare other forms of life that were
born separately from ours, that have different origins.
Let's go back then and imagine, at some point there was a conversion of inanimate organic
molecules, comprising elements such as carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen.
These are the traditional elements of what we call organic chemistry.
At some point there was a transition of inorganic molecules into animate self-replicating creatures.
That would have happened about four billion years ago, and that transition today remains
inaccessible to us, and as a consequence, remains a mystery.
Alright, because of this, it greatly challenges our efforts to duplicate the phenomenon in
the laboratory.
We don't see it happening anywhere else, it could be, but we don't see it happening
anywhere else.
Now, the modern tree of life has a level of depth and complexity that Darwin, and perhaps
even your parents' biology teachers, wouldn't even recognize.
As far as we've ever measured, all life on Earth has common genetic heritage.
That's what the tree of life means.
Everyone branches from, you go back in time, they get fewer and fewer branches, and you
reach a point where there's only a single branch.
So an example of this, dig far enough back in time, and you will find the common ancestor
between any two people on Earth.
The common parent.
Dig far enough down the tree of life, and you will find the common ancestor to any two
species on Earth.
I don't care what they are, you can find it.
How about humans and chimps?
That's in the recent past.
How about humans and goldfish?
That's a little farther back.
How about humans and toadstools?
Humans and yeast cells.
There is a point where you will find the common ancestor for any two branches of modern life.
And so as far as we've been able to determine, there's been only one genesis on Earth.
So in order to help out this effort to understand life, and how it got here, what we need is
a second genesis on Earth, or an ensemble of planets out there, all with different stages
of formation of life on them, just as we've done for the formation of stars and planets
in the galaxy.
This is some of what motivates the search for other planetary systems out there.
If we find them with life, let's get the inventory of them all and compare and contrast.
So what we need to ask however is, on Earth, since life happened pretty quickly, almost
as quickly as it could have, it took place within a couple of hundred million years,
why hasn't there been a second or multiple coexisting parallel trees of life on Earth?
All data that we've ever collected on the fossil history of life on Earth tells us that
life began almost as soon as earthly conditions would allow it.
For the first half billion years or so of Earth's four and a half billion year history,
the planet was still forming. It was still accreting leftover material from the nascent
solar system.
We call this period the period of heavy bombardment.
And the word accretion, that's what we say in astrophysics, that's just a polite word
to describe the incessant impacts of comets and asteroids and planetesimals.
These are planets that are not yet grown, but they hit you and then they're gone and
they're part of your material rather than another planet that might have formed out there.
This is the process of Earth clearing its orbit, rendering Earth's surface hot, because
every time one of these objects hits, the surrounding terrain heats up.
And under those conditions, under those temperatures, you cannot form complex molecules, because
large complex molecules break apart in the presence of heat.
And after all, what is biology if it's not the most complex expression of chemistry we
know?
So now, after this period of heavy bombardment, it took no more than 200 million years.
That sounds like a lot, but it's not. It's just 0.2 billion years of Earth's history.
Start the life clock after the period of heavy bombardment and ask, how long does it take
to get the first evidence of life on Earth 200 million years?
That's after Earth cooled to allow the formation of complex molecules in the first place.
So I'm tempted to ask, if life formed so quickly back then, practically as soon as it possibly
could have, then why wouldn't life keep forming in this fertile newborn Earth?
Why wouldn't there be multiple genetic origins of life?
Why not multiple coexisting trees of life, forming, dying, and forming again?
A lot of time has passed since 4 billion years ago.
If it did happen, if there were coincident trees of life, there's no trace of it.
And if it did happen, our tree of life was far more successful at exploiting Earth resources
than any other tree of life that might have been competing with us.
And in the end, it is our tree of life that won.
We weren't around back then. Fossil evidence tells us about only one tree of life.
So the end we really don't know.
You know, one of the branches in the tree of life that's established just in the past
couple of decades is the community of organisms known as extremophiles.
And as the name implies, these are lovers of extreme environments.
And these are the kinds of environments that we humans would find hostile to our comfort.
Long gone is the time when we imagined all life on Earth requiring a warm room temperature
pond in which to evolve. Extremophiles, they thrive in high temperatures,
low temperatures, high acid, low acid, high pressure, low pressure.
All kinds of extreme environments, these organisms do just fine.
Just fine. Now, put a pin in that and consider that recent computer simulations of astrophiles
that have an asteroid impact on planet surfaces tells us that surrounding rocks can be cast
into space escaping the gravitational pull of the planet on which they were found.
That's an interesting fact. Put a pin in that fact as well.
Now, you've got the existence of extreme microbes.
You have microbes that can thrive in extreme environments.
You have rocks that can be cast into interplanetary space, allowing them one day to land on other
planets given enough time. Calculations show that, for example, Mars rocks have come to
Earth. Earth rocks have gone to the moon and to Mars.
And so forth, back and forth around the solar system.
Now, there's evidence for liquid water on early Mars. That evidence is plentiful.
Mars is bone-dry today, but look at the surface features.
They're dried riverbeds that meander and they're floodplains and lakebeds, all bone-dry today.
Bone-dry. Something bad happened on Mars.
I don't know what, but something bad. In its day, however, we expect Mars to have been
an oasis. So, it may be true that Mars was wet and fertile long before Earth was.
If so, then maybe, just maybe, there was stowaway bacteria on Mars hiding in the nooks and crannies
of the rocks that have been cast back into space.
Some of those rocks may have made the journey from Mars to Earth.
Now, let's say it had a full assortment of microbes. Microbes that actually like warm
ponds as well as microbes that can thrive under stressful conditions. Then only those
microbes that survived the cold, dry, radiation-intense void of space would have survived. Seeding
early Earth with life. Seeding early Earth with extremophiles. We call this concept panspermia.
And it implies, if true, that all life on Earth are descendants of Martians.
So, all this leads to a couple of interesting questions, I think. Suppose we find life on
Mars and it's DNA based. Alright, it could be one of two possibilities. Either that
life has DNA in common with life on Earth. That's the smoking gun that we are Martian
descendants. But suppose it has DNA and there's no genetic code in common. What that will
tell us is that DNA may be a fundamental molecule of life. And if we were to find life anywhere
else, it would be based on DNA. It just wouldn't have any DNA in common with us because it
didn't co-evolve here. So, what would be more interesting, I think, is if we go to Mars
and we find out it has life and the life is not even based on DNA at all. That's a much
more interesting result, personally. Because that would then give us another way nature
figured out how to make life. And it would tell us that life, in fact, doesn't require
DNA. It found another way to encode identity, to figure out how to make one creature different
from another. When you add all this up and dig deeper, what you find is that life on
Earth, it's not simply are we based on DNA or not. Of course we are. But it's something
else that's true, hardly ever talked about. And that is the fact that complex molecules,
nearly all of them, have a kind of handedness. They're not the same on one side of a mirror
as they are on the other. Yet they're chemically identical. So, as an example of this, if you
take a glove, a left-handed glove, and you look at the left-handed glove in a mirror,
that glove in the mirror is a right-handed glove, and vice versa. So, it's possible to
have a chemical that's written out. That's identical to another chemical written out.
But when you build it, it looks different in a mirror than it does on your side of the
mirror. A famous example of this, my favorite example of this, is the molecule for the flavor
that you detect as spearmint. If you write it down, it's identical to the flavor of caraway.
Same number of atoms in the same sequence. But one of them is constructed with a left-handed
orientation, and the other with a right-handed orientation. And our body's tasting mechanism
distinguishes the two flavors from one another. And of course, spearmint and caraway, those
two flavors taste nothing like one another. There's nothing related between one and the
other, yet it's the same molecule. Turns out, life is overwhelmingly left-handed. Organic
molecules on meteorites, because in fact, organic molecules can form in interstellar
space, and intergalactic space, and interplanetary space. We see these molecules across the universe.
When we find organic molecules in meteorites, and ask how many of them are left-handed,
how many of them are right-handed, it is 50-50. Yet those same molecules, when we look in
life on Earth, and find them, and we bend them by who's left-handed and who's right-handed,
100% of them are left-handed. So it leaves you wondering, could there be another planet
out there, just like ours, except everybody uses right-handed molecules? That's kind of
an interesting question. Or why isn't there an entire coexisting ecosystem on Earth that
thrives in this right-handed regime? Then we can ask, and it's not well studied, we
can ask, does one kind of handedness offer an inherent advantage over the other, either
in competing for resources, or maybe two forms of life, if one doesn't interact with the
other, it could be that you could not derive nourishment by eating the right-handed life
versus the left-handed life. That'd be an interesting planet to live on. You'd have to know in advance
who your prey was, is it left-handed or right-handed, in its molecular construct. That's a science
fiction movie waiting to be filmed, a book waiting to be written. That's one all by.
Got another question, how smart are humans? It's funny because we're the ones doing the
defining. If we define what it means to be intelligent, then how accurate could that
be on a cosmic scale? When we search for intelligent life in the universe, we try to set up criteria
by which we would judge the civilization to be intelligent. The audacity of us to presume
that we'd even be able to meaningfully communicate with the species of life from another planet.
Why do I say that? Because we can't even meaningfully communicate any kind of deep ideas with any other
species of life on Earth. And life on Earth are creatures with whom we have DNA in common.
And my point is, in spite of whatever conversations you think you're having with your dog, I'm
suggesting that they're not deep. They're not the kind of conversations you'd imagine
having with an alien. And so I question the audacity of saying, we're intelligent, any
other intelligent species out there will be able to have a conversation with. That's audacious.
In fact, it's hubristic. Let's explore what this means. Let's compare human and human
intelligence as we define it to chimp intelligence. Use our own definitions of this. We have nearly
identical DNA with the chimp. And it's less than, it's trifling difference. It's less
than 1% difference in the DNA between a chimp and human beings. By the way, this comparison
can work with any other animal. It'll just be more illuminating if I compare us to chimps.
I could compare us to dogs. But I'm just using chimps because they're the closest relative.
So 1% difference between us. And we say to ourselves, what a difference that 1% makes.
We compose poetry. We have philosophy. We have technology. We've got Beethoven's 9th
Symphony. We've discovered quantum physics. We built the Hubble Space Telescope. Yet what
can the smartest chimps do? You know, they do what human toddlers can do. Maybe they'll
be good at some rudimentary sign language. Maybe they can stack boxes to reach a banana
or some other object of interest. Our toddlers can do that. Yet that's the behavior of the
smartest chimps that are out there. Again, we're defining what's smart. Now, imagine,
if you will, a species of life. An alien species, perhaps. Likely. That has 1% genetic intelligence
beyond ours. Just as our intelligence is 1% genetically beyond that of the chimp.
What would we look like to them? Frankly, I think we'd look like drooling, blithering
idiots. That's what, all right? If it corresponds, then the smartest among us would be capable
of what their toddlers can do. Imagine their human researchers sort of rolling out Stephen
Hawking and commenting, hey, he can do astrophysics calculations in his head, just like little
timmy over here in preschool. That's what they'd be saying about us, because that's what we
say about chimps. Imagine, you know, I could keep going here. I think, imagine their preschoolers.
They bring home their freshly composed operas for the refrigerator door, instead of what
do we bring home? Pasta collages, all right? Their preschoolers will bring home fresh derivations
of calculus, instead of finger paintings. Would that species judge us to be intelligent
at all? Would they enslave us, put us in a zoo? Would we even know it if they did it?
In fact, is Earth a zoo for their own entertainment? If they're that much smarter than we are,
this would be a trivial exercise in their culture to accomplish, because we do that
for other creatures that are not as smart as we. Now, perhaps the most terrifying thought
of them all is that such a species is out there, such a species has combed the galaxy
in search for intelligent life. Such a species has visited Earth, observed our ways, our
cultures, and concluded, based on all the data they have gathered on us, living here,
on Earth, that there is no sign of intelligent life.
