Do you remember the periodic table of elements?
That's that mysterious chart of boxes that hung in your chemistry class.
Well, you might not know that there are still mysteries about the table that befuddle even
with chemists and physicists.
For example, at the heavy end, these are the elements that we're actually manufacturing
in the laboratory.
We've found all the elements that nature has to give us.
Now to extend our understanding of the table, we are creating elements beyond what nature
is capable of all by itself.
And there are places there that remain mysterious to us.
But let's back up for a minute.
To structure the table, just as a quick primer, you have columns, and as you go from left
to right, an extra electron gets added to the outer shell of that atom.
The rightmost column holds eight electrons, and that completes the shell.
When you have a completed shell, you have no electrons to either give or take.
And when you have nothing to give or take, you cannot make molecules with any other atom.
It's an interesting part of the diagram, but all parts of the diagram have interesting
things to talk about.
For example, you remember that elements that are in a column have the same number of electrons
in their outer shell as each other.
What that means is they will bond similarly with the same set of other atoms.
This example there is carbon and silicon.
As a good example, we are carbon-based life.
An entire biochemistry is based on carbon.
Right?
Below it is silicon.
So you can ask the question, if you can have carbon-based life, why wouldn't you have
silicon-based life?
In fact, there's a famous episode of Star Trek, the original TV series, where they imagined
a silicon-based life form.
Now silicon is one of the active ingredients in rock, so rock is pretty stable.
So here we have this rock, so they imagine silicon-based life as a rock moving around
that could penetrate through mountains the way we humans move through air.
It's a cute storyline, but it turns out that maybe life based on silicon is possible, it's
just not necessary, because carbon is far more abundant than silicon in the universe.
And also its bonds are not as permanent.
If you have permanent bonds, it restricts how much chemical experiments nature can do
with your molecules.
And so with carbon bonds, they can break, they can reassemble, break and reassemble again.
Much more experimenting that can happen with that.
And that's what you need when you want to try to create life.
When you want to create the complexity that we know exists in life.
In addition to shells of electrons that exist in the atoms on the periodic table, the nucleus
of each atom has a shell structure as well.
The nucleus is composed of protons and neutrons, and it depends on how many protons and neutrons
are in each shell will determine whether or not the atom itself is stable.
If a shell is complete, you've got a stable atom.
If the shell is incomplete, it's more likely to decay into lighter elements, breaking apart
into other elements on the periodic table.
That is the origin of radioactivity.
Now those elements with complete outer nuclear shells and complete electron shells, they
are the most stable elements of them all.
Now all known elements that are heavier than lead are unstable, and generally it's a general
truth that the larger the nucleus, the less stable it is.
How unstable?
They last fractions of a second, maybe at most a couple of minutes at a time before decaying.
Currently we've discovered elements in nature up to 92 protons.
That 92nd proton element, that's uranium, named in fact after the planet Uranus.
And beyond that, we've manufactured another two dozen, heavier than uranium.
Where would we do that?
Of course, in the physics laboratory.
Now the most recent of the named elements has 112 protons manufactured in the lab.
It's called Copernicium, named of course for Nicolae Copernicus.
He advanced the sun-centered model of the known universe back in the mid-16th century.
Finally caught up with him, honoring him with an element name on the table.
Now most models of nuclear structure tell us that elements with 120 protons or 126 protons
and 184 neutrons might be stable on timescales that are long enough that they could survive
days, maybe even centuries.
We've made elements up to number 118, and so we're right on the threshold of this magic
island of stability.
We've been there before, we think it's there, and this is counter to the traditional sense
that big, fat nuclei are unstable.
Our models tell us that you can have a community of massive nuclei that are as stable as anything
else in our lives.
Now if we reach that zone, what might we use these elements for in everyday life?
Maybe they're so exotic they'll just be curiosities.
We've been there before.
That was said of most of the elements that were discovered on the periodic table.
For example, who would have thought that germanium, which is an obscure semi-metal discovered
in the 1880s, would turn out to be the crucial ingredient in the development of transistors
that 70 years later?
Or how about elements like neodymium and samarion that regarded for a century as just curiosities?
They turned out to be essential to the construction of super powerful permanent magnets.
Or one of my favorites is americium, named for America.
We discovered a lot of elements down there, and so that's one in honor of America.
That one was discovered in 1944, americium.
That would ultimately become, and is today, the active ingredient in household smoke detectors.
So I look at this island of stability, and I hunger for what properties they will have.
And in the hands of a clever engineer and perceptive scientist, we'll be able to exploit those
properties and possibly transform life as we know it today.
Where were you in the 1970s?
Were you even born yet, and if you were, were you dancing to disco?
So what I was doing, I was the right age and at the right time, but over that decade, physicists
in America and in Europe were getting the final inventory of all the known particles
in the particle zoo.
And it wasn't just the compilation of an inventory, what came out of that period was an understanding
of how all these particles fit together in a coherent way to think about the relationship
of particles to each other, and the relationship of particles to matter and to the universe
at large.
So what we've come to learn with the help of high energy particle accelerators, and
what do they do?
Their job is to smash atomic nuclei together and pick up the pieces that come afterwards.
And when you smash nuclei together, there's a lot of energy that gets pumped in, and that
energy can spawn new particles, other particles can disappear, and it's a mess, it's a train
rack, but out of that train rack, you get insights into the nature of matter.
And you can see what the universe has wrought in the center of your particle accelerator.
And what we've come to learn is that there are three energy regimes of matter, three
of them.
There's the low energy regime, the medium energy regime, and the high energy regime.
Guess which one we're a part of?
The low energy regime, sorry about that.
So, everything we know, everything we do, think about, say, taste, touch, occurs in
this low energy regime of particles.
We are wholly unfamiliar with the other two.
And so let's take a quick look at the inventory of what particles thrive in that low energy
regime.
First, we have our protons and neutrons, all right?
Turns out they're not fundamental particles, they're not.
As we said earlier, they're made of quarks.
We call those quarks up and down.
Okay, that's kind of funny because you go back to ancient Greece, the word atom was
invented to describe an indivisible part of matter.
What does atom mean indivisible?
We would later find that atoms are composed of particles, and in this particular case,
neutrons and protons are themselves divisible into quarks.
So we have the up quark, the down quark.
What else do we have?
We have the electron.
We're familiar with electrons, that's what courses through all of our electronics in this
modern era to give us what we call electricity, the electron.
Then there's another particle, a particularly elusive particle.
We've greeted it before earlier in this series, it's called the neutrino, and that particular
neutrino is an electron neutrino.
You get one of these by an interesting way.
Go snatch a neutron from the nucleus of an atom and leave it out in free space.
Six minutes later, it decays.
Neutrons are not stable outside of nuclei.
Now neutron has no charge, but it decays into three particles, a proton and electron, whose
charges cancel each other.
So you start with no charge, you end with no charge.
The neutron becomes the proton, the electron, and an electron neutrino, which escapes.
It escapes.
There you have it, up quark, down quark, electron neutrino.
Then of course they each have antimatter counterparts, antimatter.
We invented antimatter, not the science fiction writers, this favorite fuel of space travel
in science fiction stories.
Antimatter does exactly what you think it does.
When it comes in contact with matter, it annihilates, creates pure energy.
Antimatter is real, it's made every day in particle accelerators, you find it every day
in the centers of stars, it is part of the particle count that we inventory for the universe.
So what we have are total four particles and their antimatter counterparts that makes up
our regime of energy in this universe.
I repeat, four.
Those four particles comprise everything you've ever seen, done, thought about, tasted, sat
on, touched, up quark, down quark, electron, and neutrino.
All right.
Each of those particles has a corresponding particle in the other two energy regimes.
So let's go to the middle regime.
What are the two quarks?
Well, they have fanciful names, like hours were up and down, the middle regime quarks
are strange and charm, and there's a counterpart to the electron we call the muon.
And of course, the muon has its own neutrino, we call it the muon neutrino.
Third up, in that third energy regime, we get two more quarks, the top quark and the
bottom quark, and we have a third species of electron.
We call that the tau particle, and the corresponding tau neutrino.
This means three generations of quark pairs, three generations of electrons, and with their
corresponding neutrinos.
Now operating among these particles are three other particles that transmit forces, okay?
Three other particle groups that transmit forces.
You have the photons that transmit electromagnetic forces.
You have the gluon, my favorite particle name of them all, the gluon that transmits the
strong nuclear force.
That's that force that's so strong it holds protons together in the nucleus against fair
wishes.
In fact, it holds the gluon, holds quarks together inside the protons and neutrons, okay?
The gluons.
Third, there's something called the weak nuclear force, and those are represented, those are
propagated by what we call the W and the Z particles, and they're more physicists who
are not Americans than are Americans, and so they pronounce it in the way that the British
say our letter Z, so it's called the W and the Z particle, alright?
Now add to this the Higgs boson, the Higgs boson, sometimes called the God particle.
How audacious.
Could possibly be God-like about this one particle?
Well, people reference it as the particle that creates the field that grants mass to
all other particles.
It gives them mass in an interesting way.
It creates a field that a particle tries to move through the field, and if it feels resistance,
more resistance it feels, we measure that as high mass, and if the particle goes through
freely, we measure that as low mass.
The Higgs boson granting mass to all other particles.
So that, ladies and gentlemen, is the standard model of particle physics, the standard model.
Throw in gravity, I haven't mentioned gravity yet, throw in gravity, and this inventory
encapsulates all of the universe that we understand, all of it, all of it.
But I gotta sit down for this, because there's some questions that I'm left with after we
go over this inventory.
I wonder, why, why are there three regimes of matter, and not one or ten?
Why is there three?
Why do particles have the properties that they do, and why are there particles at all?
And are these particles fundamental?
We think they are, but do they themselves have an as yet unresolved, never ending internal
structure deep down within them?
Or perhaps most intriguing of all, is there a simpler understanding that continues to
elude us?
Maybe there is a deeper understanding of the universe that awaits us, simultaneously eluding
us.
Right now, there's a whole team of people thinking about that very problem, they're
called the string theorists, the string theorists.
And what that idea offers is the hope, among other hopes, it offers the hope of unifying
all the particles and all the forces of physics.
Now, why would anybody want to do that?
If our descriptions of nature work, what's the need to try to simplify that even further
other than just the elegance of it?
Well, this exercise, this urge to combine all the forces of nature and all the particles
into one single coherent understanding has been kind of a holy grail ever since the beginning
of any understanding of particles in the first place.
And in fact, one of the early leaders in this exercise has been Albert Einstein.
He did all his great work with relativity.
He devoted most of the rest of his life to what was called the unified field theory.
This was his attempt to bring together all the pieces of physics into perhaps something
represented by a single equation.
Now, there's good precedent for this, by the way.
The 19th century, electricity and magnetism were presumed to be separate and distinct
entities, until they were shown to occupy two different sides of the same coin.
When we discovered this, electricity and magnetism got stapled together into one word, and that's
where we get electromagnetism from.
It wasn't always one word, started out as two words back in the 19th century, until
we learned more about the structure of matter and the behavior of nature.
Meanwhile, in the late 1960s, early 1970s, the electromagnetic force was found to share
the same coin with the weak nuclear force.
What came out of that?
A new theory of our understanding of the universe that combined those two forces.
So now we do some more stapling, do some editing.
We had electricity, magnetism, became electromagnetism.
We have electromagnetism and the weak force.
So rather than have a word this large, it's called the electroweak force.
So why not continue in this grand tradition, until we learn of the one force of nature
from which all else derives?
Why not?
Okay?
What?
That's got to be a cool result, right?
Now think about it, there's no tablet in the sky that requires that the universe that
we live in, regardless of our perception of it, that it exists in four dimensions and
only four dimensions, that'd be three spatial dimensions, X, Y and Z, and of course the
time dimension, T. In the past several decades, basically since the dawn of string theory,
it's been imagined that all the fundamental particles that we see and measure are not
separate and distinct from one another.
It's been imagined that they just appear that way to us in our lowly four dimensions.
Our lowly four dimensions, you never heard anybody say that, right?
Our lowly four dimensions, perhaps that's what's really going on because in higher dimensions
the string theorist tells us, exist these vibrations of strings of energy and that
string is what's fundamental, not the particles themselves.
Particles are just manifestations of those vibrating strings in our dimension.
And if you vibrate a string at one frequency or another, it reveals itself as one particle
or another in our dimension.
Now there's not a shred of evidence to support this idea, nor is there any proposed experiment
that can test it within the foreseeable reach of modern technologies.
But I'm okay with that.
I'll overlook that shortcoming for now.
One of the great mysteries of the universe, just because it's just so cool, is what is
the nature of black holes, black holes.
Kids love black holes the way they love T-Rex, and I think it's because each of these entities
can eat you, and anything that eats you, you give your highest respect.
You know, they're the consequence of the general theory of relativity, of Albert Einstein.
And that's his theory of gravity.
It's the modern theory of gravity.
And it describes gravity not as a force, the way we normally come to think of a force,
action at a distance.
Gravity is the curvature of the fabric of space-time, space-time.
That's our coordinates in space combined with our coordinates in time.
That sounds exotic, but it isn't really.
For example, you've never made an appointment with someone at a place unless there was also
an agreed upon time.
And you've never met someone at a time unless there was an agreed upon place.
So the intersection of space and time has been with us our entire lives.
It's even in our language.
It's just not in our thoughts.
These are fundamentally interwoven concepts, space and time.
And this whole general theory of relativity concept leads us to the fascinating statement
uttered by the relativity community, and it summarizes what goes on.
That's that matter tells space how to curve, and space tells matter how to move.
Now, what that tells you is that regions of space can have such high gravity that the
curvature of space is so deep within it that if anything wanted to climb out of that curvature,
it can't, can't.
What's the limit on that?
It turns out there's a kind of zone where even if you're traveling at the speed of
light that is insufficient energy to leave the area, to leave the zone.
If you are in such a zone and light doesn't get out and light is the fastest thing we
know about, nothing gets out.
It is dark and it is a hole.
That is what we call a black hole.
And here's what's interesting about that.
Here I am on Earth, I can take a pebble, toss it up, it comes right back.
If I throw it faster, it'll go higher before it comes back.
There is a speed with which I can toss this such that it will never come back to Earth.
You can calculate what that is.
You can experiment.
We've demonstrated it with the missions to the moon.
It is seven miles per second.
Now I'm not strong enough to do that, but I promise you if I threw this seven miles
per second, it will escape Earth and never come back.
That's the escape velocity of Earth.
If you have an object that is approaching the dimensions of a black hole, that escape
velocity gets higher and higher and higher and higher.
And just the way I can play catch with this pebble or with a ball on a very high gravity
surface, you can play catch with a beam of light because such is the path that the light
takes through the heavily curved space time in the vicinity of a black hole.
Now that makes for some interesting phenomena.
What would happen if you fall into a black hole, you might ask?
If you didn't ask it, I'm asking it for you.
What would happen if you fell in?
Well, let's take a feet first dive.
All right?
So you fall in.
There you go.
Here's what happens.
The center of the black hole, the gravity is so intense that as you get nearer and nearer
to the center, because you're falling right now, you get nearer and nearer to the center,
the difference in gravity between your feet and your head begins to grow.
There's a difference in gravity because the rate of change of gravity is so severe as
you approach the center of the black hole.
So that difference in gravity, we call the tidal force.
And tidal forces have the power to stretch things.
The moon's tidal force on Earth stretches the oceans, creating tidal bulges.
So when you have high tide, low tide, Earth is turning into and out of these bulges that
are always there in space.
People say, just a quick aside, the moon affects tides on Earth, does it affect our heads?
Because the tides are water, we're mostly water, the biologists tell us.
Yeah, there's a tidal force across your head.
It turns out it's one trillionth the force on your head that the pillow that you slept
with would put on your head if your head happened to be under it.
So we have tidal forces.
They're especially great across large objects, and especially small across the diameter of
your head.
All right, so here we are falling into the black hole.
My feet want to approach the center faster than the top of my head.
And I begin to stretch, and I get longer and longer and longer.
Stretching feels good initially, but at some point it hurts.
And you reach a point where in fact the tidal force is greater than the molecular bonds
that keep your flesh together, and you snap into two pieces, likely at the base of your
spine.
After that, those two pieces feel the tidal force, and they snap.
So you go from two to four to eight to sixteen, and this continues all the way down to the
center of the black hole, where you become a stream of atoms, and that's not even the
worst of it.
Because spacetime is funneling down to a point, you are not only being stretched, you are
being squeezed shoulder to shoulder, front to back.
You're being extruded through the fabric of spacetime like toothpaste through a tube.
We have a word for this, a word for dying while falling into a black hole.
That's called spaghettification, because that's what you look like, a string of spaghetti
falling in.
So it turns out, very large black holes, the tidal force is not as great as small black
holes, because big black holes, your feet, while they're closer to the center, the difference
between your feet and the head is not that great.
So it turns out you can survive a fall into a black hole, and here's the kind you want.
You want to spin up the black hole, and fall into one where when you get inside, the singularity
is actually a doughnut shape.
That's what happens when you have a spinning black hole.
It takes on extra interesting properties.
As you fall into a black hole, time slows down, and to a point where it practically stops,
and when it stops, the entire universe that you just left unfolds in an instant, and you
see the future of the universe you left in the instant it takes you to fall down into
the black hole.
This is clearly a one-way trip, okay?
Can't tell anybody else about this, but we also learned that you do the calculations
for what you expect to find in the center of a black hole that's rotating.
There's an entire other space time that has opened up before you, an entire other universe
that's not the one you just came from.
So take a large spinning black hole, fall in for this one time experiment, and you may
end up in another universe entirely.
Have we ever done that experiment?
No.
It works on paper.
So we'll accept volunteers.
Do we out there want to verify that prediction?
