I got one for you.
What happens when the theory of the large meets the theory of the small?
This case, what am I talking about?
The theory of the large, Einstein's general theory of relativity, that's our complete
understanding of cosmology.
It alerts us to the nature of the space-time continuum that spans the universe.
The theory of the small, of course, is quantum physics.
These two theories apply in their own regimes, quantum physics, the theory of the small,
general relativity, the theory of the large, yet they are fundamentally incompatible.
Quantum theory requires that space and time be quantized.
That's what quantum theory means, that space and time are not infinitely divisible into
a smooth continuum.
Space actually breaks up into pieces, and you can't get pieces any smaller than that.
Meanwhile, general relativity requires that space and time be smooth.
Like I said, they both work in their own regimes, but you can ask the question, what happens
if they have to meet each other?
What happens if they have to operate in the same place at the same time?
Just such a situation existed in the very early times of the universe.
In the early times, the universe, as we know, is expanding.
That means yesterday it was smaller than it is today.
You go back early enough, there's a point where the entire universe was in the same
place at the same time occupying an extremely small volume, a volume small enough that
it rivals the scale over which quantum physics applies.
The entire universe within the size of an atom.
Under those conditions, what do you have?
You have a shotgun marriage between these two incompatible theories.
Something's got to give, because the large becomes the small.
Well, the effort to merge these two theories, these two great understandings of our universe,
comprises part of the work that string theorists do.
Among other things that they're up to, that's a big part of it.
Can you merge these two great theories of the universe?
And what this spawns are ideas, really freaky ideas like quantum foam, where the fabric
of space and time is so tightly curved onto itself, that space time is less like a smoothly
curved fabric and more like the froth on a latte.
In this state of matter, and of energy, quantum fluctuations, which are a normal part of quantum
physics, they can spawn entire universes.
Since a universe is the size of an atom, a quantum fluctuation births an entire universe.
Each with slightly varying laws of physics from each other.
And all this unfolds in dimensions higher than our own.
Now, not all universes will survive the laws of physics they've chosen for themselves.
Some will re-collapse before stars are born.
Others will expand so fast that matter never has the chance to coalesce into galaxies and
stars.
And still others might succumb to laws where no matter is stable at all.
We're in the one that allowed some of the matter within it to achieve consciousness and
to contemplate its very existence.
If quantum fluctuations give rise to multiple universes from within that quantum foam, then
what do we call this entity?
Multiple universes being born?
The multiverse, of course, the multiverse.
I've given some of the theoretical arguments in favor of it, but there's also historical
philosophical arguments in its favor as well.
Let's go back in time.
There was a day when Earth was imagined to be all there was, everything else orbited
around us.
So Earth was singular, unique, large, and important.
We would later learn that Earth is just one of many other planets.
The planets that we saw in the night sky were not something smaller and lesser than
we are.
In fact, among planets were actually quite small.
Jupiter has storm systems in its atmosphere bigger than the entire planet Earth.
So that'll set you straight right quick once you make those comparisons.
So we learned that there's not just one Earth, there are many planets in orbit around the
one Sun.
Of course, our Sun is special, it's big, and it's bright, and look at those stars
in the night sky, they're just small and dim, no, they're just far away.
In fact, the Sun is not even unusual among stars, it's not the biggest or the smallest
or the brightest or the dimmest, it's kind of average actually.
So we learned that our Sun is just one of countless other Suns, evolving in our mindset
from a time when we imagined the Sun to be unique in the galaxy.
How about the galaxy, the Milky Way?
We see the band of light in the night sky, surely that's unique, yeah.
We're the one galaxy that comprises the universe, nope.
As we've said many times, Hubble showed that our Milky Way galaxy is but one of countless
billions of galaxies in the universe.
The universe, how about the universe?
Surely there's only one of those, there we go again, you want the universe to be singular?
Nothing before this has ever been singular, in spite of our urges to require that to be
true for them.
In fact, as far as we can tell, there's nothing in the universe that comes in ones, perhaps
not even the universe itself.
So this actually gives us a place to stand regarding that perennial question, what was
around before the universe began?
Perhaps we began as a single quantum fluctuation among countless others in a hyperdimensional
multiverse.
But of course that just shifts the question to a new paradigm, what was around before
the multiverse?
Or better yet, if indeed the universe never makes anything in ones, not even the universe
itself, then perhaps the multiverse from which we are born is part of a system of multiverses,
and that part of a system of those, and so forth.
Given that we started all this thinking that Earth was something special in the center
of the universe, it can be quite a blow to one's ego.
But only if your ego started, at the beginning of the day, much larger than the cosmos can
justify.
So we take this fact and use the trend line in the history of our discoveries to try to
never have an unjustifiably large ego.
Because just wait a few decades, at most we're going to find something about the universe
that puts us in our place, and such is the continued progress of our discoveries about
our place in the universe.
In the early universe, we know that everything was packed into a small space, and the temperature
was very high, and when you have a high temperature, the world around you behaves very differently
from what goes on here on Earth.
There's an equation that matters that drives everything, and we've learned this equation
in elementary school.
It is, of course, E equals MC squared.
Hold the C squared aside for a moment, that's just a constant, and it happens to be the
speed of light.
What matters in that equation is that energy is recognized to be equivalent to matter.
You can convert them back and forth.
At will, provided you have enough energy to pull it off.
And when you do so, you can create particles out of energy fields, and energy fields out
of particles.
This was going on incessantly in the early universe, because it was just that hot.
How does that work?
Well, light, anywhere you see it, typically visible light, doesn't have enough energy
in it to make particles.
That's why E equals MC squared does not manifest itself in any obvious way in everyday life.
But if I was instead being bathed, not with visible light, but with high energy x-rays
or gamma rays, that's light too, x-rays and gamma rays, that's a high energy version of
visible light.
That kind of light has enough energy to spawn spontaneously, it can create particles, electrons,
for example.
Now, there's a symmetry to this.
Chemistry is a beautiful concept in the universe.
What we have found is that if you take light and make matter out of it, the energy from
light and turn it into matter, it makes pairs of particles every time.
If you take a high energy x-ray, it'll make an electron and the antimatter counterpart
to the electron, the positron.
It'll spontaneously create them and they'll fly apart in opposite directions.
If you bring those two particles back together, they annihilate and become energy once again.
This is E equals MC squared manifested and it does this all the time in the early universe
and it's a kind of an equilibrium particle soup that went on back then.
All right, so here's what happened.
Every time you make particles, they come in pairs.
Every time they annihilate, they disappear completely.
If that's all that went on in the early universe as we expanded and cooled, there'd be a day
where every matter-antimatter particle annihilated, it would create light.
That light would cool, wouldn't have enough energy to make particles again, and the entire
universe would be just filled with light and no matter in it at all because everything
was symmetric.
All matter got annihilated with its antimatter counterpart.
All particles got created in pairs.
So if symmetry, which we know and love that drives so much of the laws of the universe,
if symmetry were preserved, we wouldn't be here to talk about it.
So something must have happened in the early universe and we call it symmetry breaking.
Water disobeyed its own laws.
At some point, a high-energy beam of light created a matter particle without the antimatter
particle pair.
That's a breaking of the symmetry and we know how often this must have happened.
One in a hundred million of these phenomenon gave us a matter particle and no antimatter
counterpart.
This matter particle now will live forever because it's got nobody to annihilate with.
All the others annihilate.
So in fact, the universe that we see, know, and love today is the consequence of broken
symmetry in the very early universe, shortly after the Big Bang.
It's a mystery.
We don't know why it happened.
We don't know the, we don't know the, the, we can, we try to produce it in the lab.
We don't, everything we do in the lab is symmetric.
Any time we create particles in the lab, it's a matter antimatter particle pair.
Every time we put them back together, we get light.
So something happened in the early universe.
We call it a phase transition.
You're familiar with phase transitions in everyday life.
Water goes to ice.
The fundamental properties of it changes across that border, the freezing point.
Water can go to steam.
That's another phase transition.
So when we think of periods in the early universe where things were really different, on one
side of a transition from the other, we call that a phase transition.
In that particular case, it was the breaking of the symmetry of the matter and antimatter
in the cosmos.
So I bet you never thought that you would embrace and love the fact that while we have
antimatter, there's a point where unless nature breaks its own rules, we wouldn't even be
here to contemplate the fact that it broke its own rules.
As far as we know, nothing can travel faster than the speed of light in a vacuum.
Period.
It's not like we haven't wanted to make that happen.
It's not like we haven't looked around the universe to see if we can find something that
violates that rule.
We have.
We've looked hard.
We've never found anything to violate that rule.
Not only that, it is a fundamental tenet to Einstein's theories of relativity.
So what that says is this speed of light rule is not a limitation of technology.
It's a basic fundamental feature of the universe.
Now you might be thinking, look, you guys once said we'll never be able to fly with
heavier than air hardware, or you will never break the sound barrier.
We'll never go faster than light.
This is where I hear this all the time, except these are fundamentally different statements.
What's different about them is the people who said we will never fly fast, that we'll
never fly.
Well, okay.
When they said that, surely there were birds flying overhead, surely.
So it's not like flying is impossible.
You just haven't figured out how to do it yet.
That should have been obvious to that person.
The statement should have been we have not yet figured out how to fly.
And birds are heavier than air and they manage it just fine.
And this thing will never fly faster than, will never travel faster than sound, the sound
barrier.
We had rifles at the time people were saying that, where the bullet coming out of the rifle
traveled faster than sound.
We had the bull whip.
When you flick a bull whip, the very tip of the whip.
The reason why it makes that cracking sound, that's like a mini sonic boom.
It is traveling faster than sound.
We had things that travel faster than sound.
Just because you couldn't figure out how to make an airplane do it, that's not my fault,
not the fault of the universe.
So those two claims are fundamentally different from the assertion that we will never go faster
than light.
It doesn't mean we haven't thought about it.
In fact, there's a hypothetical particle that was invented just to accommodate what would
happen if we went faster than light.
And they're called tachyons from the Greek root of that word meaning speed, a tachometer
has the same root as the word tachyon.
These are hypothetical particles.
We've never found one, but we imagine what would it be like if particles existed faster
than light?
Well, it turns out Einstein's relativity tells us you can't accelerate any material object
to reach the speed of light.
But if you put in an object that exists faster than light, you can still run through all
the equations and the equations don't mind.
But some interesting properties emerge.
For tachyons, what do you get?
They exist faster than light.
It will require an infinite amount of energy to slow them down to the speed of light.
So in fact, they can never reach the speed of light.
And because they're going faster than the speed of light, they live backwards through
time.
How would you ever detect such a thing?
Well, here's what you do.
You find out what kind of interaction your tachyon would have with particles that exist
in your present.
So as they go backwards in time, they have to share your present, even if for only an
instant.
So we looked at what energies the tachyon would have, what particle interactions might
be favored for a tachyon, we've looked for them, we've never found it.
And so to this day, a tachyon remains an intellectual curiosity that itself does not violate any
known laws of physics because it's not crossing the speed of light barrier.
It's existing faster than it.
But the day we find a particle faster than light, we bet pretty sure that it'll have
all the properties that I just described, which would make it one of the coolest particles
ever discovered.
Now, there are other ways to go faster than light.
You can cheat.
Cheat in a legal way.
For example, on Star Trek, everybody's favorite sci-fi series from the 1960s, Star Trek,
what did they have?
They had warp drives.
Warp drives, what did that do?
Well, here's your galaxy right there, and they're on one side of the galaxy and they
want to get to the other.
So what do you do?
Turn on the warp drives, and that takes the space-time continuum and bends it.
And now here's where they are, and here's where they want to go.
They just take a little gap through the fabric of space-time, unwarp the galaxy, and there
they are.
They cross the 100,000 light-year diameter galaxy during the TV commercial.
Works every time.
So that's legitimate in the sense that we know space and time can curve, and if you
can control that curvature, you can get to a place much faster than a light beam would
have taken, in time much less time than it would have taken a light beam to traverse
that same journey.
And so we allow that.
That's cool.
I want warp drives that can do that.
That would be really cool.
But not only that, this little path that they took to cut from one part of their space-time
to another, we have a term for that as well.
It's called a wormhole.
That is a portal in the space-time continuum that takes you from one part of the universe
to another.
And the more energy you have, the more you can curve major sections of the universe to
traverse great distances.
And I assert that if we're ever going to travel the stars, if we're ever going to cross the
galaxy or visit another galaxy, it's going to have to be in some kind of way that exploits
wormholes and the curving of the fabric of space and time.
It's going to have to, because our fastest spaceships, if you hop a ride on them today,
would take you 50,000 years to reach the nearest star to the sun, and the nearest star to the
sun is sitting on our nose compared with the scale of the galaxy.
So watch that space, look for the invention of a warp drive, because I'm going to be on
that first spaceship that has it.
You ever wonder what the long-term fate of the universe is?
We think we know enough of the laws of physics and the behavior of stars and galaxies to
actually have some insight into what that looks like.
Because stars don't burn forever.
Stars will not continue to be made forever.
There's a winding down of the cosmic clock that we know enough physics to be able to
track.
So let's go forward in time.
One of my favorite moments will take place in about seven billion years.
We chatted about it a few lectures ago, and that was the impending collision between the
Milky Way galaxy and Andromeda.
Galaxies all around the universe, if they are within each other's gravitational embrace,
they will ultimately collide.
This is the very distant future.
Some galaxies look like they're on a stable orbit around each other, but there's an erosion
of that orbital energy that is happening with any two orbiting objects.
They will eventually collide and merge.
Okay, how about the gas clouds that are generating stars?
Eventually we're going to run out of gas.
Our galaxy, about, I don't know, 10, 20, 30% of its mass is in gas, and it is cranking
out stars.
There's some nearby fascinating regions of star formation in the sky tonight.
So we keep making stars, so everything feels like it's in equilibrium.
Stars die, other stars are born.
The problem is, for every star that's born out of a gas cloud, most of those that are
born don't return their gas into space.
It gets locked up.
And so every time you make a star, you are draining the supply of gas clouds.
The day will come when there's no gas left.
All the gas supply is exhausted, and the era of birthing stars will have stopped.
Now, that is a trillion years from now.
Don't hold your breath.
It's a while.
Don't worry about that.
However, right about then, something else will happen.
Remember this dark energy I've been telling you about that's forcing the universe to accelerate?
You've got to realize that, that acceleration is catastrophic.
It is, it will take every galaxy in the expanding universe, and in not very much time from now,
it will accelerate them beyond our horizon.
Now, let's back up for a minute.
Let's back up.
Before Edwin Hubble showed that the fuzzy spiral things in the night sky were not just
fuzzy spiral gas clouds among the stars.
They were entire other galaxies beyond the stars of our Milky Way.
But before that moment, we would sit out under the stars, look up, and imagine that those
stars was the entire universe.
That was the state of mind at the time.
It was not until Hubble where we learned that there are other galaxies out there.
That's an interesting transition in our understanding of our place in the universe.
Now what effect dark energy has in the rapid expansion of the universe is that all the
galaxies of the night sky recede so fast that they go beyond our horizon.
What is a horizon in the universe?
It's just kind of like our horizon here on Earth.
You put a ship out to sea, and it looks out to the horizon, and it's, is that the edge
of the Earth?
No.
No, you know better.
You can travel in that direction, and you see more Earth come into view.
But at any given instant, there is an edge beyond which you cannot see, and if a ship
goes across that edge, it is gone from your sight.
That concept of a horizon at sea has much in common with our three-dimensional horizon
in the universe.
And so, here's what will happen.
As these galaxies accelerate beyond our horizon, there is an important chapter in the history
of the universe that will get erased, torn from the pages of cosmic truths, without galaxies
in our night sky.
Any post-apocalyptic Earth civilization will know nothing of the cosmic history of the
universe.
It will be the end of cosmology.
Everything we know about the beginning of the universe comes from studying galaxies,
not from stars, galaxies.
But what will happen at about that time in the future of the universe?
Is that anyone on Earth, or in our galaxy at all, who looks up at the night sky, that
night sky will resemble the pre-hubble night sky.
Except the difference is, back then, they only thought the stars in the night sky was
their entire known universe, whereas in our future, the stars of our night sky in our
own galaxy will be the entire known universe.
There will be no galaxies available to us.
That's an interesting chapter in our lives, because if we're trying to be scientists,
if we're trying to be astrophysicists, if we're trying to be cosmologists in that time, there's
a chapter missing.
There's a piece of the universe not available to us.
There simply would be no cosmology at all.
Get back to that in a minute.
Let's continue to evolve the universe.
All right, eventually, without any stars to do the replacing, the stars end up burning
out.
One by one, they turn off in the night sky.
The sky starts getting dark.
Eventually, we theorize that the proton will decay.
The very structure of matter itself will decay into lesser, lighter particles.
That's bad.
That's bad for matter.
That's way in the future.
Now we're talking at least 10 to the 33 years.
That's huge.
I'm talking about the very distant universe here.
Very distant.
I'm self-aware of this.
All right.
You keep going far into the future.
All the orbits of galaxies decay.
They spiral down ever so slowly, but they'll eventually get there and pile onto the central
black hole that lurks in the center of every single galaxy.
Every galaxy loses its stars.
The remnant cores of each star that burned out eventually spiral down into their black
holes and you have this sea of black holes in the universe.
Those black holes eventually evaporate using Hawking radiation.
They evaporate.
That takes 10 to the 100 years.
That's a Google years.
Google spelt G-O-O-G-O-L.
That's the original spelling of Google.
It's got nothing to do with the company.
Mathematicians had that word first.
So what is going on?
The black holes evaporate.
Stars are gone.
The universe is dark.
As it expands, it continues to cool and the universe plunges towards absolute zero.
And this expansion as it cools eternally.
What this tells us is that, no, the universe will not end in fire, but in ice.
All right, now let's get back to my night sky that's missing galaxies.
On the short list of what keeps me awake at night, I ask, is today a time in cosmic history
where some chapters in the cosmological storybook have been previously removed?
Today, I ask that.
I know that in the future, we're not going to have cosmology because there'll be no galaxies.
Is there something we don't have today and I don't know we don't have it today?
And I'm trying to figure out the universe and I'm missing an important chapter.
I'm missing the rule book, I'm missing the index, I'm missing the primer of how to figure
out how the universe works.
Because if we are victims of such a gap in the data on the universe, then we're surely
just groping in the dark, delusionally thinking that we've been granted full access to the
universe.
We want data.
We need data.
We require data for us to deduce the correct operations of nature.
And so I ask, is our ignorance that prevails today that we're only 4% of the universe and
the rest we're clueless about?
Is that state of ignorance the consequence of a missing chapter in cosmic history?
Or is it just the next set of mysteries awaiting the birth of a new Newton or an Einstein?
Or perish the thought, maybe in this particular case the human intellect is insufficient to
answer the very questions that it's smart enough to pose?
I'm missing an important chapter, I'm missing the index, I'm missing the primer of how
to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out
how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure
out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to
figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out
how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure
out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure
out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure
out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure
out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure
out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure out how to figure
