So, I would like to present our speaker, Dmitry Grimovsky, a professor of fasting medicine.
He will begin an activity about smoke and pig driving in stores. Please, Dmitry Grimovsky.
Dmitry Grimovsky.
Hey, great. Good morning or good afternoon, depending where you are.
I feel almost mandatory to give a talk on fluids. I don't work with applications of fluids.
I work with applied PDE and stability of nonlinear waves.
But I was lucky that I had an undergraduate student last year, Spencer Locke,
and with him we reviewed lots of fluid material, and I think my talk will be something interesting,
so it's on a classical subject.
I'd like to mention that Spencer just finished his undergraduate degree and he's moving to University of Michigan for graduate study.
Don't hesitate to interrupt with any questions.
So, I will start with some background information and it is just a classical problem of rotational motion of incompressible fluids.
The problem is a free surface, so-called Stokes wave.
As I said, I'm very interested in the stability of periodic or solitary waves.
And the fluid mechanics equations, the early equations seems to be a little bit complicated because they combine the Hamiltonian dynamics on a free surface with elliptic PDEs for the velocity potential coupled together.
And therefore, the main question is how to get nonlinear evolution equations close to describe this Hamiltonian dynamics.
And from very long ago, some applied PDEs were derived in this context, in particular for long, small amplitude waves.
So, the wavelength is much larger than the depth of the fluid and the amplitude is much smaller than the depth of the fluid.
And of course, the list of PDEs would start with a classical Cartovac de Vries equation, which is evolutionary equation, first order derivative in time, dispersive here and convective nonlinearity.
And it was derived long, long, long ago and it was used for existence and stability of solitary waves and periodic waves.
A different equation was derived not so long ago, only 50 years ago, much shorter compared to KTV equation, and it was a regularized KTV or PBM equation.
The only difference here appears to be in the dispersive term.
And this later another PDE was derived by Kamasa and Hall.
And if you look at the left hand side, it is just the BBM equation, but it's modified with some quadratic nonlinearity and cubic derivatives here.
And in fact, this equation was rigorously justified as well as all other equations were rigorously justified in the context of fluids.
But I will start my talk with a comparison of the state of the art and the existence and stability theory for periodic and solitary wave solutions for these three equations.
For KTV and BBM, they share common features. Solutions of initial value problem exist in the sobular space H1.
And in this sobular space, the energy and momentum function are well defined. That makes it energy space, which is very good, conserved in time.
The traveling wave solutions can be found effectively from an ODE, and the study of this ODE shows that all traveling wave solutions have smooth profiles in the admissible range of the wave speeds.
And moreover, these traveling waves becomes constrained minimizers of the energy subject of momentum.
Then by working with the Lyapunov theory of stability, we can prove that because this is constrained minimizers of energies, the traveling waves are orbitally stable in the energy space H1 for which solutions of the initial value problem are well defined.
And so in this theory, the original theory, there are only smooth waves, while in fluids we know in earlier equations, there are also some picked waves, or even waves with singularity.
And if we look now at what Kamasa Holm equation can offer, in fact, it can offer not only smooth waves, but also the waves with singularity.
In the Kamasa Holm equation, we have to be a little bit careful with solutions of the initial value problem.
And it turns out that one need to control the slopes, the first derivative of the solutions in order to get local well postness in the space H1 with bounded slopes.
In the traveling waves, then we will find intervals for parameters for which waves are smooth, and intervals for parameters for which the waves are picked or casped.
These are two types of singularity, for peak it's a finite jump of the first derivative, the first derivative is still bounded, for casped it's an infinite jump of the first derivative, so the first derivative is unbounded.
Both coexist, smooth and picked, and both smooth and picked waves are still constrained minimizers of energy.
The energy is still defined in the space of H1, however we are now lacking local well postness in H1, we need to control the slopes in the time evolution.
Because of that we have to be very careful with stability analysis.
For the waves with smooth profile, it was proven that the waves are still stable because there is a momentum density which can be used to control the slopes for the waves with the smooth profiles.
But for the waves with peak profiles, they are unstable in the time evolution.
The perturbations do not grow in H1 because of this constrained minimization properties, but the perturbations do grow in W1 infinity, and that makes the profile unstable.
So as a summary of what this Camasso-Holm equation can offer, it's a cartoon here with admissible range of the velocities for which smooth waves exist, something like waves with such nice profiles, where intervals for which casped waves exist, the waves with infinite singularity for the slopes for the first derivative.
And then in between there is a point for which the wave is picked. There is a singularity, but it's not strong, the first derivative just jumps by finite number here.
And that's the state of the art for the Camasso-Holm equation.
Now if you want to go away from these nonlinear PDEs and think about the regional problems, the earlier equations, the stock's wave, then obviously we know that there are smooth waves and there are picked waves.
Stocks himself predicted existence of the peak wave is 120 degrees at the crest here, and the existence of such solutions was proven by Toland and his collaborators.
The existence of this precise 2 pi over 3 peak singularity was proven by Plotnikov.
But if you want to approximate or to understand stability problems related to such picked profiles, then we would be running into the troubles and even approximation of such solutions would be a troublesome.
I will refer to some pictures from the paper of Sergei Dechenko, Pavel Uznikov and Korotkevich, Alexander Korotkevich, where they studied approximations of these traveling wave solutions by using conformal coordinate, by using the formulas which will be the main item in my talk.
And the smooth waves could be very, very approximated by Fourier series, but unfortunately it is very hard to get close to the picked wave.
There is always some distance from reaching the peak wave.
Let's look at how the velocity depends on the steepness of the wave. The picture is also quite confusing. It starts very good monotonic function, but then it reaches the maximum point, and then it's not clear whether it's oscillate or just wind around here, but definitely there is at least one fault point here.
Because the numerical results obtained before reaching the peak status and there are no results for the picked solutions. Recently Anastasia and Sergei Dechenko studied a lot in stability of such solid stocks waves by using numerical methods, and this is quite good.
And so from the beginning, I would like to say that I will be looking at the periodic waves, and I will be thinking about the stability problem with respect to periodic perturbations of the same period.
It eliminates the problem of modulational stability, and I was very happy to see that recently the subject was booming with the proofs of modulational stability by using different techniques.
And so these four groups, including the group of Bernard here.
The point here to make is that these four groups used four different techniques to study modulational stability for stocks waves, and only in the limit when the stock's ways has small amplitude, so it eliminates immediately as the picked waves.
What I wanted to mention is that we are going to work with the formalism which is neither in the list, not in the list. We are going to work with the formalism based still on conformal transformations or assumptions similar to the work of Walter Strauss, but with some modifications.
And so the objective of our work is to inspect a closed system of nonlinear evolution equations, which we can obtain here to eliminate elliptic part of the problem and reduce it to Hamiltonian dynamics.
And we will be particularly interested to understand transition from the smooth to singular traveling wave solutions, periodic wave solutions, and also to understand analytically stability of the periodic waves.
So the system of equations we haven't been exploring is the generalization of what is called Babenki equation, and it was derived about 30 years ago, 40 years ago, in the context of earlier equations, and it is using conformal transformation method.
So the starting part is classical, we have the free surface profile here, the velocity potential which is defined in the fluid domain, with a periodic boundary condition in the next direction, flat bottom at the bottom, and then the free surface here at the top,
Neumann boundary conditions at the flat bottom, and on the top we have this dynamical and kinematical or kinematic and dynamic condition.
One important thing here is that in order to make sense of the depths, we need to do some kind of normalization and now normalization will be the zero mean constraint here.
Now, with conformal transformation, we think about mapping the fluid domain to a rectangle, and the transformation is supposed to be given expressed in terms of holomorphic function, so that for really imaginary parts of holomorphic function would satisfy Kashi Riemann equation.
The domain here in the W plane becomes a rectangle, which we particularly like because we can use the operation of variables and PDA techniques to solve this elliptic part of the problem explicitly.
We would do still periodic boundary conditions here in the horizontal direction, we would do Neumann boundary conditions both for the potentials and also for the X part of the mapping, and we would have to define a little bit the depths of the fluid.
Here H, that's the depth of the fluid in W coordinate, the variable may be different from H0, the difference is the mean value of the free surface.
But once we have separation of variables, we know how to solve this kind of problems, and so here we can see here the difference between the two depths, which would be the mean value of the free surface here.
We can do the same thing for the velocity potential because Laplace equation is invariant under conformal transformation, so it's still the same kind of problem for the velocity potential.
What is this formalism, we will define two canonical variables, one is for the velocity potential at the top surface, and the other one is the free surface, which is now mapped at the top surface in W plane, xi and eta variables.
And as it was derived 30 years ago, these equations are closed and they look like these two equations for the free surface and for the velocity potential.
In fact, the derivation can be found in the papers of Aleksandr Gechenko, Kuznetsov, Petro Zaharov, and many other papers around this time.
We particularly like the derivation and appendix of the paper of Sergei Techenko, Luzhnikov, and Karatkevich here, and we have followed these derivations to check that it's all consistent and correct.
If we think, if you look at these equations, then they are local with respect to time, which is a good thing.
It's a little bit quadratic here with respect to time, which makes it slightly more complicated that what we want to, but they're still non-local with respect to the spatial variable.
The non-local operator is a multiplicative operator in a Fourier domain, and it just expresses the wave dispersion.
So, for example, here, the TENCH can be seen here as a mapping from x to y variable, and that's expressed by the operator T.
Obviously, this operator is not invertible, however, it gives zero mean value for the periodic function when it acts, and so if we restrict our consideration to periodic functions with zero mean, then we can invert this operator,
but then there will be zero value for the mean value of this inverse operator.
Both operators are skew-adjoint in L2 spaces, and with this inverse operator with derivative, it becomes self-adjoint operator, which is one of the most important operators of this water-wave theory with the Fourier symbol N.
Well, here, of course, the equations are slightly more complicated, but still they can be analyzed. In particular, we can think about conserved quantities and we can think about traveling wave solutions to simplify these equations greatly.
So, first, for about conserved quantities, since we had this zero mean constraint in physical variable and there is now a transformation variable involved, this constraint maps to a quadratic constraint on the mean value for the free surface in the new variable u.
The most parts of this quadratic constraint are constants of motion, and the right additional constants of motions, in particular, the last one is the Hamiltonian, the full energy of a water-wave problem that's encoded here.
If we think about traveling wave solutions, these equations become particularly nice. For the traveling wave solutions, the quadratic part of the first equation cancels out, and we have a local linear relation between the velocity potential and the free surface.
But with this relation to the second equation, it becomes what is known as a Babenka equation. I like the form of Babenka equation in this way, that the left-hand side is just a linear operator, self-adjoint operator here, and the right-hand side is just a quadratic non-local operator expressed by the same k.
And the problem is Hamiltonian, so it can be formulated from the least action principle from the variational derivative of the energy function.
If we want to study existence, then we need to solve this equation, and both smooth and picked traveling waves are supposed to give us profiles satisfying this equation.
If we want stability, then we need to linearize this non-linear equation and get a linearized operator, which is a self-adjoint operator in L2 space. And this is like a Hessian of the energy functionals defined at this profile of the traveling wave solution.
If we want linearized evolution of this problem, this is the second order problem, the linearized evolution will give us a quadratic pencil related to this self-adjoint operator, which is slightly more complicated than what we want.
And therefore, our first step was maybe to approach to this subject to think about the ways to simplify, to think about the toy problem.
The idea of the toy problem which I'm going to present during my talk today is to explore this traveling wave coordinate and to explore this kind of linear relationship between the two variables with the deviation here is hidden in zeta variable.
The first equation is invariant after this transformation in zeta variables and eta variables. And the second equation, which was long, remains long.
However, in this long second equation, we can see a remarkable structure which is placed here in a frame, in a box.
First, we see all the terms of the Babank equation, which would define profile of the traveling wave without any truncation.
And we can see the first order evolution, which is closed on the same surface elevation variable as the Babank equation.
So the toy problem which I'm presenting now is that we can just cut out this discrepancies, this deviation variable zeta, completely neglect the first equation, cut out this path from the second equation and consider the problem which is framed here in the box.
And that's what is our toy model. And I'm going to simplify this toy model even more in order to be able to solve both existence and stability problem in a full analysis glory without any numerical approximation.
So this is the path where I will work with the toy model. So again, just one equation instead of two, which still keeps the same squared joint operator here in front of the time evolution, time derivative, and it keeps the Babank equation with a self-adjoint operator here cage.
So now, as I promised, I would like to think about the shallow water limit when I can replace this non-local model with something like a non-linear PDE to be able to study it.
And one remarkable equation which comes immediately in the memory is the equation which is called intermediate long-quave equation, which is one of the models of integrable problems, integrable systems.
And that problem has a very similar non-local operator cage. There's only difference that the mean value was non-zero, but was augmented in the same way that it's the same as the limit of n going to zero for all other four modes, such that this operator can be expanded in a shallow water limit to be just identity,
plus second order derivative operator, and the identity here is removed by the Galilean transformation in a reference frame moving with the limiting wave speed, so that we have reductions of the intermediate long-quave equation to the KDB equation.
So here, in our operator cage, we already have zero mean. We don't have to remove it. But the idea of the toy problem that we are going to remove the limiting values for all other Fourier coefficients subtract them out, such that the leading order will be just the second order derivative equation, so that this non-local problem is replaced by the PDE.
So I don't claim that there is a rigorous procedure involved here. It is basically a toy model where we can give a full mathematical analysis of the PDE involved.
In particular, thinking overshoot beyond the smooth waves towards to the to the picked wave and cast wave.
But if it offers something significant, then maybe we can reinspect the original problem and think if the same phenomena is available in the full water wave problem without this interesting trick.
So if you think about this local PDE, then it shares all the properties of the original water wave equation. It has the same constraint, which is the zero mean constraint in the original variable. Now it's expressed in terms of the local operator here.
Both parts of these constraints are constant of motion. In addition, there is a Hamiltonian, which is also constant of motion, and all these quantities are not very far from the conserved quantities of the commasohol equation.
So what we achieved here by doing this kind of a toy model that we are at the level when it is not a KDV theory, but more like a level of commasohol theory with the quantities defined like this.
So here in the main part of my talk, I'm going to present two main results on this local model, which we derived in this way.
Actually, three main results. The first result is about initial value problem. We think about initial value problem and there is still no locality involved here. The derivative in spatial variable applies to the left.
Yes. On your previous slide.
So you have the constraints. So both, as you said, both parts of that are conserved quantities. The second one's clearly positive.
Yes.
So in the toy model, you don't have that the average of eta is zero anymore.
In fact, it's strictly negative because this is a positive quantity. So we have this mean constraint, which comes from a regional mean in terms of the integral of eta with respect to x.
And now because of the chain rule transformation, it becomes this additional quadratic constraint. So from here, the mean value is constant in time, but it's always equal negative to this positive quantity here, which could be considered to be momentum.
So mass, momentum and energy is the same, the same, the same terminology as we used to do in KDV theory. But in addition to this, there is a non locality involved because there is still derivative here, which we need to invert.
And in order to comply, in order to resist inversion, we have the zero mean constraint. So it's not zero mean constraints. We have this non linear constraint, right.
Thank you.
Okay, great. And so I wanted just to show that the origin of this non locality, which is still remaining in this problem. That's because of this operator th k h is th derivative.
So if k h is replaced by second derivative th inverse is supposed to be replaced by first order derivative and that's how it appears to be in the problem.
The good stuff is that since this quantity has zero mean, I can use projection operator to the subspace of L2 functions with zero mean, and on this subspace I can invert the derivative, obviously the Fourier series inversion, and I can define uniquely the
derivative to have also zero mean.
In which case we have conserved quantity for eta conserved quantity for derivative of eta squared, and the additional zero constraint here.
In evolutionary form, we can prove well posting a theory quite easily, because the right hand side is a sum of two parts. The first part is local and it is inviscid burglarous equations solutions of which are well defined by characteristics in the space of h one with the bounded slopes.
So the burglarous equation, we always have to control the slopes.
And this is a non local part, the second part, it's a bounded operator on every bounded subset in that space as well.
And so by using kind of method of characteristic blue ML principle, we can immediately end up with the local well postness in h one space intersecting with the bounded slopes bounded first derivatives.
And that's the space which makes sense for picked wave and for smooth waves, but maybe not so much for cast wave, if you want to consider evolution of the cast wave.
Now if you think about traveling wave solution, we don't have to use traveling wave coordinate anymore, it was already done before, and we have very explicitly the parameter for the speed of the traveling wave here encoded.
What we have instead is the ODE, ODE for time independent solution of this toy model.
And that is a nice ODE which can be fully solved fully studied. And the main principle result which I wanted to show is precisely this existence theory.
The periodic waves with a normalized period of two pi, we always do two pi here for the normalization of the period bifurcate from the unit value of the wave speed C.
And that limits the L infinity norm of the solution goes to zero. And then it always bifurcate to the right of this limiting wave speed.
And there exists another remarkable value C star here given explicitly for which the wave remains smooth.
In fact, there is a non-empty interval of wave speeds for which the wave is continuous, but the first derivative is singular. It's a strongly singular with infinite jump of the first derivative.
And more precisely, it has a very precise asymptotic expansion to be exactly mod u2 short as comes from the ODE shield.
So if we want maybe to illustrate this with pictures, here they are. If we increment the speed parameter, then the small amplitude wave becomes strongly non-linear and approaches, in our theory, it approaches without any problems to the picked wave.
We have no any problems, any discrepancies here. And then the dotted line, the dashed line shows the picked wave with the finite jump of the slope.
And then past this peak wave, there is a family of casped wave with infinite jump of the slopes. And the waves exist still in a non-empty interval of wave speeds.
So this precisely confirms or maybe generalize or maybe just give another example of the phenomena I was talking about when I was reviewing Kamasa-Holland equation.
The interval of wave speeds for which smooth waves exist, interval of wave speeds for which casped wave exist, and then a very particular border point for which the wave is picked.
In fact, it exists in a very explicit way as a parabolic profile for that precise wave speed. So it's just for one wave speed, it's parabolic profile.
What is interesting and may attract some attention that if we think about the highest, the maximal height of the wave, then for all casped waves, the maximal height happen exactly at one half c squared,
which is Bernoulli law. It comes from Bernoulli law of high dynamics. Waves of the maximal height should have one half c squared at the at the at the maximum value.
Another remarkable thing is this behavior of u to the power two-third. Since u is the variable in w plane and we use this analytical transformation, conformal mapping, but which is not fully conformal now because there is a singularity involved.
Still, the singularity is unfolded precisely to give us a peak with 120 degrees.
And so here for the first time, we can see that maybe such things like a casped wave, like a stock's peaked wave in the original earlier equations exists not just for one particular limiting wave speed, but for the whole range of the wave speeds.
And the border point, it's not clear what it is sent to by conformal transformation. What is the border point which separates the family of smooth waves from the family of singular waves.
Maybe it's the artifact of the toy model, but maybe it exists in one just to study more attentively earlier equations in this Babenka formulation.
And so I will give a little bit details, not much about how this result can be proven. In fact, it's just ODE theory. We are lucky to have Hamiltonian ODE from Hamiltonian PDE, so it says there is a first-order invariant.
And with this first-order invariant, we know that all orbits of ODE, they are level curves of this function of two variables.
With smooth curves existing inside of separate waves loop, they give us smooth periodic waves. And casped waves exist outside if the singular waves and this parabolic wave, the peak wave is just a separate risk curve.
One important ingredient of the theory for DEs on the face plane is the period function. That's the duration of the period of this free surface.
And it is a function of the parameter C, but also a function of this level, constant level for the first-order invariant.
And most important thing that it is monotonic. It is monotonically increasing with respect to C, and it is monotonically decreasing with respect to this level E, at least within the family of the smooth waves and slightly beyond the family of the smooth waves.
So in fact, in order to illustrate this, I will just give a picture here from E0, that's from the center point, the period function is monotonically decreasing, passes this limiting peak wave, still monotonically decreasing until it reaches a global minimum and then it increases.
And so if you want to identify how many 2 pi periodic solutions exist, what we have to do is just to find a root of this period function at the level 2 pi.
And the other dotted curve shows the same period function for large values of C to show that it's indeed monotonically increasing with respect to C.
So with this we have an existence diagram completely. The family of smooth wave exists between the black points, the family of casped wave exists between black point and the red point.
And there is one more family here, the casped, the singular family, which we completely ignore because it doesn't bifurcate from the linear limit, so we don't need to worry about it.
And so with the same kind of analysis, we can see the relevance of the picked wave, the singularity is cancelled here in the quadrature and the secondary derivative is in fact constant, so it's a parabolic profile wave.
And then if the value of the level E is above the critical level, then the singularity is not cancelled and from that singularity by very elementary analysis we can get back this law of U to the power 2 third.
So with this I'm going to present the last important result, which I have for the toy model is a full understanding of stability, at least for the smooth and for the picked wave.
So for the stability analysis, we would think about something like adding a perturbation to the profile. Remember that I cut out quadratic eigenvalue problem and now it becomes a linear eigenvalue problem or in other words first order with respect to time evolution is well defined here by
linearized Bob-Banker operator, which is here, self-adjoint operator. Then we have this constraint of the theory, which gives us a proper orthogonality of the perturbation to this local path, so that's anti-derivative is again well defined, but because we have conservation quantity for this, we can always complement with two constraints.
So requiring both the mean value to be just zero and perturbation to be orthogonal to the second derivative just zero.
And that's just to fixed mass and the fixed momentum, the same concept which is very useful in orbital stability theory.
With this we have the following theorem. For the entire family of the smooth periodic waves, we are guaranteeing linear orbital stability, meaning that for any initial data H1 with these two constraints, there exists a unique solution staying in H1 such that this unique solution is not growing relative to the translation of the original periodic wave.
So this is a derivative with respect to space, it's a translational mode and the translational mode is controllable, it cannot grow faster than the linear function, but then the perturbation is defined relative to this translational mode, which is very typical for the orbital stability concept.
The idea, okay, before that a few remarks are in order. So first of all, we can do spectral stability with the same level, linear stability in fact implies spectral stability here, for spectral stability we would have an eigenvalue problem and the entire spectrum is a subset of a purely imaginary line.
What is interesting about this problem is that if we now differentiate this, we can reformulate it in the form which appears in the work of Stanislav and Stefanov in 2016.
I think they were looking at the different examples, but now with this toy model we have a very natural example for applications of this stability theory for this strange interesting eigenvalue problem.
On the other hand, linear stability doesn't apply non-linear stability because we are using energy quantity to control perturbations in H1, like it was here in the theorem, the norms of H1 given, while the slopes are not controllable from the energy.
And I don't know any momentum quantity which could be useful here to control the slopes. If it exists, then we can upgrade it for the non-linear stability analysis, but so far I'm not no luck.
Then I think I can prove also instability of the peaked wave by using the ideas we were developing very recently in the context of other fluid models, but so far we have not written this part up.
But what is interesting is that if you are really interested in stability of the single wave, the cusp wave is the slope u to the power of two-third, then there is no theory which can be applied to those, because the cusp wave doesn't exist in the space of H1 with bounded slopes.
Therefore, well-possessed is lacking in order to understand stability of cusp waves.
So here I will just mention a little bit of how easy to prove the stability theory if we have such nice toy model as we have here.
In fact, what we have to do is to operate with the energy quadratic form which is related to this self-adjoint operator, some of the two terms here.
It's a constant with respect to the time evolution.
If it is positive definite, we have immediately the Lyapunov stability theory.
Unfortunately, it's not positive definite, but the spectrum of it can be fully understood.
First of all, it's a Sturm-Leuville type problem in the periodic domain.
The spectrum is purely point consisting of isolated eigenvalues, zero in the spectrum because of translational mode.
But the second homogeneous solution of this operator is given precisely by the derivative of the family with respect to this level of energy, the level of the first order environment used in existence here.
And so since this is not too high periodic, we know that zero is a simple eigenvalue, but also from the monotonicity of this quantity, we have immediately the theorem, criterion to guarantee existence of two negative eigenvalues in the spectrum.
So if you go back to the quadratic form, no, there are two negative eigenvalues, so we cannot use it as a Lyapunov function.
But there are two constraints, which are fixed mass and fixed momentum.
And with these two constraints, by simple calculus and constraint spaces, we can prove that the operator has no negative eigenvalue and has a simple zero eigenvalue.
The criteria for which is the monotonicity of the mass.
It should be monotonically decreasing.
But this is, in fact, we can prove again body theory can be used to prove it rigorously this numerics just illustrate monotonicity of the mess with respect to mess is negative and it's monotonically decreasing to the negative side.
And it's valid for all for the entire family of the smooth waves.
So with this, then the rest is just a decomposition.
So initial data is supposed to be orthogonal to two constraints.
And then we decompose it in a neutral mode and the remainder term and require the generality of the remainder term to the neutral mode.
And now quadratic form is fully coercive with respect to this perturbation and quadratic form is conserved in time and convertive form is bounded in the space of each one from which we immediately have each one stability bound of the linear series.
So with this, I think I finished my part on the toy model, and then the rest of my time, I can explain some other exciting features of this Bobenki equation and maybe linearization linearized Bobenki equation outside of the toy model.
So I'm back to the Bobenki equation in a full, with a full dispersion here.
And we can inspect, we can inspect of course this Bobenki equation for any age, but because it's under graded project it had limited time.
So we inspected this Bobenki equation in the deep water limit.
It is a non-local equation in the deep water limit, but non-locality is a sort of well known, it's the derivative and Hilbert transform, which is very well defined with respect to Fourier series.
So in this model, one, the model can be written in this case, in this way, and one of the first result would be immediately small amplitude expansion, it's always the first result I try when I have periodic waves.
And in this way, we can immediately illustrate this bifurcation from the unit speed c bifurcation to the right with the amplitude of the wave here quadratically expanding and apparently, apparently this result was written back to 1880.
So it's the old result from the time of stocks.
Another interesting is to think about the limiting wave.
So to think about the cast wave for which it reaches the highest, the maximal height at one half c squared.
In this way, I found interesting to rewrite the problem with respect to deviation from this maximal height, the deviation will be zeta will be positive definite quantity.
So if we do this, we are canceling the non-local linear part of the problem, that's a remarkable phenomenon.
So as a result, the entire Babenka equation can be written as a fixed point equation, zeta is equal to a certain operator which is just defined in terms of a quadratic part with plus some constant.
In the analysis of this equation, we can prove a couple of results which are sort of well-agreed with a well-known theory, asymptotic theory, but I think these results were never derived by using Babenka equation.
The first result is the following.
If we think about the wave being single in a fractional way, alpha is between zero and one, then we shall try to inspect what kind of powers of alpha this fixed point equation admits.
And we can prove that this fixed point equation admits only one power of alpha, which is exactly two-third. No other powers of alpha are admitted by this fixed point equation around the peak, around the singularity.
And that is apparently in agreement with all the results I already mentioned.
But then we can go further. We can think, okay, if the wave is a singular and we had a perturbation which should be smoother than this, but still in a fractional power, something between two-third and two, then can we find a very precise value for beta for which the perturbation is defined.
And then in this way, we can derive the following transcendental equation which coincide explicitly with the equation derived by Grant by using Euler equation.
At that time 73, Grant did not use Babenka equation. So we have effectively recovered exactly the same equation as in a Grant paper, but simply by analyzing all admissible singular solutions of this Babenka equation.
So unfortunately in that theory, neither constant could be well defined. A, B, and even the C here in the equation C cannot be uniquely defined. They are defined from an unlocal problem.
So the singularity analysis which is sufficient to identify correct powers are not capable to give us a very explicit formula for A, B, or for C.
Another thing we can think is about linearization and stability theory. The linearized Babenka equation is still a self-adjoint operator.
And here, if we are in the small amplitude expansion case, we immediately see that this operator is close to a constant coefficient operator with spectrum being given by Fourier modes.
Fourier mode is located at negative eigenvalue negative one. First Fourier modes cosine and sine give double eigenvalues zero, higher Fourier modes give positive eigenvalues.
So if you now bifurcate from this limit along the family of periodic wave solutions, then the zero eigenvalue is split and it remains as a simple zero eigenvalue because of translational symmetry, but it also generates small negative eigenvalue.
And this value isn't precisely in agreement with numerical results published in the paper, Sergei Dechenkin.
And so this is also quite good.
Figurate for modulation stability. I said that I'm not going to do it, but in fact it was the first thing which we recovered by using Babenka equation and this second-order time evolution equation by using exactly the same ITS and expansions.
In fact, this figure eight is related to the Fourier modes which sit here and split to the negative eigenvalue. And so our slopes here in a full agreement with the recent results and I think the recent results are just justification of some old results.
With this, I think I will finish my talk. I think it's the right time with a short summary.
So I'm sailing today this toy model, which is the first order evolution equation closed for the surface elevation as a truncation of the second order evolution equation.
Exactly the same solutions as a traveling waves and it makes stability analysis extremely simple because it reduces to the linear eigenvalue problem instead of quadratic eigenvalue problem.
Again, justification of this toy model is questionable. We have not thought about it, but it's quite promising model in a full glory with a full dispersion.
But in addition to this, in this toy model for the shallow water limit, we have our main results that continuous families exist not only for smooth waves, but also for cast waves separated by single picked wave in W plane, right, in a pre-image plane compared to the physical domain.
The smooth waves are linearly stable in the time evolution. Picked wave is linearly unstable. No results for cast wave could be unless we can push up the well posed theory.
And the well posed theory is well formulated in the same space as a big theory for Kamasa Hall equation. So thank you very much for your attention.
