Lecture 24 Truth, History, and Citizenship
We've come a long way in this course chronologically from Plato's dialogue, the Sophist, and also
conceptually in attempting to expose the complexity of the concept scientific knowledge, of what
it means when scientists claim to know nature, what the object of that knowledge is, what
the justification for the claims that they have knowledge of nature are, and the complexity
of the process that out of which scientific knowledge is produced. There are a number
I think of core lessons that this historical approach to looking at the knowledge problem
in science, as I've called it, has produced, and that need to be pulled together before
we can reach any conclusions. First, and I think most essentially, the historicity
of scientific knowledge, that science has a temporal character, not a once and done
with kind of truth, that you discover X, you put X in the bank, and now you move on to
Y. A scientific theory is never once and done with. Science is intrinsically historical
or temporal if you prefer that term, in the sense that it is continually changing at every
level. It is changing at the level of data, it is changing at the level of instruments,
as instruments are refined, for example, and in the process open up completely new data,
whereas totally new kinds of instruments are invented, which generate new kinds of data,
so that science is continually changing at the level of data, at the level of physical
instruments, at the level of the analytical tools, the conceptual instruments that are
available to scientists at any given time, they too are continually changing, as for
example new kinds of mathematical techniques are invented. We saw this in the rise of quantum
theory, for example, where Heisenberg adapted an old technique in mathematics called matrix
algebra, unknown to him, he sort of reinvented matrix algebra and used that as a tool to
found his version of quantum mechanics, Einstein adopted a form of mathematics developed in
the 19th century called tensor algebra, which becomes central to the compact description
of the equations of the general theory of relativity. So as analytical tools change science, that
also changes science, it allows us to see different things in theories when we formulate
them in one way rather than another. The symbolic language that we use in science and mathematics,
when it changes, tends to significantly change the kinds of research and the kinds of discoveries
that are made by mathematicians and science. Science continually changes at the level of
the assumptions that scientists use, the measures, as I like to call them, following
protagonists in this, that man is the measurer of all things, my own reading of protagonists,
that you must measure, you must begin with assumptions in order to reason, seems unexceptionable,
but it is also the case that these assumptions change over time. We just saw that in terms
of changing the definitions of space and time and matter and energy and changing what an
atom is, changing what the universe is. So the science changes at the level of assumptions
continually and it changes at the level that theories are continually changing. We've seen
this over and over again. Theories also continually change, they develop and they evolve, they
develop in the sense that they become more articulated, but they also change in ways
that their founders did not expect unpredictably. So Copernicus did not anticipate that the
one of his greatest disciples would be Johannes Kepler, who would switch the orbits from circular
to elliptical, for example. Kepler did not anticipate that Newton would derive the ellipticity,
the orbits from his theory of universal gravitation and so on. So the elements of science, the
data, the instruments, the conceptual assumptions and principles, the analytical tools, the
theories are continually changing. That is, I think, manifest from the kind of inquiry
that we've engaged in in this course. That's why I adopted the historical approach in order
because science is intrinsically historical and you can only see that by following an
unfold over history. So in one sense at least, I am very sympathetic to Keun's notion that
the history of science is the key to understanding the nature of scientific knowledge. But of
course, as I have already mentioned in an earlier lecture, that is exactly what William
Ewell claimed in the 1830s and 1840s and which is why he wrote a two-volume work called The
Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, founded upon their history that only through the changing
fundamental ideas that scientists use from which to deduce phenomena could you recognize
the logic of scientific reasoning. So only through its history does science display, so
to speak, its inner character. These elements of science, the data, the instruments, the
concepts, the principles, the theories, they change at different clock speeds to borrow
a term from the computer world. They change at different, the rate of change is different,
of course, and they're different in different disciplines. It may be different in physics
and different in chemistry, different in molecular biology than it is in geology. But all you
have to do to see, blatantly see the extent to which science changes at all of these levels
that I've just described is to contrast the scientific knowledge claims that we make today
with the scientific knowledge claims that we made in 1900. To contrast what we think
is real today, what we think the earth is today, the universe is today, what we think
life is today, what we think human beings are today compared to what we thought they
were, to what scientists claimed, we now know this about the universe. Well, in 1900 it
was the Milky Way. We now know this about matter. That was before quantum theory. And
we now know this about space time. And so if you play that game out, you see that it's
the difference between what scientists say they know now and what scientists said they
knew then is startling. The reality that scientists tell us is out there, is so totally different
today from what it was in 1900. In fact, in most sciences, it's so totally different
what it was in 1960. Inflation of the universe did not exist before 1980. Dark matter didn't
exist. Dark energy didn't exist. The quark theory of matter and energy did not exist
before 1960. We don't need to press that point. In my opinion, brilliant and underappreciated
British philosopher of science, Mary Hesse, in the third of her trilogy of deeply insightful
books into the philosophy of science, makes the comment that we need always to keep in
mind that the theories we currently believe to be true are just as falsifiable as the
theories we look back on as having been falsified. And one might add, and the theories we currently
hold to be true are as likely to be falsified in the next hundred years as the theories
that we look back on as having been falsified in the last hundred years. So that is, I think,
a fundamental insight that is extremely valuable in terms of assessing scientific theories
like knowledge and truth claims. Science remains the wonderful body of knowledge that
it is, but it is understood to be an evolving body of knowledge keyed to assumptions that
are themselves always conjectural and courageable in ways that we've discussed. A second insight
that I think we need to call attention to at the close of the course is that scientific
knowledge is influenced by how scientific knowledge is produced, what scientists know,
what they know, the content of their theories is also influenced by the process through
which scientific knowledge is generated, and that is a fundamentally collective enterprise.
Without buying into the rhetoric and the value judgments of the major proponents of the
social construction of scientific knowledge, that theory of the social construction of
scientific knowledge, it is quite clear, it seems quite clear, and Flex Monograph I think
makes it inescapably clear that science is a collective enterprise, and the analogy with
the language is very appropriate here. Scientists speak a language. The world of elementary
particle physicists speak a language in talking about elementary particles. The evolutionary
biologists speak a language in talking about evolutionary processes at whatever level they
discuss them. Plate tectonic geologists speak a specific language about the earth and its
structure and the forces that are acting on the earth at various levels, especially the
ones acting on the crustal plates, the continental plates and the ocean floor. Now we ask ourselves,
do scientists invent the languages they speak, or do they discover them? Early in the course,
I mentioned that Galileo had held that mathematics is the language of nature. He wrote, the book
of nature is written in the mathematical language, and its characters are circles, triangles,
squares, etc., because geometry was the dominant modality of mathematical thinking. At that
time, it would soon be displaced by algebra. But what justification is there for saying
that this language is the language of nature? Well, because Galileo had a metaphysical belief,
which he called platonic, but which was really Pythagorean, that nature is at its deepest
level mathematical. And so that he believed, but he didn't know it, he believed that mathematics
was the language of nature. But if we step back and say, well, in order to do science,
then you speak a language, metaphorically speaking, not it doesn't matter in English
or French, but there is a language that you have to learn in order to be a relativity
theorist, a quantum physicist, a chemist, a polymer chemist. Where did that language
come from? Was the language invented? Well, that seems to support the historical view
of science. Was the language found? You mean, if it's found, then it should be permanent.
Why does it change? Why is there this temporal dimension to science? So we have, as a second
point here, that science, the scientific enterprise that produces scientific knowledge
is a collective enterprise. Third point, going back to the very first lecture in the
course, recognizing that the knowledge problem that, by which I mean, the need to characterize
what scientific knowledge is, is itself embedded in a wider knowledge problem within Western
intellectual and cultural history. And that's the one between Plato and the Sophists, that
we have from the side of Plato, that the view of the gods, knowledge being universal, necessary,
certain, notice that on this view, scientific knowledge is not temporal, and Socrates carried
this thing through in his moral reasoning. What is valuable, what is good, what is just,
what is true, what is real, never changes. And then on the other side, the view of the
Sophists, that scientific knowledge has an experiential dimension, and as such, it is
always contingent, it is always uncertain, and it is always concrete and particular.
What we have seen in this course, and surely it did not escape your attention, is that
over centuries, science has said to the question, well, which is it? Is it the gods or the
earth giants? The answer to the scientific community has been yes. But what we want to
hear is one or the other, and the science wants to have it both ways. We have repeatedly
seen the inextricably realist character that is woven into the rhetoric of science, and
at the same time, the parade of absolutely first-rate scientific thinkers who have insisted
that science is not about an independently existing reality, that the focus of science
is on experience, and who have accepted what I have been calling the temporality or historicity
of scientific knowledge. And the community as a whole just smiles and says, yes, why
is that? Why this ambivalence, one might even want to call it schizophrenia, however politically
incorrect that might be. Why this ambivalence within the scientific community over what seems
to be a clear choice in this great rationality battle between what Plato called the gods
and the earth giants? If the object of scientific knowledge is experience, the earth giants win.
If the object of scientific knowledge is reality with a capital R, that which is this behind
and independently of experience and is eternal, then Plato's gods win. I think the answer
is that experience itself, what we call experience, is concurrently, is concurrently the greatest
warrant for realism and for the particular contingent and uncertain character of experience.
Experience, at one and the same time, is literally about a world out there. That's the way we
feel it, that's the way we experience. At the same time, all of our experiences are particular
contingent and uncertain. There is an uncertainty associated with attempting to anticipate future
experiences. All of our experiences are concrete, in particular. You don't encounter man with a capital M,
you encounter this person and that person and that person. We don't experience necessity.
We experience events that seem to be not connected to one another and we are often surprised by the
order of events, as Jung pointed out. We never have an experience of necessity, necessary
connection is a concept, is an intellectual construct. So now, how are we to understand this aspect of
experience? Well, first of all, notice, from Plato's perspective, what you want to do is escape
experience. Experience is hopelessly confusing and experience wants to draw us into the
particular, the contingent and the uncertain. We need to achieve salvation. We need to escape
experience and go behind it to the ultimate reality, which is timeless, eternal, like mathematical
truth. Another view, the alternative view, it's not the alternative view, it's the one that seems to
me to have the most promise for helping us to understand the situation is John Dewey's view.
You remember when I talked about Dewey, I said that for Dewey, mind and world are of experience,
that they are not the names of things which confront one another in experience, but that they are of
experience in the same way that a mountain is of the earth and the Grand Canyon is of the earth.
It's not just a whole dug in the earth, the Grand Canyon as a phenomenon is an expression of the
earth and processes associated with the earth and Mount Everest is an expression, I called it an
extrusion, which is probably geologically incorrect, but an expression of forces that work within
the earth. It is the earth, not just sitting on the earth as if somebody, a passing spaceship,
dropped it down. Analogously, what we mean by the world and the mind, the realist position is of
experience and so is what we casually call experience, let us say our experience, that the words
mind and world refer to processes that are of what we call experience. We tend to think of
experience as something that's going on in here and then we wonder what connection it has to what's out
there, but Dewey's view was that experience is a name for that fundamental reality of which mind
and world are names that we give to aspects of experience and so from that perspective,
science's ambivalence is quite natural. We can't really deny the realist position because it is a direct
experience of ours, it is a direct experience that we're putting on our clothes, nobody thinks that
maybe I'm not putting on my clothes, maybe it's just an illusion and there are no clothes, I said before
there is no car that you got into and you've turned the key in. So if we want to play a bit, not in a frivolous
sense, but if we want to explore a bit the Dewey and position of how we can understand the nature of scientific
knowledge and as incorporating an intrinsic ambivalence, I called earlier an inner conflict, an internal
conflict that manifests itself in the constant tension between the realist and the contingent or let's call it
conventionalist, just for casual purposes, conventionalist views of scientific knowledge, then I'm going to make a
suggestion that we introduce a word apart from reality and experience, I want to introduce the word actuality.
The word real has deep connotations, especially when we talk about the real with sacred
overtones, the real as the ultimate, because that's the way Plato and Aristotle and all western philosophers have talked about it,
that reality is unchanging and even within science, those scientists who defend the realist view believe that there are
fundamental truths that the ultimate reality is unchanging, it's just that we no longer think that the ultimate reality is
matter, the ultimate reality for those physicists are constants, universal constants of nature and universal principles like certain
kinds of invariance that are the fundamental principles of relativity theory and quantum theory and therefore of our
conceptions of matter and energy and their interaction, so we used to think for example of the conservation of matter as such an
invariant, we have much more, there are much more sophisticated versions of that today, so at a certain level, even in contemporary physical
science, there are certain eternal invariance, there are certain invariance that have been there ever since the universe started
and there has to be something constant otherwise, as I said in earlier lecture, you can't reason, if everything about nature
were changing all the time and there was no pattern that was constant then you could not possibly reason about nature and you could
not formulate scientific theories, so something has to be constant, if it's not the matter in the energy that is the principle by which
matter gets transformed into energy and energy gets transformed into matter and if it's not that equation then it must be some
equation deeper than that and then that one stays the same so that the pattern of change is constant or the pattern of the pattern of
change is constant but you must have some invariance, so on the one side you've got reality has overtones of the ultimate which are
very disturbing because they have metaphysical implications which get into all kinds of logical and philosophical problems, so the
relationship between ordinary experience and reality is very controversial and emotional, let's substitute the word actuality and say that
scientific theories are about actualities, what are actualities? Actualities are scientific objects, I've talked about that before, so the
sun is a scientific object, the earth, we all know what the earth is an ordinary experience and as a scientific object the earth is defined by
geologists and that scientific, the characteristics of that scientific object change all the time, in 1806 Dalton started modern atomic
theory by saying that atoms were like tiny little billiard balls, that they had no internal structure, in 1896 J.J. Thompson said that they do have an
internal structure so we had to redefine the atoms so it had an internal structure but it was still a continuous distribution of positively charged
matter and tiny little dots of negative matter that were called electrons analogous to raisins in a pudding he said, now in 1910, 1911 Ernest Rutherford said
we have to redefine the atom, it's mostly empty space, forget that bit about the positive charge, it's all concentrated in a tiny nucleus, 99% of the
atom is empty space, in 1930 we had to say, oh, we thought that matter was made out of electrons and protons, 1932, throw in the neutron, now we have to
redefine the atom so the nucleus has no protons and neutrons, in 1935 we've got to make room in the nucleus for mesons, by 1960 there were 200 elementary
particles, by 1980 we were already saying forget that whole business, it turns out that everything in the nucleus is made out of quarks, so the atom as a scientific object has been repeatedly
redefined and that's okay, it is much less controversial and difficult for us to grasp that scientific objects are redefined as we improve, as we get more
experience as we accumulate new data, we make new experiments, we have to redefine, we sharpen the definition or throw it out and start with a different definition, that's different from changing reality
because our intuition is that what we mean by reality is something change less, so if we recognize that scientific theories are about scientific actualities, fields and forces, particles and molecular
structures, that's what scientific knowledge is about and that those scientific objects are directly or indirectly correlated with ordinary experience, we're not interested in their
connection with reality with the capital R, they're correlated with ordinary experience, then the whole account of scientific knowledge that we've been tracing out in this course seems
false together very nicely, we understand on the one hand why there is a tendency, why there is a need, a psychological, let's call it a psychological need
and a philosophically justifiable need to claim that science is about more than mere experience, that these scientific objects have some connection with the real but we don't need to deal with that, that's not really part of the
scientific knowledge claim, the actualities are justifiable by a specifiable set of characteristics, namely do they explain, do they give us predictive success, do they give us control, so we can judge actualities directly
whereas we can't judge reality directly, so seeing scientific knowledge as about actualities is a potentially useful way of eliminating much of the controversy from trying to understand the status of scientific knowledge and truth claims
at a minimum, scientific actualities, the scientific objects are justifiable instrumentally, what the implications of this instrumental success are for vis-a-vis reality is a separate issue but here we have a quite explicit set of criteria
just as you can say given what you want to do with a camera, this digital camera is better for you than that digital camera, so this definition of the atom is better than that definition of the atom because, and I can give you a list of reasons why
as stories about actualities, and I use stories in an honorific rather than a pejorative sense, as stories about actualities that work in these specifiable ways, then science is a source of truth in our society but it is not the only source of truth in our society because other aspects of our lives, in other aspects of our lives we tell stories about experience in different ways
that don't involve scientific objects, that don't involve the actualities as I have been calling them, but notice something interesting, for working scientists these actualities are very real
if you are an elementary particle physicist whose whole career is spent doing experiments using the linear accelerator at Stanford University, those particles in there that you cannot see are real to you
they experience their actualities as the kinds of objects we experience in ordinary life
for them, the relationship between actualities and ordinary experience is a real phenomenon, it's reality for them
for us, outsiders to science, we have to take their word for it
unless you want to play the game of science too, and you're quite willing, you're welcome to do that
so this view of looking at scientific knowledge as having as its object actualities is eminently compatible with the view that scientific knowledge is always fallible and temporal
and that, I think, goes a long way on the one hand to seeing why there does not need to be a conflict between science and ordinary experience and between science and religion, let's say
but at the same time, it also goes a long way towards helping us understand how scientific knowledge should be assessed when we want to make use of scientific knowledge
the deductive form of scientific knowledge obscures what I believe to be the fact, a fact about science, namely that it has this temporal and conjectural and courageable character
so finally then, here we are at the beginning of the 21st century, attempting to deal with profoundly
Concernful issues such as global warming, stem cell research, genetic engineering, energy issues, policy, nanotechnology policy, what role can science play in this process?
scientists offer knowledge, to the extent that we misestimate the nature of that knowledge, we will have the wrong estimate of what scientists can do
what scientists can do to resolve these policy issues, which are, in the case of global warming, for example, quite controversial
there are disputes associated with the policy issue, what are, to what extent can science resolve this?
let's look, let's note something that I think we have established beyond cavill in this course, that scientists cannot offer us certainty about experience
the deductive logical form of scientific knowledge can obscure that for a while, but we have certainly gotten behind that
there can be no certainty about experience, about the future, so scientists can have theories about what will happen
but there are no guarantees that our current theories will accurately predict without failure, so you can't turn to science for a guarantee about what's going to happen in the future
second, the ethos of science, the code of conduct of science, rightly or wrongly, is that scientists, science does not incorporate value judgments relative to the use of scientific knowledge
so that you can't ask scientists as scientists to prioritize what the options you may find available to you based on scientific knowledge
the implications of this to me are very positive in a democratic society, because it creates a space for informed citizens to participate in science and technology policy disputes
of the most sophisticated kind without having to understand the technical issue involved
if we understand the kind of role that scientific and technical knowledge can play, we understand it as fallible and temporal and conjectural
but the best tool that we have for effective action on experience, then we have to use that kind of knowledge understanding that the ultimate accountability for action is on us
not on the knowledge that the scientists claim to have, because that knowledge is intrinsically probable not certain
the accountability for action as Aristotle had recognized, ultimately action is non-rational, it cannot be deduced from anything you know even if you were the wisest possible person
so action always requires that we use the best tools available to us and science understood as having actualities as scientific objects like the atmosphere, like the planet earth
as its object is the most effective tool we have for dealing with experience
our courses are available to order online, visit our website at www.teach12.com
or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH12, that's 1-800-TEACH12
thank you very much
