Lecture 4
Isaac Newton's Theory of the Universe
This lecture is devoted to Isaac Newton.
The master of them that know is how he came to be perceived and called
displacing Aristotle, who for centuries before Newton had been called by philosophers
the master of them that know.
Newton in his own lifetime achieved the kind of fame that Einstein achieved in his lifetime,
the kind of popular claim and popular identification with genius,
so much so that at the end of Newton's life the British poet Alexander Pope could write
and God said let Newton be and there was light.
This is, to put it mildly, a hero worship of a very high order,
the identification that Newton had achieved something truly spectacular, truly epical in human history
and what was it?
It was knowledge of universal laws of nature.
It was Newton's universal theory of gravity that allowed him to deduce Kepler's version of Copernicus's theory,
if you can follow all of that, that impressed immensely,
that here we had a human being who had figured out a fundamental truths about the universe as they understood it.
The universe as a whole had grasped the order of the universe as a whole
and in addition, of course, he had also developed a mathematical physics that was very powerful
and that was confirmed experimentally and in fact dominated physics until the theory of relativity
in the early 20th century.
So Newton was a magisterial figure in late 17th century science
and he is famous because he was perceived to have revealed fundamental truths about reality.
That is exactly in the center of our concern in terms of looking at how do scientists come to know what they claim that they know.
So far, you will have noticed, everybody that we have discussed is on the side of Plato's gods.
That is to say, all of the figures we have discussed, including Francis Bacon,
who on other grounds might be thought of as a proto-empiricist,
was ultimately convinced that scientific knowledge was of reality.
But certainly in the case of Descartes and Galileo and Newton,
although they had different ways of getting there and they wound up in different places,
each of them believed that they were pursuing universal, necessary and certain knowledge of reality,
that the task of science was to disclose what was there beyond experience and causing our experience.
Newton's triumph, ironically, elicited the most probably explicit confrontation, however,
with the problem within knowledge, as we will see. Newton's language for what the goal of science was,
was to disclose the true causes of phenomena. That was the phrase that he preferred.
For Newton, the goal of the natural philosopher, we would call it the scientist,
it's anachronistic because the word scientist did not exist until approximately 1840, 1830s,
that the goal of the natural philosopher is to reveal the true causes of natural phenomena as we experience them.
And of course, this is going to be very different from the way we experience them.
We're familiar with that already with Copernicus.
We experience the motion of the heavenly bodies in a totally different way from what Copernicus says is really going on,
and then, of course, we have to add Kepler's corrections to Copernicus's theory that the planets don't move at uniform speeds,
sometimes they move more slowly, sometimes more rapidly, that they don't move in circular orbits,
they move in elliptical orbits, and that they have the distances and the periods from the Sun that they have,
the distances from the Sun and the orbital periods because of some kind of a force emanating from the Sun.
Kepler believed that there were two forces emanating from the Sun, one that we would call gravity,
something like gravity that kept the planets in their positions,
and one like a magnetic paddle wheel that paddled them around in their orbits.
So there were two forces. The important thing here is that while Kepler didn't get the forces right,
and he didn't get the mathematical description of how the strength of the force varies with distance,
he was probably the first to give a physical model of the planets,
and really, therefore, he was the first to have a solar system.
The planets and the Sun constituted a system for Kepler, as they did not for Copernicus,
because the system was held together by the Sun as the source of the forces that held the whole collection of planets together.
Newton's theory of gravity allowed him to deduce from his equation of universal gravity
to deduce the elliptical orbits and the positions of the planets from the Sun and the orbital periods,
so all of that popped out, so to speak. All of that was a deductive consequence of Newton's major equation of gravity,
as described in his Masterwork of 1687, The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy,
generally known as the Principia Mathematica.
Now, in this very large work, which has been kept in print and which is available now in a new and annotated English edition,
Newton goes to great lengths to describe the method that he uses,
and he also is very clear about the assumptions that he makes,
the axioms, as he describes them, that he lays down in order to be able to write the equations of motion,
including the equation of gravity that he describes in this work.
Newton's method is an axiomatic method in which there are certain definitions and postulates and principles,
an axioms, self-evident principles, analogous to Euclidean geometry, that are laid down,
and then from these logical consequences are deduced,
and then if the axiom's definitions and postulates are correct,
then the deductive consequences of the theory match what happens in nature.
Where do these axioms come from?
They are not Baconian inductions, even though Newton wrote positively about Bacon.
They are not Baconian inductions because Newton didn't rush around
collecting all imaginable kinds of evidence in order to figure out his principles.
They are derived from experience creatively in a way that we have yet to be able to identify,
but when we get to the 19th century, we will see that a number of thinkers started paying attention
to the logic of the process of scientific discovery as opposed to the logic of scientific justification.
After a theory has been formulated, how do you justify the theory?
That's the logic of justification.
What goes on in the mind of the scientists when they are discovering what they discover?
And we will see that William Uell claimed that there was a creative act involved here,
that Charles Sanders Purse, the American founder of pragmatism, gave a special name to this moment
in the mind of the scientists that are called abduction,
and the 20th century called Popper just threw up his hands and said that the logic of discovery is non-rational.
There is no logic to discovery and we can only focus on the process of justification,
but we need to focus on the process of discovery because what to make of scientists' knowledge claims
is critically dependent on the confidence that we have in the assumptions that the scientists make.
So Newton's assumptions emerge when, for example, he gives us his definitions of space and time.
Space, according to Newton, is absolute and infinite and uniform in all directions.
Space is a featureless, infinite container existing totally independently of anything in space.
Now this definition, you say it's a reasonable definition or maybe it's not a reasonable definition,
but the fact is you have to have some kind of a definition if you're going to deal with writing mathematical equations of motion
because motion is change of position over change in time.
So change of place over change of time, I mean change of space over change in time.
So what is space? Well, the first thing, the easiest thing to assume is that space is not the kind of a thing
that influences what happens in space.
It's an assumption that space is uniform.
Obviously, when we get to general theory of relativity, we're going to have to make qualifications of that
because according to Einstein, wherever you have a dense concentration of matter or energy, space is curved.
Everybody nowadays knows about black holes, which are such dense concentrations of matter
that even electromagnetic radiation cannot get out because space is so curved
that electromagnetic radiation generated inside the black hole would curve back and stay inside the black hole.
It would not be able to get out because there is no out as far as the inside of the black hole is concerned.
So the general theory of relativity has a different conception of space to put it mildly
because space is affected by and or it affects what is in space, but not for Newton.
Now, for a long time it was assumed, well, this is sort of self-evident,
like the shortest distance between two points is a straight line.
This is a self-evidently true definition or a possibility, whichever you prefer,
but it doesn't matter, no one in their right mind would argue with it.
Well, it turns out in the 19th century when non-Euclidean geometries were developed
that a lot of ideas in geometry that seem self-evident really are not.
And here we have an example that kind of slips right by us,
but this is an assumption that space is a featureless container.
Infinitely, how does Newton know?
How can Newton know, using the word know in its philosophic sense,
that there are regions of space that in fact influence what happens in space,
where there are forces exerted by space, but Newton lays this down as a definition.
And same with time, that time is somehow a kind of an invisible clock
that ticks away at the same rate through all eternity.
How could he possibly know that?
I mean, what would happen if in fact time was slowing down, maybe a second a century?
How would you measure that?
With what clock would you measure that?
How could Newton know that?
But think of it, if you don't assume that time and space have these featureless characteristics,
writing equations of motion becomes much more complicated.
So these are assumptions that Newton lays down right at the beginning.
Here's my definition of time.
Here's my definition of space.
Here's my definition of matter.
Here's my definition of motion.
He distinguishes between relative and absolute motion,
assuming that there was such a thing as absolute motion, that not all motion was relative.
Again, that becomes a problem when the general theory of relativity comes along.
But from 1687 until the early 1900s, Newtonian physics is the dominant form of physics
in western natural philosophy, western science.
And more than that, it is its truth was what inspired, as we shall see in subsequent lectures,
the philosophers to develop theories of knowledge that justified Newton's theories as true.
So it was a very powerful theory and it was not perceived to be a construal of experience
that was a function of certain kinds of assumptions and other assumptions could have been made.
It was perceived that these were not assumptions so much as self-evident truths.
And they could become the axioms that Newton could use in his method,
which was a method that he called analysis and synthesis,
in which, in the analysis part of science, you decomposed a phenomenon into its fundamental elements
and then the synthesis part, you recomposed them, you combined them back together again
to get the original phenomenon and that showed that you really had understood it.
If you can take the thing apart and put it back together conceptually as well as experimentally,
then you have understood it.
Now that's an interesting claim.
You can do it. Have you really understood it? Do you understand what it really, how it really works?
Let's set that aside for the moment.
I mean, the clearest illustration of this perhaps is Newton's optics published in 1700
where he describes the famous experiment with the prism in which he decomposes sunlight into its seven ingredients,
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet,
and then further experiments recomposes the decomposed sunlight back into white light,
showing that he can take the separate colors, he can separate out the red light, the green light,
and do experiments with them.
They do not decompose any further if you make them go through prisms.
The red light stays red, the blue light stays blue.
If you then put another prism in the appropriate position relative to the first one,
the seven colors will recombine and out comes white light again.
So he can decompose light, he shows that the individual elements do not further decompose
and then he recomposes light and he develops on the basis of these experiments.
So first of all, of course, there was the startling announcement that white light is complex.
That white light is really a combination of colors and surely no one had anticipated him there.
And in fact, for centuries people wondered whether that was really true
or whether the light was being modified somehow by the glass of the prism
and it was the prism glass that was creating the colors.
That white light really was simple, as the ancients thought it was, and not complex.
This opens up the question that we will be pursuing further throughout this course
of how to make sense of experiments and especially how to make sense of what new instruments,
in this case it's a simple instrument, relatively speaking, the prism of what they're telling us.
Now, in the 17th century, the first mechanical calculators were invented
for doing addition and subtraction, multiplication and division.
You can check the results of a mechanical calculator,
but you can't check the results of, let's say, a telescope that shows you dots near Jupiter
by going out there to see if there really are moons circling Jupiter.
You can't check when a microscope reveals something that the eye cannot see.
Then you have to ask yourself, how do I know that that's really there
and not something produced by the microscope?
Maybe somehow the lenses are showing me something are creating a shadow or a shape that's not really there.
There's no independent way of checking it.
Sometimes, quite often, scientific instruments are revealing things to us that we have to interpret.
We have to make assumptions about what facts we are being shown.
Whereas, ordinarily, we think of facts as things that just, they are what they are.
They're not involved in interpretation.
They are the raw material of reasoning.
But scientific facts are almost always the results of experiments or the outputs of instruments
that have to be understood relative to certain kinds of assumptions.
Did Galileo see moons circling Jupiter?
Or did he see tiny little dots that Bob back and forth or that disappeared and reappeared in a certain pattern
and he interpreted them as moons?
Obviously the latter, but it was taken for granted after a while
that since other people could see those dots as well,
that it wasn't just something in Galileo's telescope.
This is a question that becomes increasingly severe when the instruments become increasingly complex
and when you get down to a particle accelerator in which it takes months or years to do an experiment
and interpret the data, you're not going to be checking this by doing the experiment several times.
So then you have to be extremely confident that you understand how to make sense of the outcome of the experiment,
the data that floods in in the course of the experiment.
So returning now to understand Newton, we're talking about Newton and the assumptions that he's making
and showing us how assumptions are central to the process of reasoning about nature.
Consider Newton's three laws of motion.
The first law is the law of inertia, that a body in straight motion in the absence of any forces acting on it
will continue in straight motion, uniform straight line motion indefinitely.
Where did this come from?
What experiments did Newton do to establish that this is the case?
That the law of inertia is a law of nature.
I would say that Newton stipulated the law of inertia.
It was stipulative. He didn't discover it.
He never in his life saw a body moving in the absence of any forces whatsoever
because there is no such thing, especially for the author of the gravitational theory.
There is no such thing as a body that is not being acted on by any force whatsoever
because this theory of gravity says that every material object attracts every other material object
with a force which is directly proportional to the product of the mass
and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
So there is no such thing.
This is an idealistic notion.
This is like Galileo's idealized experimentation.
The law of inertia is a stipulation that matter just lays there.
It is inert unless a force acts on it.
How about the third law of motion?
For every action there was an equal and opposite reaction.
Do you think that Newton sat up late at night for years,
banging things off one another to see if there were any exceptions to this law?
This too has a stipulative character that it makes sense given the law of inertia,
given a belief in the conservation of momentum, as we have come to call it.
The third law makes eminent sense, but it was not derived from experimentation.
You could not do enough experiments to be able to say that every time one object hits another object,
there is an equal and opposite reaction for every action for everyone,
because obviously there are some kind of actions that you don't get an equal and opposite reaction,
for example in chemistry.
So you have to limit it to certain kinds of actions and reactions
in order for the principle to hold.
So here are a small number of the key assumptions that Newton made
and outcomes his equations, and the equations work.
I mentioned that the universal theory of gravity, in fact, allows us to deduce.
It is a deductive consequence of the universal theory of gravity
that the planets behave in the ways that they do,
and over the next couple of hundred years astronomers tested this every which way
in the 19th century the planet Neptune was discovered,
strictly on the basis of a deviation from Newton's laws,
which predicted that Uranus should move in a certain way,
and there was a tiny deviation.
So, well, maybe Newton's laws are wrong.
Ah, maybe they're right.
What if they're right?
Then there should be a planet of a certain size,
a certain distance away from Uranus,
whose gravitational attraction would cause Uranus's orbit to deviate
from what Newton's equations predicted if there were no such planet as Neptune.
And by golly, they pointed their telescopes and found Neptune.
This creates, to put it mildly,
a kind of confidence that the theory has hold of reality
when you can make that kind of prediction.
Of course, this was less than a hundred years before the theory of relativity came
to displace Newton's assumptions about space, time, matter, and motion.
Newton's theory of gravity, and in general Newtonian physics,
is a force-based physics.
It's a physics that's rich with forces.
Gravity is a force that acts, and he had his own theories in chemistry.
He talked continually about forces acting in nature,
but there was something disturbing about gravity,
as there was, in fact, about his chemical theories generally,
that Newton was very comfortable with forces that acted at a distance.
This was deeply problematic to the continental nature philosophers
under the influence of Descartes' mechanical philosophy of nature,
which held that nature was matter in motion only,
and that the only kinds of forces that could exist were contact forces
when one piece of matter contacted another piece of matter and caused it to move,
depending on the angle and the velocity and the mass, so you can understand that.
But for Newton, gravity acts across empty space.
The Sun attracts the Earth across empty space.
This kind of a force that acted at a distance was suspect
as returning to Renaissance magical nature philosophy,
in which all kinds of spiritual forces were associated with causing natural phenomena,
and lawful but spiritual.
The continental philosophers, therefore, were opposed to Newton's theory of gravity
as a force acting at a distance.
On the other hand, as Leibniz pointed out, among others, that the equations work.
Now, this is the fruition of what I said at the beginning of this lecture
about how, in the moment of his triumph, Newton's theory explicitly exposed
the problem of knowledge within science, very similar to what happened with what we saw with Galileo.
Leibniz said, and Newton had to agree, he backed off very quickly,
that the equations work. What they mean, I don't know.
Newton said, I'm not as a scientist, the term, of course, did not exist,
as a natural philosopher. I do not make a claim as to what gravity is.
Here is the equation. Gravity means what the equation says.
Now, is it a force that acts at a distance? Is it another kind of force?
That's a separate question. That's a philosophical and metaphysical question.
Leibniz, in a sense, forced out into the open a feature of science, of natural science,
that will become explicit and central in the 19th century,
which is that mathematical theories of experience can work
without our necessarily understanding the correlation between those theories
and what is behind experience. There's no need, if you want.
There is no need to correlate them with what is beyond experience,
or you can take experience to be reality, as the pragmatists did,
or you could say, I'm only interested in working with the scientific theory.
I'm not interested in understanding reality.
This becomes quite clear in the case of Leibniz's response to Newton,
because Leibniz himself had a philosophy of nature
that was very different from Newton's philosophy of nature.
And here we see why it's so difficult not to call these people scientists,
but they weren't scientists, they were natural philosophers.
As philosophers, they had a broader sense of responsibility.
They were involved with broader issues than the kinds of issues that scientists,
especially the way science has been professionalized in the 19th and 20th centuries,
are concerned with. Newton, for example,
expended the bulk of his time on theological and historical questions.
A very complicated text that he left behind on biblical chronology, for example.
Someone has calculated that over 80% of the manuscript words that Newton left behind,
four million out of five million, are on theological and historical and alchemical subjects,
and only less than 20% are in mathematics and physics.
Now, it's very interesting that the history of science is written in such a way
that you don't know that about Newton.
His complicated theory of God's plan for the universe,
whose mathematical structure is revealed in the tabernacle in the desert,
Solomon's temple and Herod's temple.
You wouldn't think that Newton would spend enormous amounts of energy
to figure out how the mathematical proportions of those buildings described in the biblical canon
reveal divine secrets that translate into the structure,
the secret of the structure of the universe, but he did.
Now, Newton, in his, so to speak, personal beliefs, as a matter of fact,
wrote, and in the Principia, in a separate little section,
he describes as if gravity is the finger of God,
the means by which God acts on the universe and keeps it together,
because otherwise, the finite amount of matter in the universe would spread throughout infinite space.
So gravity holds everything together so that it is a coherent system.
We have the solar system, the Milky Way.
For space, Newton referred to as the sensorium of God,
that infinite space is somehow the medium through which God is aware of the universe.
Newton was a deeply religious man, a Unitarian, who gave up his professorship
because he would not sign an oath that he believed in the Trinity,
but because he was a Unitarian on the subject of God's nature.
Leibniz, by contrast, and Newton and Leibniz had a very odd correspondence
through an intermediary because they were already arguing about the calculus
and Newton didn't want anything to do with Leibniz,
but he had a mouthpiece who exchanged four and a half letters with Leibniz,
and what emerged out of this was the view that these men had two philosophies of reality.
For Newton, reality was things, material objects moving in space
and exercising forces on one another.
For Leibniz, he didn't believe that there were material things at all.
He thought that reality was an energy network, a network of relationships,
and relationships were the key to reality, not things.
Leibniz was a determinist, not a materialistic determinist,
he was a rationalist, determinist, universal, necessary, certain conception of knowledge,
all of that on the side of the gods.
So was Newton, but Newton was, theologically, very committed.
What's odd is that Leibniz, who was religious, Newton, who was religious,
they managed to, in the 18th century, give rise to a materialistic deterministic theory of nature
in which there was no room for God, no role for God to play.
In the light of Leibniz's expose, so to speak, of the option of accepting Newton's equations
without accepting his interpretation of the equations,
the great Dutch mathematical physicist, Christian Huygens,
wrote that, in spite of what I have called the fallacy of affirming the consequent,
the fact that our theories predict experimental outcomes correctly
must be taken as a sign of reality.
Surely, he said, these theories must correspond to reality,
even though logically we have no right to make that claim.
Thank you.
