Lecture 17, Kuhn's Revolutionary Image of Science
In the last lecture, we were looking at the sociology of knowledge movement in the 1930s,
and especially the curious and insightful monograph of Ludwig Fleck,
but it was in the 1960s, 30 years later, that science and technology became issues
for the public at large and for a broader segment of the intellectual establishment
in the U.S. and in Western Europe that had been interested in science and technology before.
I'm talking, of course, about humanities and social science academics and intellectuals more broadly.
The context is something that I referred to back in the first lecture,
that is to say the political critique of science and technology associated with the anti-establishment protest movements of the 60s,
the anti-war movement, the international corporation movement, the criticism of government,
the environmentalism of the 1960s, and science and technology became targets of these protest movements
because they were perceived as having been co-opted into this establishment and that science was an ally,
had become an ally of the military, of corporations, of special interests,
and so for policy reasons the science and technology in the 1960s became broad issues for the public,
they also became issues for a broader range of intellectuals, many of whom were also social reformers,
and a pivotal factor in the intellectual reassessment of the nature of scientific knowledge
was the publication in 1962 of a book called The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
by a physicist turned historian of physics named Thomas Kuhn.
It came out at the same time that Rachel Carson's book came out Silent Spring,
that precipitated the removal of DDT from use,
and so there is some overlap here with the environmental movement
and I think you'll see how the connection exists between these protest movements
and the reassessment of scientific knowledge.
Kuhn's book doesn't really say anything new,
there is no single feature in Kuhn's book that is new,
and what he did was in a short monograph argue that the history of science
properly applied, and we'll have to look at what that means, done properly,
reveals that the classic image of science and scientific knowledge is incorrect.
What Kuhn argued in this book is that claims to the objectivity of scientific knowledge
are in fact not supportable.
That scientific knowledge is not objective in the way that it has been given to us to understand.
The response to Kuhn is quite a phenomenon in its own right
and deserves a more explanation at the social level than it has received
because it achieved Andy Warhol cultural phenomenon status in the 1960s
in which everybody in the academy was reading Kuhn's book
and striking themselves on the head and saying,
oh my God, how did we look at this scientific knowledge isn't really scientific at all.
Now, it's a kind of a chicken little syndrome, I think, in the sense that we're all anticipating
that the sky is going to be full, we're all afraid of it anyway,
so when someone starts yelling, the sky is falling, everybody assumes that that is it,
my worst fears have been realized, or in this case, my dream has been realized
if I'm not myself a physical scientist, a natural scientist, then I realize that,
wow, they're not so special after all, there may be an element of that at work here,
but we're concerned with the intellectual content of Kuhn's book
and the social impact of that content.
When I say that there is nothing new in Kuhn,
what I mean is that we have seen in this course that starting in the 1800s,
there is a long tradition of eminent thinkers whose works were hardly unknown,
who were, in fact, their works were very well known,
who had argued that there is a historical dimension to knowledge generally
and to scientific knowledge as well, including scientific knowledge,
that scientific theories represent functionalist interpretations of experience
rather than revelations of an underlying independent reality.
And by this, at this point in this course, you're all very well aware of the fact
that this is hardly, this hardly can come as news,
and yet the reaction to Kuhn was as if it had come as news.
And Kuhn's book seemed to put definitively in the shade
a rationalist and empiricist interpretations or theories of scientific knowledge
as in some sense corresponding to reality.
Now we're going to have to see that in fact, this was an overstatement
and by the 1970s and 1980s substantial regrouping was to take place.
But the kinds of ideas that we have heard associated with the names of
Fourier and Ewell and Comte and Mach and Hertz and Poincare
and Bridgeman, for example, and the references that I've made
to the founders of quantum mechanics who all in the late 1920s and 1930s
wrote books arguing that scientific theories are about experience,
not about an underlying reality, certainly provided the framework
for saying to Kuhn, well, what else is new?
I mean, what are you trying to tell us here that we didn't already know?
But in fact, people were seeing in the way Kuhn put all the pieces together.
And perhaps they were, as we sometimes say, the time was right.
They were primed for it.
Flexbook might have had the same impact if anybody knew about it.
And some people did, of course, know about it.
And Kuhn, in the preface to the structure of scientific revolutions,
refers to the fact that he was told about Flexbook and read Flexbook,
but after he had completed the manuscript for the structure of scientific revolutions.
So even though there are startling similarities between Flexmodel of science
and Kuhn's, and also some startling dissimilarities,
there was no influence of Flex on Kuhn.
So Kuhn begins the structure of scientific revolutions
by claiming that the history of science properly applied
will show us that the image of science by which we are currently possessed,
the objectivist, realist image of science by which we are currently possessed,
is incorrect.
Let me mention at the beginning, Adon Noirath, whose name has come up before,
as one of the figures in the logical positivist circle in the 1930s,
one of the people who I mentioned became disenchanted with the promise of logical positivism
and eventually gave up on the idea that logical positivism could provide an objective criterion
for showing that scientific knowledge corresponded to knowledge of the world.
And I said that Noirath defined truth as an internal property
of the set of sentences, propositions about the world that scientists make.
Noirath became the editor of a series of books called The Encyclopedia of the Unified Sciences,
which was a kind of extension of or a development out of logical positivism.
And the editors commissioned Kuhn to write this book on the history of science
in the expectation, given Kuhn's training as a physicist
and his previous publications in the history of physics,
that the book would in fact contribute to anchoring an objectivist account of science.
So in another one of those delicious ironies,
Kuhn's book seems to put the quietest once and for all to logical positivism
and logical empiricism that their claims are not supportable
and that the history of science reveals that.
But the history of science has to be properly applied.
Properly applied means the following.
People have been doing history of science by time,
a structure of scientific revolutions came out in 1962.
History of science goes back over 150 years.
Now, what do you mean properly applied?
People have been doing history of science, Professor Kuhn.
What does it mean to do it properly?
Well, Kuhn says historians of science until now have been what I will call
groupies of the science community.
They have accepted the notion that science is progressing towards a correct account of reality.
So that history of science has been concerned with telling the chronological story of science
focusing on the present as superior to 10 years ago, 50 years ago, 100 years ago, 200 years ago.
So it is a story of the progressive ascent of the mountain of truth
starting with Francis Bacon, René Descartes, Galileo, Newton, etc.,
getting through to Einstein.
At each point, there are individuals who see the right path
and who direct the science community onto that path.
So it is what some people call, what historians call,
a wiggish interpretation approach to the history of science.
That means that based on the Wig Party in England,
it is a revisionist look at the history of science
which makes it seem as though the present is the inevitable outcome of the past.
And all of those people who thought they were doing science that we now consider wrong were wrong.
They were not doing good science.
They were mistaken.
They made errors.
It was not rational.
Their theories were not rational
because if you take the objectivist image of science seriously,
then there is only one correct description of nature.
There may be multiple paths to that,
but every step along the way can be measured against the truth, so to speak.
And so the history of science, Kean said,
historians of science have not been asking the right questions.
They have been telling the story of science
and they've been very interested in tricky little questions like,
when did that paper of fouriers get published?
Why was it held up for 15 years, etc.?
But they have not been looking at the process of discovery.
And that, he says, is the key to understanding the nature of scientific knowledge,
not the process of justification after the fact,
but the process of discovery.
If historians ask questions such as,
what does it mean to discover oxygen?
What does it mean to discover evolution by natural selection?
Let's look at that process and let's look at it in the context of the process of discovery.
Let's look at the reasoning in the context of the process of discovery.
When you ask those kind of questions about the history of science,
then you discover that the formulation of scientific theories is much more complex,
is much less clearly a matter of logic applied to experimentally derived data.
A clean, objective, value-neutral process of applying logic to experimental data
and say that's what the theory is based on.
We already have mentioned a number of instances that are consistent with Kean
with Kean's observation here.
But let's start with Kean's own discussion of Lavoisier's discovery of oxygen,
which is a central piece of any history of science,
a major moment in the history of physical science,
in which modern chemistry was born as a science, for example.
Lavoisier himself saw himself, said that he was responsible for doing a revolution.
He was performing a revolution, used that word revolution in chemistry,
with his, by building up a new theory of chemistry, keyed to the element oxygen,
which he had discovered.
But, as Kean points out, if you look at the history of that moment in the 1780s,
when Lavoisier isolated an element of the air
that seemed to be uniquely associated with combustion,
that seemed to be a requirement of combustion,
then it's not at all clear what he did.
To say that Lavoisier discovered oxygen is an old-fashioned,
a classical, objectivist, using Keanian language,
way of saying that oxygen was there all the time waiting to be discovered,
archaeologically, and Lavoisier stumbled upon it.
Or Lavoisier was clever enough to figure out where oxygen was hiding,
behind which veil oxygen was hiding that he needed,
and he needed to lift that veil.
Kean says it's not at all like that.
Look at the, there was a kind of a race going on.
Well, it wasn't really a race, there was a rivalry between Lavoisier
and the British scientist, natural philosopher of course in those days,
Joseph Priestley, who defended the mocked,
the subsequently mocked theory of phlogiston,
that burning took place when phlogiston escaped from a substance.
Everything's got phlogiston in it, just as everything has caloric in it,
and when phlogiston leaves a body, then that's called burning.
Lavoisier's theory eventually required us to believe
that burning is combination with oxygen.
So that if that's true, then when, then the burning requires
kicking something in from the air, rather than the phlogiston theory
which is giving off something, but not only was it the case
that Priestley, who was at least as smart as Lavoisier,
never accepted the oxygen theory of combustion
and always defended the phlogiston theory of combustion,
but several other of the most eminent scientists of the period,
right into the early 1800s, continued to believe
that the theory of phlogiston was correct and did not accept Lavoisier's theory.
And we saw that Laplace, certainly not a second-class thinker,
never accepted the idea that heat was simply motion.
He defended the caloric theory of heat even after
Count Rumpfer's famous gun-boring experiment.
So in a, as I said, a relatively short monograph,
Kuhn points to, he does not analyze them in depth,
but historians have done that, especially since Kuhn,
have looked in depth at scientific discovery in context.
When you look at it in context, then defending theories
that today we think are wrong does not appear to be irrational.
People like Priestley and Laplace and Cavendish
could give you reasons why they supported theories
that we now think are wrong.
There's not an error in thinking that causes people to accept theories
that we now do not accept.
Well, if that's the case, it follows that reasoning by itself,
that logic by itself, the same facts were available
to Priestley and Lavoisier, to Laplace and to Fourier
and to Count Rumpfer, and they reached different conclusions
based on those facts.
They interpreted those facts differently.
In each case, they were using logic.
They were not just saying, well, I wish it to be so, therefore it is so.
They were reasoning logically, they were applying logic to facts,
but they were using different assumptions.
They were interpreting the facts in a different way,
even though they were using the same methodology,
they were doing experiments, they were collecting data,
they were doing the same experiments, collecting the same data,
but it wasn't the same because it was in a different context.
Now, this is a good point at which to step back for a moment,
we leapt from the late 1930s, sociology of knowledge,
and Fleck to the 1960s, but there are two interesting predecessors,
they're not the only two, but two particularly interesting predecessors
of Cune from the late 1940s.
We can skip over World War II, there are more important things to do
than worry about the philosophical theory of scientific knowledge.
In the late 1940s and the 1950s,
the Hungarian physical chemist Michael Polanyi,
who in 1932 approximately became a staff member
of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin,
found when the Nazis came to power in 1933
that this was not going to be a place he would live for much longer,
and so he quickly got out of Germany and went to England,
where he became a physical chemist,
and then converted himself into a philosopher of science
because he was very concerned with the nature of scientific knowledge
and the implications of the public image of the nature of scientific knowledge
for public policy, exactly the kind of concerns that we're interested in in this course.
By the way, his son subsequently won a Nobel Prize for chemistry,
I think it was in 1986,
and his brother, Karl Polanyi, became a very eminent economist.
Michael Polanyi's position, so to speak, on scientific knowledge
was that it has been misrepresented to the public
as merely a matter of logic applied to facts.
He said that's not correct, science is an art.
The word art here, meaning not Jackson Pollock painting,
but meaning a craft, a techné in the Greek word.
It is, historically, the word art means a skill, a craft-like skill.
There are judgments that need to be made in doing science
that are not logical, that require something like intuition,
which is what Henri Poincaré believed about doing research in mathematics and mathematical physics,
that logic is not enough.
Without intuition, you can't get anywhere just by using logic.
Polanyi argued that the individual scientist is engaged as a person with their research,
and that there are values associated with doing science,
moral values, and for him, something like spiritual values as well,
that is to say a sense of being connected with the pursuit of truth,
which was both moral and spiritual, but also epistemological.
It had implications for how you arrived at conclusions and how you reasoned,
but the critical factor here is, and he published this in a number of books,
one called Personal Knowledge, which obviously deals with the notion that the scientist is a person,
and not a disembodied logic machine.
Remember, I've mentioned several times this whole concept of reasoning as calculating.
You can get rid of the brain.
If you could build a machine that could do it according to Hobbes, according to Leibniz,
according to artificial intelligence theorists,
then we wouldn't need human beings to do the reasoning.
No, says Polanyi.
It is a person behind the reasoning, and their values are relevant.
There is lots of tacit knowledge associated with doing science.
Every art has tacit knowledge associated with it.
You can't quite put into words that you can't put in a rule book,
but the expert craftsman knows that this is the way you do whatever operations are necessary
in order to achieve an expert result.
The second person is an American historian of science,
a historian of physics especially named Norwood Russell Hansen, who was a professor at Yale.
His hobby was flying a restored World War II fighter plane,
and Hansen, beginning in the late 1950s,
so several years before, published a book heavily influenced by the later Wittgenstein,
in which Wittgenstein had turned away from the possibility of what the logical positivists were trying to do.
And Hansen argued, to put it pithily,
people see, eyes don't see.
Seeing is not a neutral activity.
What we see is shaped by who we are, what we already believe, what our expectations are.
Nowadays, for example, cognitive neuroscience has some evidence for the fact
that perception is shaped by language, by social context,
as well as by the expectations that the individual has
for what it is that they are about to see, or what they should see in certain settings.
So that Hansen's idea was aimed at the logical positivists,
who, you recall, argued that theory statements could be separated from observation statements,
so Hansen was another one of those who attacked the idea that theory and observation could be segregated.
On the contrary, observation, he says, is always, he argued, is always theory-laden.
Now, this will turn out to be extremely controversial claim.
One scientist in the 1980s especially, start to recognize how threatening it is to their own realism.
But we'll get to that in subsequent lectures.
Hansen's idea fits very nicely with what Kuhn argues,
that theory and observation are much more closely interconnected.
Now, when I say that, I don't mean, and I warned you about this earlier,
but I don't mean that observing how many chairs that there are in the room is theory-laden.
One could argue that, well, it depends on what you mean by chair.
How do you define a chair?
And yes, there is that as well.
But typically, when we talk about observation being theory-laden in the philosophy of science,
what we mean is that scientific observations.
So just as the sun as a scientific object is very different from what we mean by,
look, the sun is out.
Similarly, the scientific observation,
that means an observation in the context of a scientific explanation.
Not a question of, what's that meter reading?
Is that 3.4 or 3.5?
There we can reach agreement.
But when we look at the sun, as Hansen put it,
and I am a Ptolemaist, let's say, or even a follower of Tico Brey,
and I see the sun moving across the sky,
because I believe that the earth is stationary and the sun is revolving around the earth.
And sitting next to me is a Copernican.
The Copernican is seeing the earth rotating on its axis,
and the appearance that the sun is moving across the sky.
If that's a little too abstract, think of somebody who was an expert mechanic,
peering under the hood, the open hood of an automobile that's pulled over to the side of the road.
And next to that person is standing the driver who was utterly ignorant of all things mechanical.
Are they seeing the same engine?
In some sense, photons are bouncing off the engine and going into their eyes,
but the mechanic is seeing, oh, look, a lead has come off the distributor.
That's why your car stopped.
And the owner is saying, I don't understand. It just stopped.
It's just a dirty, ugly mess under here. What's wrong?
A physicist looking at a piece of equipment, an instrument attached to an elementary particle accelerator,
sees a particular kind of instrument and understands what it's for, how it's made,
and what its sensitivity is going to be.
A non-scientist looking at that a piece of equipment says, gee, it's really lovely,
but what is it? What does it do?
So people see, eyes don't see.
Hanson and Kuhn overlap on this point, and Kuhn built his model of science
largely around insights like this.
Let me describe briefly Kuhn's model because it is, of course, pivotal to the discussion.
And even though one can say after the fact that it is wrong in detail,
Kuhn is not dismissible.
You can't say that, oh, well, because he was wrong about this and wrong about that,
Kuhn's critique of science was, it can be dismissed.
Kuhn's critique of science survives the, I believe, mistaken character of some of his claims.
His model for science goes something like this.
When a new field begins, and of course in the 17th century, all fields were new,
there's a certain amount of fumbling around initially until scientists agree on a set of concepts
that they are going to use in order to guide research.
In the case of Newtonian science, these, let's agree that these are the definitions
of space, time, matter, and motion.
And then we can start writing the following equations.
If you have a different definition of space and time, if you don't agree with Newton's law of inertia,
then you're not going to get Newtonian mechanics.
You're playing a different game. People did play different games.
The game that survived was Newtonian mechanics.
Kuhn calls that a paradigm, a conceptual framework that everyone agrees with.
Roughly speaking, they can disagree with some bits and pieces of it,
but they are recognizably playing the game of Newtonian mechanics,
of molecular biology, of general relativity theory, of quantum mechanics, whatever it may be.
The paradigm defines research programs.
Given phlogiston, so you look for certain things having to do with phlogiston.
Given oxygen, you look for certain things that you, and you no longer look for phlogiston.
You no longer try to capture stuff from, capture the essence of combustion from a burning thing.
You're looking for what's going into a burning thing, namely the oxygen combining with oxygen from the atmosphere.
So the paradigm determines a certain kind of, a set of research programs,
a very specific set of research questions keyed to the paradigm.
And Kuhn calls that normal science.
That is what goes on in most, the overwhelming majority of scientists are not trying to come up with breakthrough theories.
They are exploring the paradigm, doing research to justify the paradigm.
More often than Kuhn thought, people do try to test the paradigm and potentially overthrow it,
but roughly speaking, we understand that normal, what he means by normal science.
In the course of doing normal science, inevitably, because paradigms are interpretations, non-unique,
and because of course Newton's definitions, no one's definitions can capture all possible new experiences.
Over time, new experiences, new experiments, new kinds of instruments will generate data that don't fit the paradigm.
So anomalies accumulate.
In every science, this is the case.
At the moment, for example, in quantum theory, neutrinos seem to have mass,
but the standard model in quantum theory doesn't allow neutrinos to have mass.
So that's a problem.
How are we going to adjust the theory?
It's an anomaly.
Is it enough to say, wow, the theory doesn't predict mass?
Throw out quantum theory?
No.
But at some point, Kuhn argued, some anomalies need to be addressed,
and if they can't be addressed by the theory, if the community is not satisfied that the theory can handle the anomaly,
you've got a crisis.
And people say that anomaly has got to be resolved.
The way to resolve the crisis often is a conceptual revolution in which a new paradigm comes in
and replaces the old paradigm, and the new paradigm does answer the anomaly.
And as a result of responding to the anomaly, then people cluster around the new paradigm, or they don't.
They may stick with the old paradigm, and younger people stick with the new paradigm.
Max Planck joked that the success of quantum theory was the anti-quantum theory people just died out eventually.
And it was the case in quantum theory, quantum mechanics, that it was typically younger physicists
who embraced the theory, and the older physicists, this is wild and crazy stuff.
So here we have Kuhn's base.
This is the way scientific revolutions work.
Scientific theory change is not a strictly logical process.
It is one in which logic and data contribute, but at some point,
non-logical judgments have to be made that underlie a new interpretation of the same data that's available to everybody,
and that crystallize a new paradigm.
A paradigm is an interpretation of nature, an interpretation of experience
that provides a conceptual framework anchoring scientific research.
Kuhn correctly noted that new paradigms define new realities.
We've talked about this before. That is correct, but he said that paradigms are incommensurable,
and that irritated a lot of people.
Incommensurable suggested that Einstein could not talk to Newton.
Relativistic physics and Newtonian physics are incommensurable
in the sense that since they use different definitions of space, time, matter, and motion,
clearly there are fundamental differences between the two.
But that doesn't mean that Einstein and Newton can't talk to one another,
or that, as a matter of fact, we can't continue to reuse the results in Newtonian mechanics
in appropriate contexts and only turn to relativistic mechanics
when the context require using relativistic mechanics.
So the concept of paradigm is fuzzy. The concept of incommensurability is overstated.
The notion of crises and anomalies needs to be clarified.
Nevertheless, Kuhn's look at science and showing that the history of science
focused on the process of discovery opens up a whole new view of science
and of scientific knowledge, was one that was extraordinarily fertile
and will be pursuing the impact of that insight in the next lectures.
