These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by The Teaching
Company. The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines. The lectures
in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long. By listening for less than an hour a
day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks. Browse our catalog or website
and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world. The lecturers are university professors carefully
selected by The Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching
excellence. These lectures are titled Science Wars, What
Scientists Know and How They Know It, Part 1. The lecturer is Professor Stephen Goldman.
Dr. Goldman is the Andrew W. Mellon Distinguished Professor in the Humanities at Lehigh University,
where he has taught for over 25 years. He received his Bachelor of Science degree in
Physics at the Polytechnic University of New York, and earned his MA and PhD in Philosophy
from Boston University. Prior to taking his position at Lehigh University,
Professor Goldman taught at Pennsylvania State University, where he was co-founder of one
of the first U.S. academic programs in science technology and society studies. He is also
a co-founder of the National Association of Science Technology and Society Studies.
A prolific author, Dr. Goldman is authored or edited eight books and has an impressive
list of scholarly articles and reviews to his credit. Professor Goldman is a co-founder
of the Lehigh University Press, and for many years was the co-editor of its Research and
Technology Studies series. He has been a national lecturer for the Scientific Research Society,
Sigma Xi, and a national program consultant for the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Professor Goldman is a recipient of the Lindbach Distinguished Teaching Award from Lehigh
University. Professor Goldman prepared the course guide
that comes with these lectures. The course guide includes a detailed outline of each
lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical notes, and an annotated bibliography. To get
the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture. Lecture 1. Knowledge and Truth Are Age Old
Problems
Modern science from its beginnings has been associated with the use of increasingly complex
instruments in order to discover the hidden secrets of nature, that nature's secrets
would be revealed through using instruments designed specifically to uncover them. For
example, right at the beginning of modern science in the 17th century, we think of
the telescope and the microscope and the air pump, about which we'll be talking more later,
but we're more familiar in our time with mammoth particles, accelerators that smash atoms,
and the atomic force microscope that allows us to visualize atoms, gene sequencing machines,
space-based observatories, etc. These are the overt instruments, these are the obvious
instruments that scientists use in order to discover the hidden secrets of nature. But
there is a fundamental instrument, perhaps the most fundamental instrument of all, that
is itself hidden, and that in fact is extraordinarily elusive. And that instrument is scientific
reasoning itself. How do scientists reason in order to construct the theories that they
construct? How do they come up with the theories that they formulate, invent, create? What is
the basis for their claims that they know that these are truths about nature? This is
a fundamental aspect of science that tends to be ignored, especially in the recent popularity
of books about science, many of them by quite eminent scientists. There is a fascination
with what scientists know, string theory for example, the Big Bang theory of the origin
of the universe, or the nature of DNA and molecular biology. There have been a raft
of popular books about what scientists know, but to the best of my knowledge there's not
a single one of these popular books that focuses centrally on the question of how scientists
know what they know. What is the basis of claiming that this theory is true? What does
it mean to say that a scientific theory is true, and how seriously should we take that
claim? We especially, who do not understand the theory, we non-scientists who don't understand
the theory, how shall we accept the claim by the science community that these theories
are true? This is very important to us, the general public, for a number of reasons, not
least because science matters in our society. Scientific knowledge matters in our society.
Because science works in some quite obvious and practical way, because over the last 200
years especially, science and science based technology and technology that became entangled
with science in the course of the 1800s and 1900s, became the source of wealth and power,
commercial power, military power, social power, political power, science has become deeply
entrenched in government institutions, commercial institutions, social institutions, and public
perception, the public perception that science is very important, and of course it certainly
is important. Industry, especially in America in the post-World War II period, industry,
our commercial, our economic well-being, is keyed to a continuous string of innovation,
which means to a continuous stream of new scientific and technological inputs that will
translate into new innovations that will keep the economy growing. And the government,
of course, has in the post-World War II period become a sponsor of science to the tune of
tens of billions of dollars a year in research compared to before World War II when the federal
government spent almost nothing on scientific research. After World War II, tens of billions
of dollars a year, a good deal of that for military-related, but quite a bit of it also
for pure science, so to speak, basic scientific research on the view that basic science is
the seedbed of technological innovation, a theme that was built into the report at the
end of World War II by Vannevar Bush, who was the head of the Office of Scientific Research
and Development of the federal government during the war, which argued that we needed
to continue to invest in science in order to generate the technologies that would secure
the national well-being militarily and that would create a continuing basis for economic
growth and prosperity economically. So science is deeply entrenched in our society, and therefore
it matters how we act towards scientific knowledge and how we assess scientific knowledge. It
is also increasingly the case that scientific knowledge is a major factor in public policy
issues, global warming, stem cell research, energy policy, pollution policy. How shall
we take the scientific input to these public policy debates? How seriously should we take them?
So these are some of the reasons why the question of how scientists know what they know is quite
a serious question and quite an important and practical question, and it's quite amazing that
it has attracted, relatively speaking, so little attention, almost no attention from the general
public, and as we'll see, it has a long history that is quite intellectually fascinating, but
also reveals how the answer to that question, how the answer to the question of how scientists
know what they know, has in fact had a considerable social impact over the last 400 years.
Let me step back for a moment and present a puzzle. Entering the 1960s, modern science was
about as deeply entrenched in society as one could imagine it would possible for it to be. It was
riding high, and yet, starting in those very 1960s, a very broad, hostile criticism of science
began on a very broad front, on a political front, on an intellectual front, and on a religious
front. Starting in the 1960s, the anti-establishment protest movements associated primarily but not
exclusively with the Vietnam War protesters attacked science and technology politically for
having been co-opted by the military and commercial establishments. Now, this critique was very
hostile, but it did not challenge the validity of scientific knowledge. What it challenged was
that the ethics and the morality of the practice of science and technology in Western societies,
that scientists and engineers had sold out to the military and commercial establishments,
and instead of working for the benefit of humanity, they were working for the benefit of the military
industrial complex for commercial cooperation profit rather than thinking in terms of the
well-being of humanity. The intellectual critique, independent but concurrent with this political
critique, was based on the idea that scientific knowledge could not be explained by saying that,
well, what scientists do is to collect facts, analyze them logically, and out-pop truths about
nature. Beginning in the late 1950s and early 1960s, a stream of books were written quite often by
people trained in the physical sciences who became interested in the history and philosophy of
science, which argued that the historical record made it on really unequivocal, that scientific
knowledge incorporates judgments that are not strictly logical or factual. And because these
judgments are not reducible to logic or to facts, then scientific theories are not unique
accounts of reality. They do not converge on a correct description of reality, but in fact are
interpretations of experience. Again concurrently and quite independently, a number of French
intellectuals, especially Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida, launched an even broader critique on
the concept of objectivity and on the concept of knowledge generally, not just scientific knowledge,
in which they argued that all such ideas and all such concepts are historical, are ideological.
They reflect specific perspectives on experience, and in particular the perspectives on experience of
the dominant class in society at a given time. That some of our most cherished concepts that we
think of as value-neutral, like objectivity and knowledge and truth, in fact, are the expression
of cultural prejudices. And of course they argued this with some cogency. They didn't just claim
that it was the case. Foucault used a particular method that we'll be talking about later in the
course. Derrida, a different method, we'll also be talking about that. But the important thing is
that this broadened the intellectual critique of scientific knowledge because it dumped the
problem of scientific knowledge into the more general problem of knowledge, which was now being
challenged, that objective knowledge is not really possible, Foucault and Derrida argued. The
convergence of the critique of scientific knowledge and the broader critique of knowledge generally
led in the 1970s and 80s to what I'm going to be calling postmodernism, a movement which rejected
the fundamental thesis of modernism in Western culture. The fundamental thesis of the modern
period, which is that reason, is objective, value-neutral, and it is the universal means by
which human beings can reach truth, can resolve their problems, can improve the human condition.
This is the age of reason idea that we'll be talking about, the Enlightenment idea in the 18th
century, the modern project of using reason as the tool or instrument by which we will achieve
truth and we will overcome the obstacles to human well-being was fundamentally trashed by the
postmodernist and this led in the 1990s to, in fact, something that was called the science wars,
as we will see later on in these lectures, that this manifest recognition that there was,
in fact, a kind of intellectual war against the traditional view of science. The third critique,
well, we saw the political critique, the intellectual critique, the third critique of
science was a religious critique. Quite surprising to intellectuals that had pretty much in the
1960s and 70s written religion off as a spent force, the resurgence of fundamentalist religion in
the United States, especially fundamentalist Christianity, led to an increasingly militant
stance on the part of fundamentalists against those scientific theories that challenged religious
teachings. It wasn't a question of just resenting the scientific theories, creationism and the
success or intelligent design controversies actually challenged the validity, the scientificness of
scientific knowledge, challenged the truth of scientific theories and argued that their ideas
were equally scientific and deserved to be taught on a parallel basis. So this is really quite
fascinating. Where did this criticism, how does it, this criticism of science on the political front,
on the intellectual front, on the religious front, how does it square with the popularity of science,
the unprecedented public support of for science and the role that science increasingly played in
Western culture in all developed societies. In fact, science and technology is an index of how
modern, how developed a society is. I want to argue in the course of this course that the science
wars, broadly speaking, this hostile criticism of science that emerged in the 1960s and became
increasingly virulent in the 70s, 80s and 90s, that the science wars are symptoms of a much
deeper conflict, an unresolved conflict internal to science. And that this internal unresolved
conflict is in fact a reflection of an ambivalence within modern science itself of what the
object of scientific knowledge is, of how it is that scientists come to know and what it is that
they know when they say that they know, when they say that evolutionary biology is true, that the
theory, the general theory of relativity is a true theory of gravity. What is it that they mean by
that? There is an unresolved ambivalence within the scientific community as to exactly what that
means. An ambivalence that has persisted even though, as we will see in the course of these
lectures, scientists have been aware of the conflict, have been aware of the ambivalence right
from the beginning, from the 17th century and repeatedly subsequently. And the ambivalence has
remained, which raises a question in its own right. Well, what does that signify? If the ambivalence is
there after 400 years, it probably is symptomatic of something fundamental. Now, bear with me just a
moment here, because there's one level deeper that I want to go. This internal conflict within
science over the nature of scientific knowledge, let's call it the knowledge problem within science,
what does knowledge mean within science, is itself embedded in a 2400 year old war in Western
philosophy over the meaning of the terms knowledge, truth, reason, reality. For since the time of
Plato, at least, but certainly since the time of Plato, Western philosophers have been aware of the
need to choose between two positions on the subject of the meaning of such terms as knowledge, truth,
reason and reality. In Plato's dialogue called the Sophist, Plato talks of the battle between the
gods and the earth giants. It's a battle, it's a war over who gets to define philosophy, who gets
to define reason, knowledge, truth, reality. On the side of the gods, so to speak, this is of
course, Plato, Socrates, Plato and Socrates side. On the side of the gods are those who hold that
knowledge is absolutely distinct from belief or opinion, that there is a qualitative difference
between knowledge on the one side and beliefs or opinions on the other. Knowledge refers to that
about which one cannot be wrong. Beliefs and opinions refer to that about which one could be
wrong. That's why they call beliefs and opinions. Knowledge is not a matter of belief and opinion,
knowledge is what is true. Knowledge is necessary, that means it must be the way it is. It is that
about which you cannot be wrong. It must be true. So truth is necessary, knowledge refers to that
which is certain. There's no probabilities involved, knowledge is certain. This is a theme that Plato
brought to the forefront of Western philosophy and Plato's vision in one form and another has
dominated mainstream Western philosophy. Knowledge is universal, necessary and certain. What we know
is timeless, it is universal, it's not a function of well the theory works in Athens but it doesn't
work in Sparta. It is timeless, it is universal, it is necessary, it is certain. That sort of quartet
of characteristics is going to recur again and again as we look at to the now knowledge problem
within science because of course modern science claims to be giving us universal truths about
nature and Plato pointed to a body of knowledge that exemplified universal necessary and certain
knowledge. Lest you think this is a pipe dream, Plato might say, there is a body of knowledge
that is universal, necessary and certain. It's mathematics and how does mathematics acquire
universality, necessity and certainty by being strictly deductive in its reasoning. So on the
side of the gods we have a concept of knowledge, truth, reason that is key to deductive logical
reasoning and the essence of deductive reasoning is an argument such that when the premises are
true the conclusion must be true, it is necessarily true, it is certain. So you get necessity and
certainty and it turns out that in order to have a deductive argument you must have at least one
universal premise. We're all familiar with such an example of a deductive argument as all men
are mortal, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal. This says nothing about women,
it said all men are mortal, we leave open the question of whether women are or not,
the Greeks did not choose to use that as part of their illustration. On the side of the earth
giants, well who are the earth giants? The earth giants were Plato's philosophical enemies, the
Sophists. The Sophists were not concerned with timeless wisdom, the Sophists were primarily
concerned with action, they were concerned with making decisions in real-world situations and
for the Sophists the word knowledge referred to a species of belief. It referred to those beliefs
that are most strongly held in a society at a particular time. Knowledge is a word that we
use when we want to say that this belief is not challengeable, this belief is in the bank.
And so I don't need to re-examine this, so I'm not going to call it a belief because I recognize
that the connotations of belief is I could be wrong about it, but of course you could be wrong
about knowledge also. For the Sophists the earth giants as Plato called them who want to pull
these wonderful definitions of knowledge truth reason and reality down from their ideal platonic
form into practical reality for the earth giants, the characteristics of knowledge are that knowledge
is always particular. It has a certain context within which it can be said to be true or false,
but it cannot be universal necessary and certain. It is particular, it is contingent,
that means it is dependent on assumptions that are not themselves known to be true,
and it is merely probable. There is some uncertainty always to be associated with
what we claim to know. It can never be universal necessary and certain. It always has a particularity,
a contingency, and a probability associated with it. This is a colossal dispute within western
philosophy, within western intellectual culture that has never been resolved. The dominant strain
is platonic. I'm calling it that, it's the side of the gods, but every now and then the earth
giants have popped up to do battle with them. They have never been fully vanquished and in fact,
as we will see with the rise, with David Hume's skeptical philosophy in the 18th century and
then American pragmatism at the end of the 19th to the beginning of the 20th century,
the earth giants argument, the Sophist argument has come back in more sophisticated and I think
critically defensible form. The important thing for us is to recognize that this battle within
western philosophy was internalized when modern science began in the 17th century, and we will
see this beginning in the very next lecture with the fathers, so to speak, of modern science,
Francis Bacon and René Descartes, and the focus on methodology in the 17th century
at the origins of modern science. We will see that modern scientists, in a sense,
the founders of modern science wanted it both ways. They wanted to be on the side of the gods,
and they wanted the knowledge of nature that they produced to be universal, necessary and certain,
to be really true, to be about what was out there beyond experience. Not something that was going
to change generation after generation because people had different attitudes, different predispositions,
different beliefs, etc. But at the same time, they said, all of this scientific knowledge
comes from experience. But everyone has always recognized, including Plato, of course, that
experience is particular. That experience is always uncertain. There's a certain unpredictability,
a certain uncertainty associated with experience. So how can you go from experience, which is
particular, contingent and probable, to knowledge, which is universal, necessary and certain?
Modern science prides itself on being empirical and experimental, but at the same time,
at the end of all of the experimentation comes a universal, necessary and certain theory.
How can you play both ends? And in fact, that is what science has done in a certain sense,
and that is why I say that science has internalized this deep conflict in Western intellectual
culture over the definitions of knowledge, truth, reason and reality. And this unresolved conflict
within science has made it, I think, effectively impossible to resolve the ambivalence of scientists
over the centuries on the question of, what is the object of scientific knowledge? Is it
reality, meaning by that term, something beyond experience, something which is out there that
we do not experience but which we know is the cause of our experience, or is scientific knowledge
experience? It makes a very big difference if science is an account of experience that we
accept because it works. That's very unthreatening. After all, technical knowledge, engineering
knowledge is not controversial. Engineering knowledge works, we accept it, we use it, we go on.
Why is the Darwinian theory of evolution more threatening than the theories that engineers
use to build bridges? Because the scientific theory claims to be true. Beyond working. It doesn't
just work. Yes, it works, and we're very glad that you give us our grants to keep doing our research
because you like the way it works, but what we're really trying to do is to understand
the truth. Now, you might say, well, look, how could you have a controversy over the definitions
of words for 2400 years? But step back and think about it. In what dictionary would we go to look
up the meaning of these words? Who knows what the word knowledge means? Who knows what the word
reality means? Who knows what the word truth means? What is the right way to reason about anything?
There's no way that we did not come with an instruction manual that we can all look into to
figure to find out the truth about these matters. We invented the concept of truth. We, human beings,
invented the concept of knowledge of objectivity versus subjectivity, etc. And so it's not a simple
matter to say, well, why don't you just go look it up? That's something that we, in fact, cannot do.
So in very broad terms, I'm suggesting to you that there is an issue associated with the question
of what scientists know and how they know it that is intellectually fascinating, but it is also of
considerable practical import in terms of how we should respond to the truth claims that scientists
make. Now, let me sketch a little bit about what's going to be coming up in the course.
For the purposes of this course, I have adopted a historical approach. We're going to start with the
17th century and move chronologically to the end of the 20th, the beginning of the 21st century,
because this approach, in the manner of a movie contrasted with a slideshow, allows us to watch
the knowledge problem within science unfold over time. It allows us to see scientists wrestling
with this problem, how they dealt with it in relation to new developments in science,
how they dealt with it in terms of the reaction of society to claims of knowledge on the part of
scientists. So society, especially in the late 17th and in the 18th century, saw science as a
sudden new form of truth, rivaling religious truth, and that prompted social reform,
because scientific knowledge was perceived to be true, not merely a useful interpretation of
experience. And so the historical approach gives us the advantage of letting a process happen over
time. And so I think that that is particularly opposite to this kind of a topic. In the 17th
century, when, as I said before, modern science was founded, we will see that from the beginning,
from Francis Bacon and Descartes, to the end of the century, Gottfried Leibniz and Isaac Newton
bracketing the 17th century, that the founders of modern science were almost obsessed with
questions of method, which you might think is kind of odd. Why don't they just get down to the
business of doing their science? Why are they spending so much time focusing on method? But
I think you can almost anticipate that now. And we will see that their focus on method was in
response to this knowledge problem that I've been referring to. In the 18th century, it was
philosophers who decided that they needed to develop a theory of knowledge that explained how
scientists could know what they claimed to know. The perception that scientists really did know
that these men, overwhelmingly, that these men in those days actually knew truths that no one
had known before, how could they do that? How could they go from experience to theories that
contradicted experience? Everybody can see that the sun moves across the sky, and yet we're told
that we are moving, not the sun. How can they do that? So philosophers for, and in the course of
the 18th century, they formulated two of the three major philosophical traditions in modern western
philosophy. Rationalism is the one that we inherited from Plato, but empiricism and idealism in the
18th century, late 17th and 18th century, are direct outgrowths of responding to science as a new
body of knowledge. In the 19th century, natural science really matured, and scientific theories
became unprecedentedly powerful, not by comparison with the 20th century, but very powerful compared
to the 18th and the 17th century, and scientists themselves once again had to confront the knowledge
problem within science, what these new mathematically abstract theories really were about. And so from
the early 1800s right into the 1920s, major scientific figures also concerned themselves
with the knowledge problem within science. Since the 1920s, the philosophical community has taken
over the knowledge problem within science, and scientists have dropped out, and we'll have to
talk about why that was the case, and how this has made the science wars of the 1960s as intense and
conflictual as they turned out to be. So our focus in the course is going to be on the knowledge
problem within science, as I defined it before, and think of these questions. What does it mean
to be rational in response to experience? What is rational action? If the sophists are right,
and action is always particular and concrete, and if rationality is universal, necessary,
and certain, then how can you have rational action? And finally, why is this ambivalence
still unresolved? We will be exploring these and related questions in the course of the
lectures to come. Thank you.
