Lecture 15, Einstein and Bohr Redefine Reality
At the end of the last lecture, I argued that logical positivism had failed in its quest
to ground to provide a foundation for an objective theory of scientific knowledge.
And mentioned that, nevertheless, in spite of the fact that even its founding figures
in the course of the 1930s recognized that it did not look as though logical positivism
could make good on its promise, it remained a dominant school in philosophy and especially
in philosophy of science into the 1960s.
And we have to ask why?
To what end?
Who was paying attention to it and why does it persist?
It might seem as though after all of the thinkers, among them first rate scientists and mathematicians
who had presented cogent arguments that the claim that scientific knowledge was true with
the capital T, that it was universal necessary and certain knowledge of reality in the platonic
sense that science was on the side of Plato's gods in the battle between the gods and the
earth giants, that by now there was a strong enough case that one would try to find some
kind of balance, try to find some way to interpret scientific knowledge so that it was knowledge
of experience that was consistent with the prediction and control, etc.
And nevertheless, it is the case that the objectivistic view of scientific knowledge
or the realist view, whatever term we want to use, keeps coming up.
The logical positivists were very well aware of the work that their predecessors were
doing.
They knew very well about Mach and Duem and Poincare, for example, and they persisted
with logical positivism because of the arguments of people like Mach and Duem and Poincare,
because science needed defenders, so to speak.
But if you ask who's paying attention, then I think the answer must be not scientists.
After the 1920s, in part because of the professionalization and specialization of science, because
science was becoming entrenched in society in ways that led to certain expectations that
meant that scientists were focusing on being productive in response to the image of science,
the public image of science, the scientists were seen to have sort of lost interest in
and dropped out of addressing the kinds of issues that the logical positivists were addressing.
Who was paying attention?
Philosophers.
One can ask, is logical positivism, which claims to be a theory of scientific knowledge,
is it really about science at all?
Or is it an attempt to show that philosophy is relevant in an age of imperial science?
What is philosophy's place at a time when science imperialistically claims to be the
center of knowledge, truth, and access to reality?
Scientific theories have this philosophical character, if you insist that they do.
Dewey wrote a book called The Quest for Certainty, in which he argued that the quest for Plato's
God definition of knowledge, that about which one cannot be wrong, universal, necessary,
certain, etc., that that is religion under another name.
It's not good philosophy at all.
In real philosophy, according to Dewey, good philosophy is philosophy, as I described,
his pragmatic conception of knowledge, which is instrumental, not absolute, not in the
very early modern period Erasmus, the great Dutch humanist Erasmus, in the 16th century
is said to have called The Quest for Certainty the comedy of the higher lunacy, that is a
form of madness, and yet it is a form of madness that persists even among the most brilliant
as we have seen, for example, in the case of Russell, and the logical positivists among
many others.
So we'll have to come back to the question of why it persists, but in this lecture, I
want to focus on the warrant, the justification, the basis for the persistence that in believing
that scientific theories are disclosing truth for the capital T, that the object of science
is not experience, the object of science is what is behind experience, realities, and
that is something that we can do here.
That is, I think, an important question psychologically and philosophically as well, because it is
not easy to dismiss the objective notion of scientific knowledge, that the object of
science is the world behind experience, when we start thinking about what it is that 20th
century scientific theories are about, the discovery of something like, the discovery
of radioactivity, the revelation that there is such a phenomenon as radioactivity, which
we had never anticipated, and which in fact required a profound reconceptualization of
our understanding of matter and energy.
The discovery of x-rays, which again opened up whole new areas of nature, and especially
when the x-rays were used not just medically, but in physics and in chemistry as tools for
revealing new levels of reality, new and in the process, redefining what we meant by reality.
So the theories that we are talking about are not simply abstract theories from the
point of view of the public reading about them, for example.
What scientific knowledge is doing seems quite clearly to be revealing realities.
I'm trying to build a case here on the side of the persistence of the objectivist view.
Say, well, okay, let's give it up and let's find, but the reason for not giving it up
seems quite strong when you start looking at what science is telling us.
Now it's not just that science is giving us radio, but the scientists are revealing levels
of reality that are astonishing to us.
For example, the size of the Milky Way, the discovery that there are other galaxies than
the Milky Way, which was only in the early 1920s.
Although the early 1920s, many leading astronomers felt that the Milky Way was the only galaxy
in the universe, that the Milky Way was the universe, and that all of those fuzzy little
patches of lights in the night sky are nebulae, they're clouds of gas.
But with the use of the 100-inch telescope on Mount Wilson, which became operational
in 1919, the astronomer Edwin Hubble was able to resolve stars, individual stars in the
constellation Andromeda, estimating that it was close to a million light-years away
from us, and it was another galaxy.
It wasn't a cloud of gas at all, it was a galaxy made up of hundreds of millions, billions
of stars.
We now know it's much further away than that, and it's about 100 billion stars, and that
there are hundreds of billions of galaxies.
Now, this is not a matter of conventionalism, we're saying there really are hundreds of
billions of galaxies, each of which has about 100 billion stars on average, distributed
through a vast space, and then in the late 1920s, the same Hubble announcing that the
universe is expanding.
This is not a convenient way of referring to experience.
This is a statement that seems the universe is expanding.
The claim that the universe originated in a big bang, for example, that it emerged out
of a primordial explosion of some sort, which has become much more complicated and sophisticated
since the idea first was sort of floated around in the 1920s, and then again in the late 1930s,
really becoming something like a scientific theory only in the 1960s, this is a statement
about the way things are, and when scientists can take something like the atom, which can
be in the 19th century and can be understood as well, it's a useful concept to employ when
doing chemistry and certain problems in physics, but who knows if they really are atoms.
So there was a controversy, as we've discussed, Mach bitterly opposed taking atoms as physically
real, although using them as conceptual tools in order to do problems in the kinetic theory
of gases or in chemical combinations to understand chemical reactions, perfectly okay, but don't
think that they really are atoms, Mach argued.
On the other hand, Boltzmann and others, I said, no, no, they're really real.
How do you resolve that?
Well, in 1896, an extraordinary year, because that was the year that radioactivity was discovered,
that x-rays were discovered, and in which the internal structure of the atom was discovered.
That is to say, JJ Thompson in England announced that the atom, contrary to everyone's expectations
since the time of the ancient Greeks and in modern atomic theory since John Dalton's monograph
proposing the atomic theory of matter in the first decade of the 19th century, Thompson
argued the atom is not simple.
That's what the word from Greek is supposed to indicate.
It's an absolutely simple bit of stuff that has no internal structure.
It is fundamental.
It is just what it is.
It's the most fundamental unit of material stuff, and Thompson said, oh no, it has an
internal structure, and the little bits inside got the name electrons.
Now in the early 20th century, the American physicist Millican measured the charge on
an individual electron, and the mass of the individual electron was estimated as roughly
1,800 the mass of the proton, which is whatever else at the time was believed to make up the
rest of the atom.
Now once you can measure and weigh and calculate, now you're attributing physical reality to
the atom.
It's not a question of saying, well this is an interesting conceptual tool, but that argument
becomes thin when you can weigh the atom, when you can measure the electrical properties
of the individual electron, and you can tell me how much charge it possesses and what its
mass is relative to the mass of the proton, then it seems kind of thin to say, well of
course there may not be any electrons, but the electron that doesn't exist is useful
to talk about it as having the following mass and the following electrical charge.
So the scientific theories, especially the scientific theories that sort of revolutionize
scientific thought in the first decades of the 20th century, like the special and general
theories of relativity, and especially quantum theory, are theories that seem to be opening
up whole new realities and redefining reality.
Now before discussing a few of these, and in order to show you what I mean in some detail,
let's point out some lessons that were not learned, that might have been learned with
the appearance of these revolutionary new theories between, roughly speaking, 1900 and 1930.
One lesson that was not learned was that science is historical, that scientific truth and scientific
knowledge emerge in time, that the assumptions that are required in order to define scientific
objects in order to formulate scientific theories, that these assumptions change over time, that
they are historical, and that therefore scientific knowledge should be perhaps perceived as an
open-ended process, that scientific knowledge, however convincing it may be at any given
time, has a conjectural and courageable character.
It has always has a conjectural character in the sense that the assumptions will probably
change over time.
After all, we can look back and see now, speaking in the early 1900s, that since the
time of Galileo and Newton, that scientific assumptions have changed, so maybe our assumptions
will be changed in 100 years or 50 years or 200 years.
And it is courageable, scientific knowledge is always correctable, as new experiences
require that we adapt theories to explain phenomena that we had not anticipated and that
maybe the theories opened up for us.
So I'd like to look in some detail here at a couple of these theories in the early 20th
century that redefined reality, and of course the first one that has to come to mind is
the special theory of relativity and the general theory of relativity.
These literally redefined what we meant by the terms space, time and motion.
As it turned out, and unexpectedly, the special theory of relativity also had as a deductive
consequence of the application of the theory that matter and energy are inter-convertible.
An equation, the famous Equal MC Square equation, that only really made operational sense, that
only became empirically significant in the 1930s when certain kinds of nuclear processes
became the subject of experiment, the most famous of course being the fission experiments
that led to the atomic bomb, and that required using the equation Equal MC Square, but the
equation initially dropped out of the special theory of relativity.
This is one of the ways in which the special theory required that we redefine, we had to
take Newton's definitions of space, time and motion, and redefine them in a similar way.
The general theory of relativity required that we redefine the relationships among space,
time, matter and energy, so that space and time have properties that are dependent on
what is happening in time and what is in space, so that depending on the concentration of
matter and energy, space will have a shape that it does not have if matter is dispersed
or if there is no matter in some region of space.
Roughly speaking, on a huge cosmological scale, the universe is close to being flat, as described
by Euclidean geometry, but in the vicinity of stars, and especially of course in the
vicinity of black holes, space is intensely curved, and one must use non-Euclidean geometry
to describe space in those areas.
Similarly, when there are intense concentrations of matter and energy, the measurement of time
changes, so space and time, which for Newton are independent of what happens in time and
of what is located in space, now suddenly have properties that are a function of what
happens in time and what is located in space.
So there is a redefinition here of what we mean by some of the most fundamental concepts
that scientists use to describe reality, namely space, time, motion, matter, and energy.
So the relativity theories are not improvements of Newtonian science.
Scientists often, in my experience, scientists typically refer to new theories as if they
were improvements on old theories, whereas as a matter of fact, the special and general
theories of relativity displace Newtonian theory.
They displace the reality that Newtonian theory proposed.
The description of reality is now changed to a new description, reality has suddenly
changed.
Where did the old reality go?
Did dinosaurs exist before the first dinosaur bones were dug up and we recognized that there
once were creatures called dinosaurs?
Did the electron exist before J.J. Thompson discovered in 1896?
Here our common sense reaction of course is, well of course it did.
He didn't create the electron, he just, that response does not adequately attend to the
distinction I made in the last lecture between a scientific object and what we ordinarily
call an object.
Scientific objects only exist when they are defined and when they are redefined they cease
to exist.
Dalton's atom, as a scientific object, ceased to exist when Thompson redefined the atom
as having an internal structure.
Thompson's atom ceased to exist when Ernest Rutherford claimed that the atom was mostly
empty space with a positively charged nucleus and electrons orbiting around them.
Rutherford's atom ceased to exist when Neil's Bohr a year or two later gave his quantum theory
of the atom.
The Bohr atom ceased to exist when the neutron was discovered, when the internal structure
of the nucleus was discovered in 1935, etc.
So you can say well but if it was the case when Bohr announced, let's take Rutherford,
when Rutherford announced the solar system model of the atom, well the atom's always
been like that, but then two years later it's not like that and 20 years later it's not
like that.
We have not annihilated the Rutherford atom when we replace it with a new definition
because as a scientific object these realities only exist within the framework of the way
they are defined by scientists.
So that's a very important distinction that I'm going to keep coming back to between what
we mean by a scientific object, a scientific explanation, a scientific observation in the
context of scientific theorizing.
Objects, explanations, observations have a more complex character than what we ordinarily
mean.
We're not talking about, well observations are infected by theory, how many chairs are
there in this room?
That's not the kind of observation we're talking about.
If you make an observation with an elementary particle instrument detector used at Fermilab
where we're doing an experiment that takes years to put together and we're making an
observation, that is a scientific observation and that's the kind of observation which is
going to play a role in a scientific explanation that it is claimed and was already claimed
in the 1930s and before is infected by the theory that you're using in order to generate
the observation.
A second theory that we need to appreciate as redefining reality is of course quantum
theory and I want to do this in two parts.
First of all, Einstein's quantum theory of light in 1905, a building on Max Planck's
very tentative suggestion in late December of 1900 that electromagnetic energy seemed
to be only absorbable or emitable in packets, not continuously as Maxwell's theory of electromagnetic
energy required but only in discrete units.
You could get one ounce of energy, two ounces, three ounces but not an ounce and a half whereas
Maxwell's theory allowed you to get one ounce and three sixteenths of an ounce.
Of course not ounces, the units turn out to now have Planck's name associated with them
so you can get one Planck's unit, two Planck's unit but nothing, nothing in between.
Planck found this very disturbing because it contradicted Maxwell's electromagnetic theory
but the equation that he generated worked and so he published it.
Einstein in 1905 took this as a fundamental fact about reality that light behaved as if
it were a dilute gas.
It's immaterial so it's not really a gas but light behaved as if it were a dilute gas.
It is made up of particles that are immaterial and that have a characteristic frequency measurement
of which is associated with this quantity that came to be called Planck's constant so
that the frequency and the energy associated with light particles comes in quantized units
that are whole multiples of the Planck constant.
Einstein argued in the first paragraph of his famous 1905 paper which is called the
photoelectric effect paper which was really an attempt to show that taking seriously the
idea that electromagnetic energy comes in particles not waves that is able to explain
the photoelectric effect and Einstein received the Nobel Prize for that in 1921 not for his
theories of relativity which even in 1921 were considered too speculative to give the
Nobel Prize for.
So in the first paragraph of this paper Einstein makes what sounds like a totally irrelevant
claim he said why doesn't he get down to the business of the paper he says that there
is a profound formal difference between physical models based on the particle concept and physical
models scientific models based on the wave concept nothing can be both a wave and a particle
you cannot have a scientific theory of a natural phenomenon that mixes and matches wave concepts
and particle concepts because if you do that then that there's a logical inconsistency
between wave concepts and particle concepts for example a wave is distributed in space
whereas a particle is localized in space the formula for measuring the energy of a particle
is different from the formula for measuring the energy of a wave so no thing can be both
a wave and a particle therefore Planck's equation which borrowed bits and pieces of wave models
and particle models cannot be used it works but it cannot be considered a picture of reality
so Einstein re derives the same equation that Planck had used but in a conceptually unified
way so that it is capable of corresponding with what's really out there and so Einstein
after a hundred year almost a hundred years of it overthrew the wave theory of light of
the 19th century for with a new quantum particle theory of light which seems very similar in
certain respects to Newton's theory corpuscular theory of light that we talked about in an
early lecture back in the late 17th century as published in Newton's book Optics in 1700
what's puzzling of course is that Einstein's quanta of light which subsequently got the
name photons back in the mid 1920s later in the mid 1920s that photons in fact have a dualistic
and inconsistent character namely they are particles but they have a frequency associated
with them a bizarre feature that Newton seemed to have anticipated that light has in some
respects has a particle like character in some respects has a wave like character this led
to what was for a long time called wave particle duality that it sounds as though the most
fundamental features of nature have contradictory characteristics namely they are both waves
and particles but those are conceptually speaking exclusive of one another. Niels Bohr starting
in the late 1920s argued that this duality is conceptual that it reflects a fundamental
feature of human thinking that we are incapable of conceptualizing what is beyond experience
that all of our concepts must derive from our experience and that which we do not experience
like atoms and their constituents and photons we have to use the concepts that derive from
our experience to describe them. This wave particle duality is a revelation of the limits
of our conceptual ability and so Bohr but not just Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Wolfgang
Pauley, a whole clutch of the most brilliant architects of quantum theory argued against
Einstein, the French physicist Louis de Broglie, the Viennese physicist Erwin Schrodinger and
a whole bunch of other brilliant physicists that the object of scientific knowledge is
not reality. It is experience. It is a description of experience that is anchored in experience
and that is incapable of penetrating experience to all such talk is mere metaphysics and must
be dismissed from science. Einstein and de Broglie and Schrodinger and Max Planck still
held out for the idea that science was about reality, that science could lift a corner
of the veil, experience is a veil which buffers us, which shields us from reality and science
lifts that veil here and there so that we can actually see reality in some conceptual
sense in the mind's eye and this is a debate that is particularly relevant to our concerns
in this course. Bohr's theory, quantum theory of the atom which follows Einstein's quantum
theory of electromagnetic energy especially light but it applies to all electromagnetic
energy. Starting in 1912, 1913 Bohr's quantum theory of the atom is very revealing in terms
of the kinds of things that we've been, the issues we've been talking about because Bohr
announced a set of rules for how electrons behave when they are circling the nucleus
of an atom and these rules on the face of it are quite arbitrary and they violently contradict
the requirements of Maxwell's electromagnetic theory which is one of the greatest theoretical
triumphs of the 19th century and yet between 1912, 1913 and the mid 1920s, quantum theory
progressively grew in depth and in stature and in acceptance and in its ability to make
valuable experimental predictions. This increased exponentially after the mid 1920s with the
rise of quantum mechanics especially at the hands of Werner Heisenberg that I mentioned
before and Erwin Schwerdinger who clashed philosophically in 1925, Heisenberg published
his matrix mechanics which was a purely empirical correlation of the frequencies of light emitted
by electrons as they changed their orbits around nuclei, it's the basis for what we
call lasers and Schwerdinger's much more classical deterministic model of the same phenomenon
which he called wave mechanics and then it was shown that these two are inter-translatable
but these two theories even though they are philosophically fundamentally different, Heisenberg
was not interested in mechanisms or causation, it's a purely empirical correlation. Schwerdinger
developed a different set of equations that had a physical interpretation that would deterministic
not statistical and probabilistic and yet the two were perfectly inter-translatable which
is a resurgence what pops up here is Fourier. Without their intending it what we see in
the inter-translatability of Heisenberg and Schwerdinger is that the theory of a set of
equations can work without our understanding what they mean physically without being able
to identify what they even could correspond to outside of our experimental experience.
This became the basis for a decades long debate, dispute that Einstein and Bohr conducted episodically
almost exclusively through correspondence and papers not through direct discussion between
the late 1920s really the early 1930s and the end of Einstein's life and this had to
do with whether quantum theory is a decisive a complete theory of matter and energy. Bohr
claimed that it was in spite of the fact that it was a statistical theory and Einstein said
that it was not because it was a statistical theory. Einstein insisted that a final theory
of nature must be deterministic and causal. The causation mechanism is irrelevant all
that matters is does it predict correctly? Is it empirically adequate? What these two
men were really arguing about is what is the foundation of the intelligibility of experience?
Einstein said experience is unintelligible to me if it is not deterministic and causal
and Bohr saying I find experience quite intelligible if it is explained in terms of probabilities
and statistical patterns, if it is conjectural, if it is probabilistic as we see in the case
of pragmatism for example. So this dispute in physics is actually a quite interesting
philosophical dispute over what is it that will make experience intelligible to us and
in this dispute we see a revelation of what is really going on in scientific thinking.
The hunger for the certainty, the objectivity, the realism, truth with a capital T and the
sofistic, pragmatic view that I don't get what you guys are anguishing over this is
perfectly satisfactory.
