Lecture 23.
Intelligent Design and the Scope of Science
Is intelligent design a scientific hypothesis?
Why does it matter?
Well, quite independently of the issue itself, which may go away, for example, as a practical
matter.
Quite independently of that, it is intellectually interesting to ask whether the claim that
intelligent design and scientific hypothesis is valuable to us because examining it, I
think, helps pull together a number of the core ideas that we have been discussing about
the nature of scientific knowledge.
So I propose in this lecture that we discuss the claim that intelligent design is a scientific
hypothesis.
Now, this became an issue really in the early 21st century, although it was already prominent
enough that it featured in a book called Darwin's Black Box by Michael Beehe, a colleague of
mine at Lehigh University, who was himself a biochemist, which argued a position that
is considered fundamental to the claim that intelligent design is a scientific hypothesis.
And Professor Beehe does argue that intelligent design is a scientific hypothesis.
But the intelligent design position is really a sort of a second generation version of
the attempts to get creationism taught in biology classrooms as a legitimate alternative
view of the world and of the origin of life, especially of human life, that took place
during the 1970s and 80s.
A number of judicial decisions technically put the quietus to the creationist and said,
well, the creationism is a religious doctrine and therefore it does not have the right to
be taught in public schools and it is not a scientific hypothesis, so it does not have
the right to be taught in a science classroom.
If you want to have a class in religion in a public school, then of course you can and
you can work creationism into that.
But it does not have a claim on the public's attention specifically because it is a specific
religious teaching.
In spite of those judicial rulings, in particular states of court in Arkansas, that there are
about a dozen states that restrict to one degree or another the teaching of evolution
in the high school classroom, which indicates the breadth of the public sensitivity in the
U.S. in this issue.
And so intelligent design, the claim that intelligent design is a scientific hypothesis
and as a scientific hypothesis, not a specifically religious doctrine, it is legitimate material
to be taught in a biology classroom, is a much more interesting and on the face of it
a much more compelling claim than the creationist.
So that's why we need to take a look at it, it's a more subtle issue and I think a valuable
one for us in this course.
For starters, it leads to the question, who decides if a hypothesis is scientific?
Who's supposed to make that decision?
If not the scientific community, who else should politicians decide what is a scientific
hypothesis?
Should workers at a particular factory or should the citizenry as a whole be polled?
What do you think?
Is this a scientific hypothesis?
Being somewhat ridiculous, it seems obvious that the only people who can say if a hypothesis
is scientific is the community of scientists to whom that hypothesis is relevant.
So in this case, if the community of evolutionary biologists or if the community of biologists
who deal with the kinds of problems that evolutionary biology addresses and that intelligent design
claims to address better, if they were to accept intelligent design as a hypothesis, then even
though I might think that it's a poor hypothesis, that makes it a scientific hypothesis.
And if the community of biologists with the relevant concerns refuses to consider as a
scientific hypothesis, then it's not, even if they're wrong.
It has nothing to do with, are they right or are they wrong?
How would we know that they were right or wrong?
As we have said before, in what dictionary are we going to look it up?
In what operating manual for nature will we look up under design, intelligent scientific
hypothesis?
There is no such dictionary and so somebody has to define what the term scientific hypothesis
is and there's really nobody else to do that but the people who do science.
So what criteria would they apply?
Well, first of all, as we have seen in this course, one thing we know already, don't expect
an ironclad formula, an ironclad set of methodological rules that will allow us to decide if a hypothesis
is a scientific hypothesis or not.
We have seen that the methodology of science is much more complex than that.
But at a minimum, we would expect to see the following, explanatory power.
Hypothesis is scientific if it has explanatory power in the context of the scientific study
of natural phenomena.
If a hypothesis doesn't explain anything, if a hypothesis lacks explanatory power,
if it is perceived to be a weaker explanation than a prevailing explanation, then it's unlikely
that it's going to get much attention.
Second, predictive success.
You're going to have to make predictions whose occurrence then is taken to be a confirmation
that your hypothesis is, if not correct, but at least valuable, at least worth taking
seriously.
And third, some kind of control.
So we typically expect, there are exceptions to this, that's why I said there's no ironclad
rules, that a hypothesis is a scientific if it gives us explanatory power, if it has explanatory
power, displays predictive success.
If it predicts novel, unexpected phenomena, as when the general theory of relativity predicted
black holes, for example, and we subsequently discovered it, and also predicted gravitational
lensing and subsequently discovered gravitational lensing, that light that comes to us from
behind a very distant galaxy, the galaxy acts like a lens and creates multiple images of
galaxies behind it that are very far behind it.
So these are startling predictions, and they give us some confidence that the general theory
of relativity is either true, not with a capital T, because we don't want to commit the fallacy
of affirming the consequent that we've talked about so many times, but at least true with
a small t, and it's got to have, we expected to give us some kind of control over natural
phenomena.
Of course, the general theory of relativity doesn't really give us much control in ordinary
life, but there are circumstances in which it does.
Well, as a matter of fact, the global positioning systems that more and more people are using
on a consumer basis actually have to be corrected for the effect of the curvature of space around
the Earth, and the fact that the Earth, in a tricky way, as it rotates around its axis,
pulls the space around it so that the global positioning system over time drifts a little
bit out of position and has to be corrected for that.
So we actually do use the general theory, but for decades the general theory of relativity
did not have any practical consequences.
The Big Bang theory doesn't give us any control, so that's why I say there's no ironclad rule,
but you've got to be looking for explanatory power, predictive success, control, testability,
is the hypothesis testable?
Is it verifiable?
Now verifiability and testability are sufficient conditions for a hypothesis to be scientific
in principle.
If a hypothesis is testable, if it is verifiable, then we're prepared to look at it as scientific,
but sometimes a hypothesis is neither testable nor verifiable, it might still be scientific.
For example, dark matter is accepted by, I think, most astronomers, at least tentatively,
as a feature of reality, but you can't test for it and you can't verify it because we
use the term dark to mean that it is not detectable using instruments that we currently possess.
So and a final criterion here that I want to talk about is that a hypothesis is scientific
if it suggests some kind of research program that based on this hypothesis I will do the
following kinds of experiments in order to explore whether this hypothesis is true or
not.
How does this hypothesis help me explain, predict, control?
Now where does intelligent design stand in this list of the typical criteria that scientists
would use to assess a new, a truly new hypothesis with which they are presented?
Well first of all, intelligent design violates what at the, in the second lecture of this
course I described as one of the legacy principles of scientific knowledge.
I referred to Adelaide of Bath's early 12th century essay called Natural Questions in
which he laid down as a principle for natural philosophy that a natural phenomenon can only
be explained in terms of other natural phenomena.
That nature is a, as far as natural philosophy, what we call science, is concerned, nature
must be treated as a closed system.
That means, and in the dialogue, in the natural questions which is written in the form of
a dialogue in which Adelaide is talking to his young nephew, Adelaide specifically refers
to, for example, let's suppose you ask why is there
a rainbow in the heavens?
So the nephew says, because God promised Noah in Genesis 9, sentence 12 through 17, that
God promised Noah that there would never be another flood that covered the entire earth,
and the sign of God's promise is the rainbow.
Uncle Adelaide replies, oh of course, of course that, that's what God said, and of course
God put the rainbow, but that doesn't explain the rainbow.
That is an example of a miserable refuge from a real philosophic explanation.
The philosophic explanation of the rainbow must tell us on natural grounds what is the
relationship between sunlight and air, and we then found water droplets in the air that
causes there to be a rainbow.
I know God did it, but that's not natural philosophy.
That's theology.
So intelligent design by bringing a supernatural agent into scientific explanation is violating
one of the most fundamental principles of science.
So it is analogous to playing baseball and suddenly deciding that you wanted to drop-kick
the ball.
That's a different game.
So if you want to play the game of science, then you have to follow the rules of science.
You have no right, only the scientific community can decide what the rules of science are.
You can't come to science and say, we think you should start entertaining hypotheses that
refer to causal agents that are external to nature.
So an attempt is to say, no, no, maybe the intelligent designer is in nature.
Well then you would ask, well, who designed the designer?
What is the natural, and eventually you have to recognize that intelligent design in fact
requires reference to a supernatural, and of course the supporters of it explicitly believe
that intelligent design requires that we recognize a supernatural designer behind the appearance
of design in nature.
Without access to the designer to interview, without access to the blueprints for the design,
intelligent design seems to me operationally vacuous.
It doesn't make a difference.
Scientific hypothesis has to make a difference.
It has to explain things differently.
It has to open up a research program.
It has to suggest, well, my hypothesis suggests that we ought to be building instruments of
the following kind in order to detect the following kinds of signals which I predict
my hypothesis says are out there.
We ought to build radio telescopes because there are radio signals coming to us from
outer space.
For example, I just made that up.
It turns out radio signals from outer space were discovered accidentally, but the intelligent
design does not open up new research programs because if you had two biologists working
side by side, one believing in intelligent design, one not, they would do the same kind
of research anyway.
It does not change your research if you don't know the design so you can't key your research
program to blueprints and say, ah, I looked in the blueprint and I say we have ignored
a peculiar biochemical reaction that we ought to be paying attention to because it seems
to be important here.
So you don't know that.
So you have to behave as if there were no design and you have to act as if there were
no design.
And since you can't interview the designer and say what question should I be asking,
you're asking the same kind of questions as somebody who doesn't believe there's a
designer anyway.
So I think that intelligent design shows us that it is operationally vacuous.
The appearance of design is a legitimate scientific phenomenon.
That is to say, scientists have recognized, philosophers for thousands of years have recognized
that nature looks designed.
That's a legitimate natural phenomenon that scientists could address and have addressed
and that evolutionary biology addresses, for example, although not in a way that the
supporters of intelligent design like.
But intelligent design does not respond to this legitimate scientific issue, namely the
appearance of design in nature by explaining it.
It explains it away.
When you say, why is there a rainbow?
God put it there.
That's the end.
You have not explained it.
You've explained the rainbow away.
And if you say, why are there these complex biochemical systems in living organisms?
Oh, God put them there.
That's not an explanation.
That explains the phenomenon away, end of story.
So we have here, I think, a number of grounds for being deeply suspicious at a minimum of
the ability of intelligent design to pass muster as a scientific hypothesis.
So we can go at another level, another level lower than this.
The intelligence design supporters, and especially Professor Bee, because this touches on his
own area of expertise, claim that Darwinian evolution, Darwinian evolution, which is
a code word for evolution by natural selection acting on random mutations.
That Darwinian evolution is a flawed theory.
And it is especially flawed because it cannot explain the spontaneous emergence, that means
that sort of random emergence of complex biochemical systems.
That's the focus of the intelligent design argument, that there are systems in living
things, quite complex systems of proteins interacting with various kinds of, with one
another, and with various other molecules in the cell that interact systemically.
Professor Bee likes to show a mousetrap, if you take any piece out of the mousetrap it
just won't work.
The mousetrap is a system, a very simple system, and it's inconceivable how Darwinian
evolution, inconceivable he says, and be he supporters say, that it's inconceivable that
a mousetrap could evolve one piece at a time.
Because the pieces depend on their relationship to one another to function at all.
That a system is not just a collection of things, it's a collection of interrelated
things.
Each element in the system has the form that it does and the character that it does because
of its need to play a role in the system as a whole.
So a system has a kind of a top-down character, top-down as in designer, rather than the kind
of thing that can evolve from the bottom up, maybe more picturesquely.
Try to imagine that a bicycle was a living organism.
How could a bicycle evolve into a motorcycle?
Even though one of the earliest applications of an internal combustion engine was to put
one on a bicycle and make a motorcycle out of it, but spontaneously, Darwinianly, how
could a bicycle evolve into a motorcycle?
Let's suppose you had an ordinary bicycle and it gave birth to a bicycle with a gas tank.
What good would that do?
There's no gasoline, there's no throttle, there's no engine.
It just happened to have a gas well, then its daughter is born with a throttle.
But it doesn't make sense.
A motorcycle is a system of a certain kind.
And not only does it have all the bits and pieces, but there's also got to be the fuel,
which is not even a part, it comes from outside, a fuel that its engine and carburetor need
to be adapted to.
So that is on the face of it a very strong argument.
And so Bay says, because Darwinian evolution cannot explain the emergence of complex systems,
we must turn to intelligent design and consider that a top-down designer.
Now let's take a look at this claim, because I think it's deeply flawed.
First of all, it is a version of what, since Plato and Aristotle, especially Aristotle,
has been called the argument from ignorance.
That is the following.
If I say that Theory X fails to explain phenomenon Y, that provides no evidence whatsoever for
the truth of Theory Z.
If it is the case that Theory X fails to explain phenomenon Y, that tells me something
about Theory X.
It's not a very good theory if what I really need is to have phenomenon Y explained.
But it doesn't provide any evidence for the truth of a different theory.
That theory has to stand or fall on its own merits.
It can't be supported by the falsehood of another theory.
There are an infinite number of false theories that fail to express phenomenon Y.
Does that mean that there's an infinite amount of support for Theory Z?
Obviously not.
So even if it were true that Darwinian evolution cannot explain the spontaneous emergence of
complex biochemical systems, that would provide no support for the truth of intelligent design,
no logical support for the truth of intelligent design.
Second, it's not at all clear that the biological community as a whole feels that it can't do
it.
That Darwinian evolution cannot do that.
Nor is there any evidence that the biological community sees this as an anomaly, to use
Kuhn's term, that is critical.
Let's suppose that, okay, the natural response, given a historical understanding of scientific
theories, is to say, well, it can't do it yet.
That's a really complicated question, and we have not yet reached the point at which
the theory is sophisticated enough to deal with that question.
That would be one possible response.
Another is that it's just not an issue for the biological community.
That is not perceived as a critical issue capable of precipitating a new paradigm.
But there are two reasons for, I think, stronger reasons for disagreeing with the claim that
it cannot, that Darwinian evolution cannot explain the emergence of complex systems.
One is associated with the relatively recent development of the science of self-organizing
systems.
There is, over the last 30 years, there has grown up a very substantial body of theory
in physics, chemistry, biology, and now in nanotechnology of self-organizing systems,
where inorganic materials self-organize into fairly complicated systems.
If you are really interested scientifically in exploring the spontaneous emergence of
complex biochemical systems, it seems to me that you would have to first make sure that
the theory of self-organizing systems is incapable of explaining what you need to have explained.
That would seem to me to have a much higher priority than reaching outside nature to an
intelligent designer.
Furthermore, within this same argument, it seems to me that a strong argument can be
made by analogy that technological systems do form spontaneously.
Very complex technological systems.
For example, I referred before to the internal combustion engine and motorcycle, the automobile,
the technological system keyed to the automobile, emerged spontaneously, that is to say, nobody
oversaw that process.
The development of gasoline as a fuel had nothing whatsoever to do with the rise of
the internal combustion engine.
The history of the petroleum and the conversion of petroleum into, as one of its products,
gasoline, has nothing whatsoever to do with the automobile.
The history of the internal combustion engine has nothing to do with the automobile.
The internal combustion engine was pursued in the 1850s and 60s and 70s by French, Belgian,
German engineers because they wanted a compact power plant for machine shops that were too
small to want to buy a steam engine.
It was quite incidental after such an engine was invented to think, oh, this is small enough
that we could actually put one on a carriage and have a horseless carriage, or put one
on a bicycle, a sturdy bicycle, and have the first motorcycle.
Then if one looks at the carburetor, is an invention that had nothing to do with any
of these industries, well, who pulled all of this together?
There was no master plan, and not only that, but then you have to have filling stations,
you have to have macadamized roads for the automobiles, you put it all together, you
see that there are really dozens of bits and pieces that came together into the transportation
system keyed to the automobile with no one being top-down designer of it.
So here's an example, and this is very typical of the bottom-up emergence for self-interested
reasons of pretty complex technological systems.
Why shouldn't we think that this is a model to look at in the biochemical world?
I'm not saying it's true, only that this is a much more plausible approach, again, than
reaching outside of nature.
Finally, the final criticism on this point is that the claim that Darwinian evolution,
and there's always this insistence on Darwin, that Darwinian evolution has gaps, that there
are things that it doesn't explain, seems to reflect a fundamental misunderstanding
of the nature of scientific theories, especially as we have been discussing them in this course.
As if to say, well, Copernican astronomy is flawed, because look at all the things that
Copernicus could not explain.
But Copernican astronomy, as we've referred several times, has evolved into 20th century
astronomy, and we feel that the line of connection is strong enough that we still refer to Copernicus
as if Copernicus were the ancestral thinker behind modern astronomy.
Analogously, Darwinian evolution, Darwin and Wallace's version of evolution, has evolved
dramatically into a much more sophisticated theory that has become woven into a web of
correlated theories, which is a key test of the value of a scientific theory.
Today, evolutionary biology and the ideas underlying evolutionary biology are woven
into geology, ecology, into molecular biology, DNA studies.
There are a host of complementary disciplines that have incorporated evolution by natural
selection acting on random mutations, or some variation of that, because within the evolutionary
biological community, as a matter of fact, there continues to be a controversy of whether
natural selection is the only force that's at work in evolution, or whether evolution
acts on species, on DNA, on individuals.
These are lively controversies, but isn't it interesting that none of these controversies
have raised within them the issue of, but maybe what we're really missing here is that
there is an intelligent designer responsible for all of this.
Now, lest it appear that I am maligning intelligent design as opposed to criticizing it, let me
point out that intelligent design is a very intelligent hypothesis.
Notice, I did not say scientific hypothesis, that intelligent design is a very intelligent
hypothesis in response to the appearance of design in nature, and has been recognized
as such for thousands of years by some of the most eminent philosophers and scientists
right into the 19th century who argued from the appearance of design in nature that there
is a designer behind nature.
The earliest thinker I am familiar with who made this point, Aristotle had his own version
of it which I don't want to get into because it's designed without a designer, but the
earliest philosopher that I'm aware of who argued that design implies a designer was
the 9th, 10th century Jewish philosopher, Sadio Gaon, who in one of his books threw in
the following observation, if I showed you a page of text and I told you that I produced
that page of text by knocking over a bottle of ink, would you believe me?
The answer, of course, is no.
So look at the world, do you believe that this happened accidentally?
That argument from design was then, not based on Sadio who may have well picked it up from
Islamic philosophers of his day, and certainly within 200 years Islamic philosophers were
making that argument, as was the Jewish philosopher Maimonides from whom Thomas Aquinas, as he
specifically cites, got his five arguments for the existence of God, one of which is
the argument from design, and right into scientists in the 19th century who accepted the idea
that the appearance of design is evidence of a designer, but not one of these thinkers
thought that design was a scientific hypothesis.
It was a legitimate, the appearance of design was a legitimate support for believing that
there was a force behind nature, not that none of them saw it as a hypothesis or as
a tool, a conceptual tool for exploring nature, and I think that that is very, a very telling
observation.
If the case against intelligent design is so strong, and I believe it is as a scientific
hypothesis, is so strong, why is it so pressing?
Well, I think there's a good and commonsensical reason for that, because especially for people
of religious belief, that is to say people who believe that human life has meaning, evolution
by natural selection acting on random mutations suggests that human life is no more meaningful
than the life of a bacterium, and that is deeply threatening, and the response to that
threat is to attack the theory as a scientific theory.
Now that is not, in my opinion, that is not a scientific posture, and that's what underlies
the controversy that you have, that you have one side in this dispute protecting its own
values and beliefs and interests attempting to claim that those beliefs and values and
interests can be captured in a hypothesis that is scientific, but that the scientific
community does not recognize as scientific.
So there is a misconstrual on both sides of this dispute of the nature of scientific knowledge,
the nature of the truth claims that scientists make, so that you have imperial science on
one side clashing with imperial religion, but science does not need to be imperialistic
as we have been exploring in this course, it is a fact that science and scientists often
defend science as if it were the only truth, and that is a very difficult position to defend
as we have been exploring. Religion is much more typically associated with the conviction
that this particular religious group has a unique insight into the truth, there you
have really a clash that seems not to be resolvable by reason.
The defensiveness of the scientific community in responding to social constructionism and
in responding to the attacks of the post-modernists and the religious right obscures the fundamental
fact about science that we have learned in this course, namely that no theory can have
the status of an empirical fact. It is a category error contrary to the Wall Street Journal
of the New York Times and various op-ed pieces opposing intelligent design to say that scientific
theories, any scientific theory can be a fact, not evolutionary theory and not the general
theory of relativity and not quantum theory.
