Butcher 12, Trading Reality for Experience
In the 19th century, natural philosophers became scientists.
The term scientist introduced and very enthusiastically accepted spread very rapidly and quickly displaced
the term natural philosopher.
The enthusiasm, the eagerness with which natural philosophers switched in their badges
and traded them for the badge scientist reflects, at least in part, a desire to distance science
from philosophy.
A conscious desire to say that what we do, the knowledge we generate, must not be associated
with philosophy, which is pretty sterile.
It may be intellectually acute, but the fact is they haven't made much progress, whereas
we make progress every day.
So scientific knowledge is, in some sense, true and useful, whereas, at least explanatorily
in the 19th century in technological applications, whereas philosophical knowledge is still something
that philosophers are pursuing.
And the systems of the philosophers have each been refuted by the next generation of philosophers
and shown to be incorrect or worthless, and so it's better to have a distance between
us and them.
When they generate knowledge that we consider worthy of the term, then we'll take a look
at it.
This is kind of ironic because what happens in the 19th century, and we began to get a
sense of that in the last lecture, is that just when natural philosophers became scientists,
they had to start playing the role of philosopher again because the knowledge problem within
science had now surfaced with a vengeance.
It was there in the background of 17th century founders of modern science, that is, as I
indicated before, that people like Descartes, Galileo, Newton and Leibniz and Christian
Huygens were very well aware of that logical flaw that I've been calling the fallacy of
affirming the consequent, the flaw that prevents the successful prediction of a theory to decisively
confirm the theory, but they glossed that over, confident that the predictions and the results
they were getting had to be confirmation that the assumptions that they were using and
that the explanatory theories they were creating were, in fact, true pictures of reality, true
that they identified the true causes of experience.
It is in the 19th century that this question comes back now with a kind of a vengeance,
and people like Herschel, Comte, Ewell and Mill, whose ideas I described a little bit
in the last lecture, at least as they focused on the question of the nature of scientific
knowledge, the differences among them constitute mini-battles, skirmishes.
They're not out and out science wars, but they indicate the extent they are symptomatic
of the recognition that there is a knowledge problem within science, and of course that
was exacerbated by the move that Fourier made in explicitly separating the explanatory
dimension of his theory of heat from any ontological claims about what heat was, and the knowledge
problem in that sense intensified in the course of the century as scientific theories became
more mathematically abstract.
Fourier's theory was pretty sophisticated in the early 19th century, and in fact some
of the mathematical techniques that Fourier developed in order to describe the processes,
especially the conduction of heat and time, have been extraordinarily fertile and are
used routinely today, called Fourier transforms in science and engineering in a broad range
of disciplines.
But in the course of the 19th century, scientific theories began to use mathematics much more
intensively, and it became a real question of how can these mathematical equations be
a pictorial representation of what's going on out there.
It's one thing for Galileo to claim that his equation for a freely falling body captures
what's really happening out there, and somehow that makes some sense.
But it's another thing entirely when you take a look at Maxwell's equations of the electromagnetic
field, and you're supposed to believe that that is a picture of what's really happening
out there, and there's something very interesting to follow here with regard to Maxwell, which
is why I mentioned him.
The work of Michael Faraday was what started the modern study of electric charges and electric
magnetic phenomena.
He didn't begin it, of course, de novo, but there was a line from Faraday to Maxwell that's
very interesting to follow.
Faraday himself was raised in a Sandamanian Baptist family, which some historians seem
to think has some relevance to the work that he subsequently did as a scientist.
He was uneducated formally.
He was self-educated, in other words, and he discovered after attending a public lecture
that he really liked science, and he went to the director of the Royal Institution,
a very interesting organization founded by none other than Count Rumford, Benjamin Thompson,
who we talked about in the context of his cannon-boring experiment to disprove, as he
thought, the caloric theory of heat.
Faraday got hired as an apprentice to the eminent British scientist, who was then the
director of the Royal Institution, founded by Thompson, as an organization to give lectures
to the public on science.
Public education in pursuit of science literacy, or really more in the way of the educated
public, the refined public in Britain, but anyone could come in, and Faraday eventually
became the head of the Royal Institution.
He never did develop anything more than very simple mathematical skills, but he had great
intuition, and he was the one who effectively invented the electric dynamo, discovered that
a rotating magnetic field in the presence of a conductor would cause a current to flow
in the conductor, that you could get an endless supply of electricity if you just rotated
a magnet around a copper wire.
Of course, it works the other way, too.
You can rotate the copper wire around the magnet, and the current will flow through
the wire, too.
Relative motion of a magnetic field and a conductor will lead to it, and this is the
basis for almost all of the electricity that we use to this day.
What nuclear power plants and hydroelectric plants have in common is that something, either
steam or falling water, turns the shaft of a turbine, and at the other end of the shaft
there's conductors that are in the presence of rotating magnets that are attached to the
shaft or surround the end of the shaft, and that generates a current of electricity.
Faraday's work in the study of electricity and the interaction of electricity and magnetism,
which had not really been studied before, was absolutely seminal, and in studying electricity
and magnetism, Faraday did not use mathematics.
He used relatively simple physical and mechanical metaphors and explanations, and he talked
about lines of force and fields of force and tubes of force, of electric force and of
magnetic force, and was able to show experimentally the way that electricity and magnetism influenced
one another.
Faraday's work was picked up by James Clark Maxwell, a Scotsman, many other people did
as well, but Maxwell, who was very good mathematically in the 1850s and 60s and early 70s, attempted
to formulate a mathematical description of Faraday's fields, lines, and tubes of force,
and finally, in 1865 and then again in 1873, Maxwell gave up and just published a mathematical
theory of the electromagnetic field without attempting to correlate the mathematics with
physical elements that were out there.
This is, so it's an exact echo of Fourier's move that we have here a theory that very accurately
describes the behavior of interacting electric and magnetic fields without telling us what
a field is, without telling us what a line of force is, physically what is it.
The great British physicist William Thompson, known as Lord Kelvin, William Thompson, knighted
and known as Lord Kelvin, he always insisted that unless you could give a mechanical model
of your theory, you didn't really understand it.
He insisted that in spite of mathematical sophistication, which he was quite capable
of, that the understanding required a mechanical or physical model so you could see how nature
worked to produce whatever effect you were trying to explain, but the fact is science
got away from that kind of thinking in the second half of the 19th century, and Maxwell's
theory of the electromagnetic field is a good example of it, even more than Fourier's theory
of heat, because Maxwell's theories made some startling predictions that turned out
to be extraordinarily fertile, also turned out to be, from our modern perspective, wrong
because we have today quantum electrodynamics replacing classical Maxwellian electromagnetic
theory, but the predictions were, for example, that light is an electromagnetic phenomenon,
that light is an electromagnetic wave, and that there are a tremendous, there's a huge
spectrum of electromagnetic waves, only a little piece of that spectrum is visible
light, but then there's infrared and ultraviolet and x-rays and all of the rest of that, they
all are located on this electromagnetic spectrum, and his equations predicted that electromagnetic
waves would travel freely in space, the way light travels freely in space.
Now this was a really startling prediction, and two physicists, the British physicist
Oliver Lodge and the German physicist Heinrich Hertz, both did experiments in the 1880s to
see if Maxwell was right. Maxwell died fairly young, so he wasn't around to do the experiment,
and they both found, yep, they built a kind of very simple spark gap transmitter and an
even simpler receiver, and sure enough, you could, in fact, generate an electromagnetic
wave and send it through space and receive it at another location. They then just went
about their business, because they looked at their point. It was Marconi who saw that,
oh, wait a minute, you could actually make a commercial instrument out of this, and that,
of course, was the birth of radio. So Maxwell's nearly mathematical theory of the electromagnetic
field was extraordinarily powerful and fertile, and although physicists, when they used the
equations, speak about physical things like currents and charges, we don't know what they are.
What is the field? Well, the field is its mathematical description, so it's in that context
of, I already mentioned thermodynamics and the kinetic theory of gas, the study of how gases,
how gases behave in terms of pressure and volume relationships, for example,
using statistical averages. The use of abstract mathematical techniques to describe physical
processes made it even more insistent, as the century wore on, that there was a gulf widening
between fertile scientific theories and pictures of reality, and that's what intensified the
knowledge problem within science in the course of the century. That's why Herschel, Comte,
Ewell, and Mill, in roughly speaking, in the first half of the 19th century, were only symptomatic
of a deepening problem that required that scientists be philosophers in addressing this
issue, and I want to talk in the remainder of this lecture about several of these scientists,
including some of the most eminent of them, in particular Ernst Mach, Pierre Duhem, and Heinrich
Hertz. Ernst Mach was, we would call him today, I guess, a Czech physicist. He was born in what
became Czechoslovakia and now the Czech Republic, and he was very politically involved. Eventually
he was elected to parliament and re-elected many times. He was very involved in the local parliament
before World War I and before the Czechoslovakia became an independent state after the war.
Mach was a very prominent physicist and a very aggressive defender of a theory of scientific
knowledge that sounds Comtean. It is a virulent rejection of the idea that the object of scientific
knowledge is a reality behind experience. That's metaphysical nonsense, according to Mach.
Scientific theories have as their goal the summation of empirical experience, that the
goal of a scientific theory is to compactly summarize patterns in experience. The object of
scientific theories is phenomenal experience, the phenomena of ordinary experience. It is not
our job to identify unexperienced causes that cause the experience. It is our job to formulate
theories that summarize experience in useful ways, explanatorily useful, predictively useful,
and useful from the point of view of technological applications. He himself did a great deal of
productive scientific research, so while one could say, well, you always are a pretty minor
figure as a scientist, you can't say that about Mach. He was highly respected, very well known,
his opinions were very aggressively asserted. He was, for example, a virulent opponent of the
atomic theory of matter taken literally. I mean, as the atomic theory of matter claiming that matter
really was made of atoms, it's fine to say, well, for us, chemists, we assume that matter is made
out of atoms and then we can put together molecules in this particular way and we can explain these
equations and these combining proportions. Fine, Mach has no problem with that, but if you start
saying, and matter really is made of atoms, there really are tiny little billiard balls out there,
then Mach goes ballistic. And in fact, there one could say one of the earliest science wars
was the war that Mach waged against a Viennese physicist by the name of Ludwig Boltzmann,
who was an aggressive defender of the reality of the atomic theory of matter.
And Boltzmann, who committed suicide and some historians have said that it was out of frustration
because he could not get his point across against Mach's really virulent and Maching criticism of
taking the atomic theory of matter realistically. That's a bit of a, seems to be an exaggeration,
he had a long history of depression. But that was a war, a minor war, maybe, very localized
war over the atomic theory of matter. And it's interesting, of course, that in spite of his
genius and in spite of his virulence and his wit and his ability to defend his position,
Mach was ignored in the end because somewhere around 1910, when he was, which is just a little
after Boltzmann committed suicide, and when Mach was sliding into retirement, the physical
community as a whole decided that, you know what, matter really is atomic. The belief among
physicists that matter was atomic was pretty much solid only in the second decade of the
20th century. In the 19th century, it was mostly chemists who believed that the atomic theory of
matter was true, as opposed to just useful. So for Mach, if you say what is scientific knowledge,
knowledge of, the answer is unequivocal. It is knowledge of experience, not of anything that
is independent of experience. And just as in Descartes' analytic geometry, the function of
the algebraic equation of the circle is to be a compact summary of every possible circle in the
universe, that you can generate any circle of any size by inserting the appropriate numbers into
the equation. So a scientific theory summarizes experience by isolating, by abstracting from
experience, those patterns that turn out to have some kind of repeating structure. And that is
scientific knowledge for Mach. Not perhaps quite as respected a physicist, but definitely an
eminent physicist at the end of the 19th century was the Frenchman Pierre du M. Pierre du M was a
very productive physicist, so his research record is fine. Again, you can't say that he's in the
category of Ewell. We're talking about a significant figure in late 19th century physics. Du M, who
had deep religious beliefs as a Catholic, which he was in no position to have challenged by science,
developed a theory of scientific knowledge which left room for other forms of knowledge and truth
than scientific knowledge and truth. He resisted what I will be calling the imperialism of
scientism, of the idea that the claim that only scientific knowledge is knowledge, that only
scientific reasoning can lead to truth. Du M argued that scientific knowledge has a necessarily
conventional character. That is to say that you can never prove the truth of a theory
from the results of that theory. He called this, this is called the under determination of theories
by facts. No, there are always more than one theoretical explanation in terms of universal
principles and assumptions for any given body of data. Theories are under determined by facts.
To be under determined means that there are more theories that you can construct than one. The facts
do not uniquely entail a specific theory, and it doesn't matter how many facts you compile,
as certainly if the facts are finite, then there are multiple theories that can explain any given
set of facts. Now, as a matter of fact, this phrase under determination of theories by facts,
which became a buzzword in the second, in the mid 20th century, in the second half of the 20th
century, is really a restatement of the fallacy of affirming the consequent. The whole point of
the fallacy of affirming the consequent was that reasoning, if my theory is true, I predict X.
X is observed, therefore my theory is true. That's fallacious because there are multiple theories
that could have, for all we know, there are multiple theories that could have predicted X.
What you have to establish is that my theory and my theory alone predicts X. Now, how would you do
that? As a matter of fact, you can't do that in advance. You cannot deductively prove that your
theory is the only possible theory for explaining some phenomenon. So, in fact, under determination
of theories by facts is a variation on this ancient insight that reasoning in that way that I have
been calling the fallacy of affirming the consequent is limits the certainty of scientific theories.
So now, if we take that seriously, and then we recognize that scientific theories always have
a conjectural character, they are contingent upon the assumptions that you make, the assumptions
themselves cannot be certain. We cannot be certain that they are the only possible assumptions that
can lead to that result, and therefore scientific knowledge is to be judged on the basis of its
explanatory success, its predictive success, the control that it can give us over experience and
phenomena, but not its truth to reality. That's a separate issue. And so, it is not at all inconsistent
to have certain beliefs about what is true in the area of religion and certain other beliefs about
what is true in the area of science, because scientific truth is not absolute. It is not unique
according to Duem. This dependence of scientific theories on their assumptions at the close of
the century, 1896, in a book that was published posthumously by Heinrich Hertz, is illustrated
nicely by what Hertz does. Hertz was a truly first rate physicist in the 1890s. He died quite young,
relatively speaking, and he left this manuscript behind. The introduction to the book is wonderful
to read. The book itself is pretty technical. What Hertz did was he took the 19th century forms
of Newtonian mechanics, which had been made much more mathematically elaborate and sophisticated,
especially by a French physicist who I've referred to before, named La Grange, and Hertz
invented a new set of assumptions that he did not intend seriously. He showed that all of the
conclusions of Newtonian mechanics could be derived from a set of assumptions that included
the effects of invisible masses on moving particles, that if you assumed that there were
invisible masses in some system and you picked the right masses, then you would get all of the
behaviors that Newtonian mechanics or La Grange's form of Newtonian mechanics predicted. And Hertz
argued that there is no logical inconsistency here with the invisible masses. There is no
discrepancy between the conclusion of his particular version of mechanics and the other
accepted versions of mechanics. So why not have the assumption of invisible masses? Well,
nobody did assume invisible masses. But what Hertz showed, he concludes the introduction,
which is about 40 pages long. So this is a serious essay by Hertz concluding that scientific
knowledge has a certain subjective dimension, subjective not in the sense of wishful thinking
on the part of scientists, but subjective in the sense of there is no logically necessary
reason why we picked the assumptions that we use. Now that is in a sense a devastating
commentary on the claim that what scientific knowledge is knowledge of is an underlying
reality. But you cannot escape the fact. It is a fact that the overwhelming majority of scientists
do indeed promote the idea that scientific knowledge gives us knowledge of what's out there,
and that we the public overwhelmingly buy into this. Let us say it seems to make sense to us
because we are all dazzled by the successes of scientific theory. And it would seem as
Hillary Putnam put it utterly miraculous if these successes were accidental. Well, of course,
nobody thinks they're accidental. But the reason why I highlighted the history
of scientific theories, historicity as a theme in 19th century science, and especially the
historicity of scientific theories and the historicity of scientific reasoning, that these
are historical phenomena that we only catch glimpses of, that we can only see manifested
by seeing them in their historical development is because the history of science shows us
how often it has been the case that scientific theories that were accepted as established
have turned out to be judged subsequently incorrect. So to be dazzled today should not
blind us to the fact that we were dazzled 50 years ago, and they were dazzled compared to 50
years before that. Think of the difference in our worldview today compared to the worldview
of the best scientific knowledge of 1900. There is almost nothing in common between what we thought
what we knew about life, the earth, the universe, matter, energy, nothing from 1900 that made it
to 2000. What is the probability when we look at 2000 compared to 1900, 1900 compared to 1800,
1800 compared to 1700, 1700 compared to before Descartes and Bacon wrote a word.
What is the probability that in 2100 those theories that scientists are telling us today are true
will still be around. The probability seems small. I want to conclude by referring to an
interesting figure who wrote a book that today is not very well known but it caused a bit of a star
when it was published in the late 19th century. J.B. Stallow was a German immigrant to the United
States who actually made a bit of a fortune and reputation writing textbooks, science textbooks,
and then eventually became a professor of physics. He really was not at all well known as a
physicist. He subsequently became because of his political activism and his involvement with the
German community in America, German immigrant community in America. He was actually named
ambassador to Italy. He was US ambassador to Italy but he wrote a book on the concepts of
modern physics in which he essentially exposed what he called the metaphysical foundations
of modern science. Exactly the issue that we have been talking about here, that scientific
knowledge, scientific reasoning is critically dependent on non-scientific assumptions
which means that scientific claims to be knowledge of reality are non-scientific claims since they
are dependent on assumptions that cannot be defended except in terms of their let's call it
practical utility. Not in terms of well we know that these assumptions correspond to reality.
Stallow was, I'm not saying he was right, but this was Stallow's qualitative argument as a
knowledgeable non-scientist, a knowledgeable about science non-scientist. His qualitative arguments
and rather philosophical arguments are a very useful summary so to speak, an overview of the
kind of skirmishing that we've been seeing here in which very eminent people within the science
community and we're going to see the extension of this into the 20th century before scientists so
to speak seem to lose heart in this whole question are challenging the ordinary daily
conception and acceptance of scientific knowledge and and what it is knowledge of.
So again this is not a matter of debunking science, this is not a matter of criticizing
science destructively. Science clearly works, it works explanatorily, it works predictively,
it works at the level of control but what's fascinating is the maintenance of this ambivalence,
this unresolved conflict over but what is science knowledge of. You would think that by now the
science community would say well it's about experience and that's it but we persist in
wanting to make another claim in going a step further and saying it works and it works because
it is true. That's the part that keeps the science wars bubbling.
