Lecture 18, Challenging Mainstream Science from Within
In the three lectures that follow this one, we're going to be looking in some detail at
the positive and the negative responses to Cune's structure of scientific revolutions
following that right into the 1990s and the sort of formal declaration of the science wars.
But in this lecture, I think we need to step back and look at some of the conceptual issues
that are raised by Cune's structure.
We'll just call it that for simplicity's sake.
Before looking at the ways that people responded to it, either rejecting it or embracing it
in general, extending it in directions that Cune himself disagreed with, much more radical
directions than Cune himself agreed with.
The, I want to first talk about the measures that are required in order to make experience
intelligible.
I'm using the word measures here for a very specific reason that you'll see in a few moments.
I have also been calling these measures assumptions.
So it becomes quite clear from Cune's work that in the context of the process of discovery,
that scientific reasoning requires assumptions which are not themselves logically deducible
from experience.
You cannot collect data neutrally and look at the data and discover in the data what
assumptions you need to make in order to be able to organize that data in order to make sense out
of that data, so to speak, in order to make that data intelligible to us and that the whole
process of intelligibility seems to us to have us nowadays, to have a social and psychological
dimension, but classically intelligibility is considered to be a logical phenomenon,
especially within the framework of deductive reasoning, which we have seen was until the
19th century and well into the 20th century for the logical positivists, the underlying
logic of scientific reasoning, at least at the level of justification.
So we ask, where do the assumptions, where do the measures, remember with Fleck we had
to have a measure before we could decide what the volume of the room was.
Once you told me the metric, in other words, the measure, once you told me the metric,
feet, then I'll tell you how many cubic feet there are in the room.
But if you don't give me a metric, I can't tell you what the volume of the room is.
I can say something like big or little, but obviously that's not what you were looking for.
So where do these come from?
Where do the metrics come from?
One can argue, and classically one would have to argue, that somehow we find them, that we in
fact get them from nature, that the metrics emerge out of our experimental interactions
with nature.
If that were the case, then we would have to say, looking at the history of science as
Cune urges us to do, how come they change?
If we have found them and the assumptions that we make in order to reason scientifically are
themselves facts, then how come they change?
That suggests that the assumptions are not found, that the assumptions are assumed, that the
measures that we apply to experience in order to make it intelligible come from us.
Now, that doesn't mean that they are arbitrary or whimsical.
As we will see in a subsequent lecture, a particular philosophy of science, several of them
that use something like a mapping metaphor for scientific knowledge, a map has no direct
physical correspondence typically to what it is a map of, a one-to-one map is not a map.
It is the thing.
A map you can have depending on what you're interested in, so the map, for example, shows
you the elevations in an area, so for a hiking map.
So once you decide what the map is for, then you can easily tell whether it's a good map
or not, whether it's an accurate map or an inaccurate map.
That's an objected description.
So the fact that our assumptions are not derivable from experience in a unique way doesn't mean
that they're not connected to experience and validated by experience, but it does mean
that the measures have, the measures that we use have a creative dimension to them.
To say they need to be assumed, and in fact, we see this right now in physics, in string theory.
The prominence of string theory, at least for one particular subset of the community
of physicists, the ones that love it and are attempting to develop it, they are quite visibly,
when you look at the articles being published, they are quite visibly looking for assumptions
that will allow them to deduce the phenomena that string theory should explain,
in particular, in quantum theory of gravity.
So we can actually see this happening where people are saying, look, let's assume this.
No, let's assume that.
Not too many years ago, it looked like string theory required 27 dimensions of space and time.
Now it looks like we can get away with 10 dimensions of space and one dimension of time,
much more compact.
We're only familiar with 3 plus 1, so 7 dimensions of space are curled up and hiding somewhere,
but we can handle that.
So where did that assumption come from?
Well, because if you make it, then you can explain, you can deduce certain features of the world
that we do experience.
Now, does that make it true?
Well, those are the, that of course is the underlying question of much of this course,
and that brings me to why I wanted to use the word measure.
Right at the beginning of the course, I said that the overt science wars,
post-Cune, and especially in the 1980s and 90s, were themselves really symptomatic of an internal conflict
within science over the nature of scientific knowledge, and that's what we've been spending
the bulk of the course exploring.
But that even that internal conflict within science was itself nested within an even deeper
and more fundamental war in Western intellectual history over the nature of rationality,
the nature of reason, and therefore the nature of truth and knowledge, and what we mean by the term reality.
And this was a war that Plato described as a war in his dialogue, The Sophist,
a war between the gods and the earth giants, you'll remember.
The gods are stand for Plato's theory and Aristotle's and all of the Western rationalist
philosophers right into the 19th century, that reason is absolutely, that truth and
knowledge are universal and necessary and certain, and the earth giants are the philosophers
that Plato despised, The Sophists, who said no, truth and knowledge are contextual, they are probable,
they are justified by their results, they were, The Sophists were close to pragmatists,
it's close enough to pragmatists to call them proto-pragmatists, so those are the earth giants
and the two giants among the earth giants that Plato and Aristotle considered to be the most
important Sophists to refute were Protagoras and Gorgias, we'll set aside Gorgias for the moment
because we'll be dealing with him in the next lecture, but in this lecture Protagoras is
important because Protagoras is famous in Plato and in Aristotle for having said man is the
measure of all things, of course he said it in Greek, and exactly what he said, which words he
used, and with what those words meant then, we don't know, we know what Plato and Aristotle said
that he said, man is the measure of all things, and they made fun of that to mean that, well,
I can decide that it's really very warm outside today, because I'm the measure of all things,
now the fact that the temperature is 22 degrees Fahrenheit is irrelevant, if I say it's a warm
day, it's a warm day, isn't that idiotic, of course it is idiotic, but Protagoras we know
from his surviving fragments of writings was not an idiot, and from his reputation,
so what does Protagoras mean? I don't pretend to know precisely what Protagoras meant,
but I think we can agree that Protagoras was right about the following,
or that the following statement is correct, and I think that Protagoras would accept it as
his statement, man is the measure of all things, that we impose metrics on experience in order
to make it intelligible, we are the source, this is the sophist position, to the extent
that experience is intelligible, to the extent that words like truth, knowledge, and reality
have meaning, those meanings derive from us, they are not derived from nature, and this,
of course, is a very pragmatic position, this seems to be what Protagoras was arguing, but if it
wasn't, since he's not here to refute me, I'm going to say it was, and so this implies that there is
no natural metric to experience, as a matter of fact there are very good arguments in 19th century
mathematics that that's a fact, there is no natural metric to space, now in today, in quantum theory,
part of the quantum theory of gravity is that even space has a quantum structure, and that there is
something called the Planck length, which is something like 10 to the minus 45 meters, that is
kind of an absolute unit of length, and maybe that could be called an absolute, a natural metric,
but not of course at the level of experience, so from Protagoras's point of view, there is no
natural metric to experience, there is no natural measure, this relates to the problem that I have
called the classification problem in science, in scientific knowledge, and that sometimes I've
called it a taxonomy problem, same thing, taxonomy classification, it is most famous in science,
in the history of science, in the case of biology, when in the 15th and 16th century, European naturalists
were overwhelmed by tens of thousands of specimens of plants and animals from the voyages of discovery
of European ships traveling around the world and bringing back plants and animals that no one
had ever seen before, there was all of a sudden a tremendous challenge to botany, for example,
and zoology, how do you classify these creatures, now medieval encyclopedias in botany just listed
them in whatever order, it was a major 16th century achievement to having encyclopedias that were
alphabetical, but then when you've got tens of, literally tens of thousands of plants, some flowering,
some not, different kinds of trees, deciduous, evergreen, and you wonder how do you organize these,
what are the relationships and the same thing with animals, is there a natural way of classifying
plants and animals, or are all classification schemes artificial, artificial doesn't mean
whimsical or arbitrary, but are they artificial, are they made up just as with a map, you know,
depending on what your interests are, then the map is a roadmap or a hiking map or a demographic
map, and then you can look at the facts and look at the map and decide whether the map is reliable,
whether it's accurate, etc. Analogously, if I have a classification scheme, I have some
intention, I have some expectation, it's not, the classification scheme is not a fact, but it is
related to facts, so we have all of these plants, what is it, which are the ones that should be
grouped together, you look at all of those dogs, what makes them all dogs, you got a Chihuahua here
and a Great Dane there, what makes them all dogs, well, so we start looking for features,
and beginning in the 16th century and continuing quite venomously through the 18th century,
the biologists, botanists and zoologists, struggled with this question,
yes, there are natural classifications, no, there are only artificial classifications.
Linnaeus was, in a certain sense, a pivotal point here, Linnaeus came up with a scheme for
classifying plants based on their sexual organs. Once the sexuality of plants had been discovered
in the mid-18th century, Linnaeus decided what could be more fundamental, what could be more
natural than reproduction, and so the reproductive organs of the plants are the basis for class order
genus species according to the Linnaeus system, which then triumphed all over the world, and he
believed that he had established a natural system of classification until the last years of his life
when his, when additional specimens made it clear that he was wrong, that there were, there were
plants that had strongly similar sexual organs, but were very different in terms of the climates
in which they grew, the soil environments in which they grew, in which the pebbles or the
sepals or the stalks, stem structures were very different, so he realized that in fact his scheme
is not natural, it is artificial, but notice what's at stake here, because the concept that there are
such things as species, that there are species in nature, implies that there is a natural
classification scheme, if, if the word species refers to a particular way of classifying things,
and it's artificial, then the transmutation of species is no big deal, it is only if you believe
that there is a natural scheme of things, what nature, what Plato called that nature could be
carved at its joints, that there are natural joints out there, and that the wise person sees how to
divide things up naturally, the Sophists say that, you know, that's not it, we divide things up depending
on our interests, they are, they're foolish people, misleading the public, there is one and only one
correct way to carve nature at its joint, that's the, the gods speaking, and the earth giants,
like Protagoras and Gorgias, are taking the artificial classification scheme, now this was a
tremendous argument in biology as I said, for centuries, in the 19th and 20th century became
an argument over the reality of species, how do you define a species, those of you listening and
watching this, I'm not a professional biologist, it may come as news to you, that biologists are
still arguing over what the definition of a species is, so this question of classification
is a generic feature in scientific reasoning, it happens to be very famous in the history of biology,
but it applies to elementary particle physics as well, when in the 1960s, by 1960, early 1960s,
we had arrived at a point where particle accelerators had created through their
collisions of smashing electrons and protons into one another, that had created
about 200 elementary particles, it was obvious that this was ridiculous, you can't have 200
elementary particles, what, how can we classify them, how should we classify these particles,
and Murray Gelman, an Israeli physicist named Yuval Naiman, came up with a scheme that was called
the Eightfold Way, Murray Gelman called it the Eightfold Way, and organized all of these particles
into eight families, subsequently that was replaced by the theory called quantum chromodynamics in
which all the particles were shown to be covered by assuming that there were what we eventually
come out as six quarks and anti-quarks and so the modern theory of quark, quark theory of matter,
these are classification schemes, now in 1960 you might thought, well the Eightfold Way is the
Eightfold Way artificial or natural, are quarks artificial or natural, is that just another
way of classifying, if somebody dumped, suppose you had an eccentric uncle, and your eccentric uncle
died and left you 10,000 books which are delivered in boxes that have been packed by the moving
people and they're just randomly arranged in the boxes, now you've got 10,000 books, how do you
arrange them on your shelves, assuming that you want to do that, is there a right way to do it?
Well the library, many libraries, public libraries use the Dewey Decimal System,
the Dewey Decimal System gives a number to, well it segregates books, well this is a history book,
this is a travel book, this is a book in biology, this is a book in physics, etc, but this is,
what happens if you have a historical travel narrative by a scientist, where do you put it?
Now you could organize the books by author's last name, or by the title of the book, alphabetically,
it depends on what you want to do with those books, are you interested in subject areas?
You've got the problem of the Dewey Decimal System of books whose content overlaps subject areas,
but you see there's no right way to classify books, to shelve books, if somebody says well I do it,
according to data publication, the oldest books are over there and they go forward from there,
well it's eccentric, but an argument could be made, I don't know one right off hand,
but an argument could be made for doing that, so this issue of classification and taxonomy
is a fundamental and generic issue we will see in a subsequent lecture, Hillary Putnam, Nelson
Goodman arguing that scientific concepts are categories, are classification schemes, concepts
like space and time, defining space, time, matter, and those are metrics, metaphorically speaking,
but they're actually maybe even literally metrics, they are measures that allow us to then begin
reasoning, they are ways of classifying, and if all classification schemes are artificial,
then we need to think differently about scientific knowledge than if they are natural,
because if there is a natural classification scheme then our job is to find that natural
classification scheme and to use just that classification scheme. What is an underlying
issue here, a philosophical issue that is directly relevant to the conflict between logical positivism
and pragmatism as we discussed in a previous lecture, or what philosophers call continental
philosophy and analytic philosophy, is the question of is our humanness ultimately relevant
to what we mean by the intelligibility of experience, to what we mean by knowledge, truth,
and reality. The analytical philosophy, the classic approach to knowledge with a capital K,
the rationalist philosophical tradition says that ultimately the fact that we are human is irrelevant
because the truth is out there, it is what it is independently of us, and of course if you could
build a smart enough machine, maybe it would discover the truth and tell it to us. The
alternative view, the continental philosophical view, especially associated with kind of fuzzy
French and German thinkers according to analytical philosophers, and the pragmatist view is that our
humanness is inescapable, that knowledge, truth, and reality can only mean, can only have meanings
relative to how we choose to define them based on our interest in experience, on what our
expectations are, on what we want to do, and we accept a theory as true if it fulfills those
expectations, and when it stops, we move on. The great 19th century experimental biologist,
Claude Bernard, who was a follower of Auguste Comte, whose ideas we talked about in this course,
Bernard said, concepts are like scalpels. You use them until they're done, then you throw them away
and you get another one. That is a very positivistic view of scientific concepts, artificial classification
kind of view of concepts, as opposed to the view that what the concept of cause is a sacred concept.
It has one correct meaning, the concept of space. There's only one correct definition of space.
That would be someone speaking with the voice of a natural classification scheme.
So let's set that issue aside and look at another issue raised by Kuhn's book, and that is the
rationality of people who defended views that are considered mistaken.
And there are, in particular, I want to point to three recent and contemporary scientists who are
highly credentialed outsiders in their own fields. One is the astronomer Halton Arp,
who on the face of it should be, and maybe is perceived by some to be, among the leaders of
the astronomy profession, but he is an outsider from a Kunian paradigm point of view, because he
challenges the prevailing paradigm of the expanding universe of how we should interpret
the red-shifted light that we collect from distant galaxies. And Arp argues that there is observational
evidence showing that quasars, showing that objects with very high red shifts,
plumes of gas that look like they're escaping from galaxies, that they are much closer to us
than you can infer from their red shift, that there is something else out there that's causing
light to be shifted towards the red end of the spectrum, which since the 1920s, physicists,
the prevailing paradigm has been to interpret as rapid motion away from us from the Earth,
that there are other forces that there's something else causing it. It is not a measure of speed
away from us, velocity away from the Earth. So, Halton Arp has insisted on this for decades. This
is his position. And he has collected what looks like a convincing body of observational evidence,
photographs, but his colleagues look at the evidence and say, I don't know, that evidence,
it's not a smoking gun. And think of what we would have to give up if we accept what Arp says.
So, Arp remains an outsider because those observations maybe are anomalies but not
enough to force a crisis given the stakes that cosmologists and astrophysicists and astronomers
have in the prevailing paradigm. The recently deceased physicist at Cornell University, Thomas
Gold, was another highly credentialed outsider, outsider in the sense that he had a number of
theories, a number of theoretical ideas that turned out to be very fertile, but some that were mocked
until it was discovered that, well, there's something to them after all. He was one of the
first, perhaps the only, physicists who predicted that the lunar surface would have a thick layer
of dust and it turned out that he was quite right about that. He also had published a paper on how
the inner ear functions that was very different from the way medical scientists traditionally
depicted how the inner ear functions. And many years after he published it and was dismissed,
as what does a physicist know about the inner ear, it turned out that he was right about that.
But for years he argued that methane, that natural gas and oil are produced abiotically
through geological processes deep within the earth and through deep biological processes,
that there are bacterial communities way, way down under the earth that are also producing
natural gas, and that natural gas and oil are not all the residue of fossilized carboniferous
material. Now people give credence to Gold's ideas, but for decades these were considered
wild speculations and he was respected because of the stuff that he did that was accepted,
but also somewhat marginalized as a maverick physicist. The third character I'd like to
call your attention to is Milford Wolpoth, who is an anthropologist specializing in human evolution.
And while the prevailing paradigm in human evolution is migration out of East Africa,
that all human beings on the planet today descend from a single population that evolved
in East Africa and migrated out of East Africa, beginning about 175,000 years ago,
Wolpoth defends the view that homo sapiens evolved in multi-regionally, in multiple regions,
and that homo sapiens interbred with Neanderthal in Europe and Homo erectus in Asia.
He's got the same data, he's got the same fossils, he's got the same datings, he's got the same DNA
evidence, but he argues the multi-regional hypothesis and the prevailing paradigm is
a single migration out of East Africa. These are examples for us of what Kiln was talking about
when he talked about Lavoisier and Tico Bride, people who rejected Copernicus, people who rejected
the oxygen theory of combustion, who rejected the heat as motion theory, that they were not
irrational. Here are colleagues of ours, so to speak, who are functioning in ways that the
mainstream dismisses, but they're clearly not wild and crazy thinkers in this regard. Finally,
what Kiln's book calls our attention to is that it is natural, so to speak, it is part of the
nature of theories and of paradigms, there's a connection between the two of course, grand theories
are what Kiln meant by paradigms, it is in the nature of theories to evolve over time,
that a theory changes over time is natural. At some point, it may be the case that a
reconceptualization takes place that is so fundamental that we have to displace the theory,
that would happen let's say with Newtonian mechanics and relativistic mechanics,
but there are many theories that evolve without our changing the name, for example,
Copernican astronomy. Now, there is effectively no resemblance between astronomy today and
Copernicus's 1543 hypothesis or theory of the heavens, but we still call it Copernican astronomy.
He had circular orbits, the planets moving in uniform circular motion around the sun,
slightly displaced from the center, it was Kepler, as I've mentioned before, who made the
orbits elliptical, who argued that the orbits are elliptical and that the planets are kept in
place by a force emanating from the sun, it was Newton who cleared up Kepler. Astronomy has changed
tremendously in terms of our theory of the planets now, but we still consider it to be within the
Copernican view. Notice something by the way, given our recent discussion of natural and
artificial system of classifications, the planets don't move in ellipses, and not because of some
cute little reason, well they flutter or it's a little off, an ellipse is a closed curve, but
because the planets are moving around the sun, but the entire solar system is also moving,
the planets never return to the same place. It's only if you say, let's pretend that the sun is fixed
that the planets move in ellipses. So even saying that the planets move in elliptical orbits is a
peculiar illustration of how, as we were warned by Fleck, of how we reify our classification
schemes, of how we make facts out of assumptions. Ah, the planets move in elliptical orbits, that
is a way of speaking if you nail the sun down, which of course you can't do, so the sun is moving
around the center of the Milky Way, the center of mass of the Milky Way, the Milky Way is moving
around the center of mass of the local cluster of galaxies, and that whole local cluster is moving
in the direction of the constellation Virgo, I've done this routine before, and so there's no ellipses
out there. You would not see an ellipse if you could put a luminescent die, or let the earth have
a trail of luminescent die, you would not see a closed curve. The same thing as true with the
Big Bang Theory. The Big Bang Theory, as it was first speculated in the 1920s by the Belgian priest
Georges Le Maître, in the late 1930s by the German physicist Kofen Feitziger, and then by George
Gamow, whose real name is Russian, his name is Gamov, but often called Georges Gamow, and then
in the late 1940s when Gamov emerged as the champion of the Big Bang Theory, becomes unrecognizable
in the course of the 1960s, 70s, and 80s when we add in inflation theory and dark energy and dark
matter, but we still call it the Big Bang Theory. So if you look at a theory and you say there are
problems with this theory, it doesn't explain everything, it's not a good theory, wrong.
The theory has changed, therefore Darwin was wrong, wrong. It is part of the nature of theories,
that they always have anomalies, that they always evolve over time. The Darwin-Wallis
theory of evolution by natural selection, driven by spontaneous variation, what we call random
mutation, and natural selection has changed dramatically as we move to the end of the 20th
and the beginning of the 21st century in terms of incorporating the DNA paradigm into that,
and our understanding of mutations. And so the whole question of when we talk about something
like the microwave background radiation discovered by Penzius and Wilson in the mid-1960s,
what they discovered was static. They had an antenna, they couldn't get rid of the static.
It was interpreted as the microwave background radiation. Nobody discovered dark matter, dark
matter was assumed to make sense out of astronomical observations that otherwise
didn't make sense. Namely, why rotating spiral galaxies didn't just diffuse over time?
What holds them together? And then in 1998, the assumption that there must be something called
dark energy out there that's responsible for the acceleration of the expansion of the universe,
if in fact there is such an acceleration. So Cune's agenda, the core agenda, is I believe
borne out by the analysis of this lecture, but it is also very criticizable. And we are in the
next lecture is going to be looking at the broader impact and response to, impact other
in response to Cune's structure of scientific revolutions.
