Lecture 14 Two New Theories of Scientific Knowledge
I began the last lecture by talking about how science had come to matter to society
at the beginning of the 20th century, and science in the course of the 20th century
became increasingly entrenched in society, in industry, in government, and in social
institutions, especially educational institutions and in public support, and the public image
of science as a body of knowledge and truth.
This entrenchment was accompanied by an intellectual imperialism, so to speak, in which science
and the scientific community, the natural scientific community, especially, claimed
that science alone was a rational response to experience, that science alone contained
knowledge of reality, that scientific knowledge alone was true.
So by scientific imperialism, I mean the claim that science is uniquely the root to
knowledge, truth, and knowledge and truth of reality rather than opinion and belief.
So the scientific worldview was proposed as the only rational worldview.
Now this worldview was nominally materialistic determinism, and we've talked about that a
good deal.
Because by the end of the 19th century, materialistic determinism was no longer valid because by
the end of the 19th century, we had accepted the reality of, for example, electromagnetic
fields, which were immaterial entities that were capable of exerting forces on material
particles, for example, charged bits of matter, so that here we had an immaterial reality
capable of influencing a material reality.
So you can't talk about materialistic determinism in a narrow sense because there are features
of reality that are not matter and that nevertheless interact with matter and have a causal influence
on matter.
So it's really better to talk about a kind of a physicalistic determinism or a naturalistic
determinism.
But we see here clearly the legacy of Cartesianism, of Descartes' view of nature as matter in
motion with no other realities than matter in motion, and that the contact forces, the
bumping up against each other of bits of matter, is the ultimate source of the entire complexity
that we experience as nature and of Laplacianism, Laplace's view that given the appropriate
information which in principle, according to Laplace, is available, that if we had the
appropriate information about nature at a specific instant of time, if, to be technical,
we knew the position and the momentum of every particle of matter in the universe at a time
that we will call t sub zero, then the equations of physics would allow us to predict the future
configuration of the universe and retro-dict the past configurations with unlimited precision.
A corollary of this view, by the way, is that time is not real.
That time is an illusion.
And one looks at the history of Western thought, quite a startling number of intellectuals
right into the 20th century, including Russell and Albert Einstein, did hold the view that
time was an illusion of our particular consciousness, but that really, past, present, and future
are not real in the sense that we are conscious of them or typically conceptualize them.
So the scientific worldview, this naturalistic determinism, which continues in the tradition
of Cartesian and Laplacian thought, extended itself imperialistically throughout physics
to chemistry, to biology, to psychology.
So the idea that life is a fundamentally physical chemical phenomenon, a mechanical phenomenon
interpreting mechanical broadly in the way that I've just been describing to include
thermodynamics and fields of some kind, and the extension to psychology.
For example, in the early 20th century, the rise of behaviorism as a scientific psychology.
This imperialism of the scientific worldview has a kind of a, that there is such an imperialism,
has a kind of a, let's call it acute support that one doesn't ordinarily encounter, from
an odd quarter, and that is from V.I. Lenin and Joseph Stalin.
Before he was preoccupied by becoming the head of the government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Lenin wrote a book called Materialism and Imperial Criticism, in which
he harshly criticized Ernst Mach's philosophy of science and other philosophies of science
influenced by Mach, that denied that the object of scientific knowledge was reality.
That denied that scientific knowledge was knowledge of what is real and what is true.
Lenin strongly defended a traditional, not a revolutionary, but a traditional conception
of scientific knowledge, because otherwise Marxism itself becomes merely conventional,
in order to protect the truth of Marx's philosophy of history and of society, in order to protect
the idea that Marx's scientific materialism is true, with a capital T, Lenin attacked
these phenomenalistic theories, conventionalistic theories that we have seen defended by not
just Mach, but also by Pierre Duem, by Heinrich Hertz, by Henri Poincare, at about the same
time that Lenin was writing Materialism and Imperial Criticism.
Stalin, in the 1930s, made it clear that the theory of relativity and quantum theory, with
its probability distributions as descriptions of nature, merely probabilistic descriptions
of nature, merely I always say in quotation marks, that these were unacceptable in a communist
environment, again for the same reasons, because Marx's scientific materialism must be true,
so scientific theories that settle for probabilities and that are relative, misunderstanding that
special and general theories of relativity are in fact absolute and deterministic theories,
and so a curious thing happened, namely that a Russian physicist in the 1930s and 40s,
and even into the 1950s, in books that they published on relativity and quantum theory,
had to have a preface in which they made it clear that this book was not about reality,
that these theories were not true, but they were very interesting and useful, and so it
was okay to explore them, but of course they're not true, because if they were, they would
contradict Marx's scientific materialism. Now, this is quite funny, because back in
the 16th century, when Copernicus is on the revolution of the heavenly spheres, was published
in 1543, it was accompanied, unbeknown to Copernicus, who was dying at the time, that
the man who saw it through publication was a Protestant named Andreas Oceander, who stuck
in a preface in order to protect Copernicus, because he knew that the church would be upset
if this theory of the heavens were taken literally, we know Galileo got into trouble for that,
we've talked a lot about that, and so Oceander stuck in a preface saying, you know, this
theory isn't really, I don't mean that the earth really moves, but if you assume that
it does, then look how nice, look how less complicated astronomy gets. So here we have
in the 1930s and 40s and into the 50s, Russian scientists having to stick in prefaces like
that in order to defend against the claim that they were defending views of science
that reduced scientific knowledge to conventional descriptions of experience, useful descriptions,
but not true with a capital T. Now, the lesson of this is that even in the case of this politically
motivated agenda, the clear perception was that science was the key to truth and knowledge,
and that needed to be defended against these marginal critics of science as true knowledge,
who wanted to say that it was merely useful summations of experience. So we have this
intellectual imperialism as I believe an empirical fact of western culture in the first half
of the 20th century, and yet it is deeply problematic. It is deeply problematic for
reasons that we've been exploring in this course in order to be knowledge of nature,
then we have to be able to establish that scientific theories correspond to what's out
there, but we have no criterion of what's out there independent of those scientific
theories. We have no way to step outside and look at nature and see that the theory, yep
the general theory of relativity, and its descriptions of space and time actually correspond
to the way space and time are. We have no such independent access, so the only criteria
that we have for convincing ourselves or for arguing that scientific theories correspond
to what is behind experience are the consequences of the theories themselves, the explanatory
successes, the predictive successes, the control that those theories give, but as we have already
noted and becomes even truer in the course of the 20th century, over and over again we
discover that theories that we thought were true because they were predictively successful
and gave us control and new technologies were wrong. In spite the technologies continued
to work and the predictive successes that they had were correct at that time, but we
now feel that those theories were incorrect. So predictive success and control are not
guaranteed indices of correspondence to reality, of truth with a capital T. So that's one aspect.
Well, so then we say, so let's just take that scientific theories are conventional, but
we saw that that's a problem as well. Namely, if scientific theories are, as Maach for example
argued, they are merely summations of experience that are justified by their practical value,
how can they lead to predictions of novel phenomena that no one ever anticipated? This,
of course, is also relevant to the question of how come mathematics is so fertile? If
mathematics is invented by the human mind, then how come we can make up weird mathematical
propositions and theorems and then discover that they correctly describe natural phenomena,
which has happened over and over again in the history of mathematics? Leading, for example,
to a very famous essay by a Nobel laureate physicist at Princeton, Eugene Wigner, entitled
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics. How does it happen that we invent mathematical
abstractions and deliberately abstract with no thought of application and then discover
later, decades or centuries later, that in fact they are perfect descriptions of natural
phenomena? How can that be the case if science is merely conventional? So we have a dilemma
and it is a fact about science and clearly science in the 19th and 20th centuries that
the dominant view continued to be the one that seems to be the most problematic, namely
the view that science is truth, that scientific theories correspond to reality. And the warrant
for this, which we are going to be exploring in the next lecture in some greater detail,
the warrant for this belief, for this conviction, has to do with the realities that scientific
theories seem to reveal to us, new realities that scientific theories seem to reveal to
us. Let me, before describing two philosophical responses that map on to this dilemma, the
correspondence view that scientific knowledge is about what is behind experience, what is
real, and the view that science is about experience, logical positivism and pragmatism, let me
just clarify something first, and that is that the issue here is not and has never been
the reality of what we casually call the objects of ordinary experience. So no one doubts that
when you get into your car in the morning, am I really in my car? Is this a car? Am I
driving to work now? That is not what's at issue here. What's at issue here is universal
statements about how the world must be and how the world must behave. Now those are never
experienced, that must, that universal character is never experienced, all of our experience
is particular. The objects of our experience, take the sun for example or the earth, it's
not a question of is the sun real? It's not a question of is the earth real? The question
is what do you mean by the sun scientifically speaking? As a scientific object, the sun
is very complicated. And what the sun really is, what we mean by the term the sun, what
we mean by the term the earth has changed dramatically in the last 150 years. In the
late 19th century it was still thought that the sun's heat and light came from chemical
processes. In the 20th century it was discovered that the sun's heat and light comes from nuclear
processes and in the 1930s that these were fusion processes, not fission which is what
the first theories were, but fusion processes. Now if you are a solar scientist then the
description gets even more complicated of course because you want to know how does the
sun's heat and light get from the core where the fusion is taking place to the outer atmosphere
which is what we experience. The heat and light that we get comes from the outer atmosphere
of the sun which is a mere 6000 degrees Kelvin approximately, but at the core that's where
the real heat is being generated by these thermonuclear reactions. And so those theories
of how the sun's core heats up the outer atmosphere by convection currents, that description has
changed multiple times in the course of the century. So as a scientific object the sun,
the term the sun is very complicated and it has changed dramatically. Meanwhile the sun
stays the same for us and the same thing is true with the earth. I mean as a scientific
object the earth was a nice quiet place relatively speaking in 1900, but now we are told that
the earth, that the continents are in constant motion, that mantle material is welling up
through the mid ocean ridges and pushing the ocean floors apart and the ocean floors
being subducted under the continental shelf and that the core of the earth, the solid
iron core of the earth is as hot as the temperature of the outer shell of the sun about 6000 degrees
Kelvin. The earth as a scientific object is deeply problematic because you can ask how
do you know that? What is the basis? No one has put a thermometer on the solid core of
the earth and measured that temperature. So what we are talking about is knowledge claims
that apply to scientific objects and typically these are universal knowledge claims, that's
what makes it science, not engineering, universal laws of nature that describe how things must
be and how they must behave in order for us to have the experiences that we have. So with
that kind of a backdrop, take a look at two philosophies that represent the sort of two
opposing responses to the problematic character of the scientific world view as I just described
to the intellectual imperialism of science. One is pragmatism, a homegrown and American
philosophy and the other logical positivism which is a central European response inspired
to a considerable degree by Bertrand Russell and by his one-time protege with whom he later
sort of fell out, Ludwig Wittgenstein who was from Vienna. Let me start with pragmatism.
Pragmatism was as a name and as a philosophy was invented by Charles Sanders Purse whom
I have that occasion to refer to earlier in this course. Purse was an American polymath
who formulated pragmatism deliberately in response to what he perceived to be the failure
of the Kantian attempt to respond to David Hume. We've talked about that Kant was responding
to Hume and showing that you can have, that science can give us universal necessary and
certain knowledge of experience but the price-kant paid was the object of science is no longer
the external world, its experience as organized by the mind. The universality, the necessity
and the certainty come from the fact that the mind organizes experience in a necessary
universe and universal way and Purse was not prepared to accept that. Purse was a realist
ultimately and as all of us are pragmatically speaking and so Purse took a term, pragmatism,
that Kant used somewhat disparagingly and made it the cornerstone of his philosophy along
the following lines that reasoning and what we call beliefs, especially the word belief,
he redefined the word. You remember how you will redefine induction to fit his particular
theory of how scientists reason. It's interesting you can do that, people are using the term
induction for thousands of years and then all of a sudden you will say no, let's mean
by the term induction something very different. Now Purse said that the word belief really
refers to the results of an action that we perform with certain expectations. So if I
say I believe that it is going to rain this afternoon, now the way I, what that belief
means is that I take an umbrella with me or I take a raincoat with me or I take galoshes
with me or all three depending on how much rain you think you are going to experience.
So belief has nothing to say well I believe in God unless that word belief can be cashed
in in terms of action, in terms of saying what it means to believe something is to expect
a certain action outcome, a certain outcome of actions that I engage in. So belief and
reasoning are key to action and action itself is driven by certain kinds of expectations.
You act in order to achieve some outcome, either you want for example some experience
in the future that you are not having now like staying dry if it's raining or you want
to continue some experience that you are having now that you enjoy and you want to prolong
but you have some motive that you want something in the future to become actual and so action
is driven by a desire to affect future experience and those actions that are effective first
called beliefs. When we are routineized, when beliefs become routineized so that you don't
even have to think about them anymore so then first called those habits. So habits are not
irritating things but they are names for beliefs that are so to speak in the bank that you
don't have to think about anymore. You don't have to anticipate how you are going to handle
a situation it's sort of automatic. William James actually popularized and promoted pragmatism
as a philosophy because Perce published almost nothing in his lifetime, a couple of articles
in a popular science magazine on his early philosophy of pragmatism not really representative
of its more mature form which was not published until after he died. But James at the turn
of the 20th century, William James at Harvard promoted pragmatism in a very famous book
Pragmatism and in another book the meaning of truth arguing though what we mean by truth
is that which is good in the way of belief. When you say that something is true what you
mean is if you act on the basis of this you will get what you anticipate. It will work.
A belief is true if it works. Now James was somewhat fuzzy about all of this and the real
burden of developing pragmatism into a systematic philosophy fell on John Dewey who was one
of the founding faculty at the University of Chicago but quickly became disenchanted
and moved to Columbia University in New York City where he stayed for the rest of his career.
Dewey was really the architect of pragmatism as a systematic philosophy and the key to pragmatism
is experience and that experience is the most elementary feature of let's call it reality.
The world and the mind the term the world and the term the mind for Dewey do not refer
to things they refer to features of experience. The world is of experience the mind is of
experience in the same way that a mountain is of the earth. Mountains don't sit on the
earth you have the earth over here and then you drop down Everest. Everest is an extrusion
so to speak of the earth and what we call mind and world are aspects of experience they
are processes within experience that we have a habit of reifying of making things out of
processes according to James and that classical philosophy with its quest for certainty has
carried this to a ridiculous extreme that has led to the 20th century when science is
making all kinds of progress but philosophy has gotten nowhere because philosophy is still
pursuing universal necessary and certain knowledge of course the scientists were doing that too
but Dewey chose to see science pragmatically he chose to see science as providing us with
ways of predicting and controlling experience prediction and control it's James's notion
that true is what is good in the way of belief but Dewey gave that more precision truth and
knowledge must be understood instrumentally that means in terms of their outcomes not in terms
of describing what things are but in terms of how what we call things and their properties behave
experientially Dewey was quite satisfied with not only satisfied with but argued that the only
thing that reasoning can mean is a process of inquiry in which we are able to predict and
control our experience to our satisfaction better than using other kinds of beliefs and
opinions so that for for Dewey pragmatism is what he called prospective empiricism it's
future-oriented and because it's future-oriented scientific knowledge is intrinsically
valuational it is driven by the desire to act in order to achieve certain outcomes this is a
big plus because back already in the 17th century Comanias I mentioned that the Moravian educator
Comanias had had warned that the new philosophy Bacon's experimental method it with with its
impersonal conception of scientific knowledge would lead to a problem namely how you're gonna
decide how to use that knowledge that becomes a non-scientific and a non-rational decision because
it comes from outside of science whereas in pragmatism the knowledge is intrinsically
normative as the philosopher say it comes with values because knowledge is driven by the desire
to act in one way rather than another because we want certain kinds of outcomes so pragmatism is
allied with the notion that science that scientific knowledge is contextual contingent concrete
particular and always operates under conditions of uncertainty and is in a kind of reciprocal
interaction with experience as opposed to the classical philosophical view the scientific
knowledge is universal necessary and certain knowledge of a reality that we don't experience
directly but which causes the experiences we do have now a philosophy that defended that view
between roughly speaking the late 1920s and into 1960s was logical positivism influence as I said
before by Russell and and the early Ludwig Wittgenstein because Wittgenstein changed his
direction 180 degrees in the 1930s and his greatest influence has been from materials published after
his death which were totally different as we will see from what he what he published in 1921
when after having been brought to Cambridge by Russell Wittgenstein published a seminal work
which influenced a group of thinkers in Vienna and Berlin who became the logical positivists
the logical positivists argued that scientific knowledge was deductive universal necessary
certain all those good things that Plato had projected initially and and the way that they
argued this given the number of scientists as we have seen who argued against that view
that the object of science was not reality but experience was as follows scientific knowledge
has three components to it observation sentences which are Russell's sense data they are pure
observational facts about the world uninterpreted just raw data theory sentences which are abstractions
and a set of rules for connecting the two theory sentences are only meaningful if they are provided
with a verification scheme how are you going to verify in observation that theory sentence so if
you have an abstract theory a law of nature how are you going to verify it you have to be able to
specify the verification scheme analogous to Bridgeman's operationalism what experiment will
you do in order to show that this theory statement in fact has a empirical merit and sometimes
logical positivism is also called logical empiricism so the idea is that scientific knowledge
can be knowledge of the world can be deductive and therefore universal necessary and certain
knowledge of the world if we we are careful to recognize we have the right set of theory
theory sentences are verifiable the observation sentences are kept pure of all interpretation
theory and we have a set of rules for linking theory to observation that are functionally
adequate that allow you to deduce observation sentences from the theoretical sentences this
is the objective and if you could fulfill it then you would have a theory of scientific knowledge
that lived up to Plato's expectations but as a matter of fact even the deepest
enthusiasts of logical positivism found that they could not accomplish this end the sort of founder
of the logical positivism especially the University of Vienna where he was in fact assassinated by
a Nazi enthusiast in the mid 1930s was Mauritz Schlick Schlick founded a group of thinkers many
of them trained in physics many of them very brilliant and an analogous group formed at the
University of Berlin that that in the 1930s especially tried to develop not logical positivism
into an objective theory of scientific knowledge in the classical sense and Schlick himself before
before he was assassinated had come to recognize that this wasn't going to work
and one of his colleagues Otto Neurath in fact gave up by the end of the 1930s and said that
truth is an internal property of scientific theories as a collection of logically consistent
sentences that purport to be about the world so it sounds very much like Duem or Poincare's
internal harmony of the world one of the younger at the time champions of logical positivism in
the 1930s who subsequently emigrated to the United States as most of these people did was Carl Hempel
who we'll be talking about again later who said who argued then in the 30s and 40s that you can't
have pure observation sentences and we'll see what the implications of this is that theory so to speak
infects observation you can't keep the two strictly separated in 1950 the American philosopher
Willard von Ormann Quine published an essay the two dogmas of empiricism in which he argued that
the key feature of logical positivism could not be satisfied the key criterion namely of having
an absolute distinction between theory and observation as between synthetic sentences
is about the world observation sentences and analytic sentences sentences theory abstract
theory sentences that were logically true that that distinction is insupportable and so logical
positivism by by the early 1960s in fact had imploded but in fact it also had had really
failed in the 1930s in the sense that it wasn't it was increasingly recognized by its proponents
that it could not deliver the goods on an objective theory of scientific knowledge as
being about reality of being about the world behind our experience nevertheless logical
positivism remained the dominant philosophy of science into the 1960s in part because of the
intellectual brilliance of its practitioners and perhaps some desire on the part of lots of
philosophers and scientists to believe that somehow it would rescue an objective theory of scientific knowledge
