Lecture 20, Scientific Knowledge as Social Construct
The focus of this lecture is going to be on the theory of the social construction of scientific
knowledge. That is to say that scientific knowledge is constructed by, in accordance
with a set of social conventions established by the scientific community, rather than scientific
knowledge as a revelation of an independently existing reality. So the term social construction
became a major buzzword in the 1970s and 80s, and one still heard it in the 1990s, less
than the 21st century happily, and we'll talk a little bit about why. But I want to
lead up to the first studies that were pointing to the social construction of scientific knowledge
by beginning with a book that was published in 1971 at essentially the same time, just
a little bit after Kuhn's book was published, but the writing of it was quite independent
It was written by an American mathematician, trained as a mathematician and philosopher of
science named Jerome Ravitz, who was living in England. I'm almost, this isn't very fair,
I guess, but he was a political refugee too. Since what he said overlaps Polanyi, I say too,
because Polanyi was a political refugee. Polanyi was a political refugee from the Nazis. Jerome
Ravitz was a political refugee from the U.S. House on American Activities Committee. As an
undergraduate, he became a member of the American Communist Party, and around 1950 found it expedient
to leave the country, and his passport was taken away. He was not able to return to the country
until, I believe, during the Carter administration when there was some sort of general amnesty for
Vietnam war protesters who had fled to Scandinavia and Canada, and he wound up being able to come
back and visit his family, and I had many interactions with him, both here and in England.
A very interesting and profound thinker, and he published in 1971 a book called Scientific
Knowledge and its Social Problems. The title alone gives you some indication of what to expect. Well,
one of the things that he begins with, one of the principles, one that he begins with, is that doing
science is a craft. Well, this is the echo of Polanyi and why I connected him to Polanyi, because
you remember Michael Polanyi had said that doing science is an art. It's not a matter of mechanically
applying logic to neutral data, but that without certain kinds of skills, like the skills of a
master craftsman, you cannot do research, that there are all sorts of personal and tacit
kinds of knowledge that are associated with doing scientific research, with generating scientific
knowledge. Ravitz said something very similar. In fact, it may be that it was close enough
that his conception of science as a craft, doing science is a craft, and like any craft,
it is socially embedded. That's the point of, what do you mean it's a craft? Sure, it's a craft.
What am I giving up by admitting that it's a craft? You are accepting that like any craft,
every craft person is responsive to the social context within which they do their work.
Their clients come, their real or potential clients come from that context. The aesthetic
values that shape what they do, if they make leather belts or if they make tiny little bonsai
trees or whatever it is, are shaped by some kind of social framework and some sort of social
expectations. To say that science is a craft is to say that it occupies a social niche,
that it is intrinsically valuational, that it is scientific knowledge and technological knowledge,
because he talks about both in the book, are both intrinsically valuational. They incorporate
values. The classical view right into the 1960s and 70s was that scientific and technological
knowledge, that technical knowledge generally, science and engineering knowledge, are value
neutral, and the values come from how you decide to use it. So that we happen to have a theory here,
if you want to use the theory to make an atomic bomb, that's not our problem. We can also use
it to do radio immunoassay medicines, and you could use the same theory to improve health and to
track down diseases and to kill cancers, or you can make weapons. That's not part of science.
That's not part of it. The theory is neutral, and there is enough plausibility to this that this
has been pretty, you know, they've had a pretty long run ever since the time of Bacon and Descartes
that scientific knowledge is neutral because it just describes what's out there. I'm a scientist.
I tell it like it is. You don't like it. That's not my problem. You want to do something with it?
Maybe it is my problem if you drop the bomb on me, but it's not my problem in the sense that you
can't blame me if somebody makes a bomb out of my knowledge. Just as you don't praise me
if somebody else goes and makes an antibiotic out of it, you give them the Nobel Prize.
Well, nowadays, of course, we have come to such an appreciation of science that we give it to them.
So as a craft, the whole concept of a craft is pivotal to this book. If science is a craft,
then it is intrinsically valuational. You say, well, you know, people kill people,
guns don't kill people, but guns are designed to kill. That's the whole point of the gun with
the barrel and the and the bullet and the propellant and all of that so that there are values built
into every artifact because every artifact is intended to fill some purpose. That's the nature
of an artifact is that it has some intrinsic purpose. That's why a two-seater sports car
is built differently from a family sedan. They have different purposes. And analogously,
rabbits is saying scientific knowledge is an artifact. As an artifact, scientists
create their problems. They create in the following sense. It's not automatically the case
that you look at nature and you see problems. Different people see problems, see different
problems. Most people don't see any problem at all. Some people get, gee, I don't understand.
Why does the sun move that way? Look at those funny lights in the sky. Why do they move that way?
It's not, it doesn't make sense to me that they move that way. My guess is that a very small
number of people historically have responded in this way. Einstein was deeply bothered by the
equivalence of gravitational mass and inertial mass, which I've discussed in a previous lecture.
Nobody else was bothered by it. That's why it is often said by historians and physicists
that the general theory of relativity really is Einstein's invention. That nobody else was
concerned. Now, it turns out there were some people in the 19th century who were doing other
work in mathematics and geometry that toyed with certain ideas. But this was something that bothered
Einstein. Scientists invent their problems or create their problems by defining, say,
this is a problem that I've decided to work on. So, and they also determine the scientific community
determines what they like as a solution to that problem. If the scientific community says,
that's a ridiculous solution, then at least for a while it's not going to be accepted.
It took about six years and some very heavy reputations reproducing his work before Howard
Timmons claim that RNA could reproduce itself by connecting to DNA. It's called reverse transcriptase
because it sounded so crazy at the time because in the mid-1960s when the prevailing dogma was
that DNA information goes from DNA to the cell, but it does not go from the cell back to DNA.
And here he's claiming that the RNA can go back into the DNA and get itself replicated,
which turns out to be the way the HIV virus works. It's a so-called retro virus.
Eventually it was accepted. For years Stanley Prusina was mocked for his concept of prions,
then all of a sudden it's mad cow disease and he gets the Lasker Award and it's a tremendous
prestige to be Stanley Prusina, but there were lots of years in which he was in which he was
laughed at. So the scientific community decides what constitutes a solution.
This is part of, this is a lead-in we see in rabbits, an anticipation of this notion of
scientific knowledge being socially constructed. But there's another dimension to rabbits'
book because he was a political activist and he remained a Marxist political activist to the end
was that the solutions to scientific problems, which scientists call theories,
cause problems for society. They do things to society, some of which society benefits from
and some of them society has to deal with. So for example, it creates nuclear weapons
and then society has to deal with that. Science generates technologies that cause pollution.
Well for example, the whole semiconductor industry generates substantial quantities of
heavy metal pollutants like cadmium or poisons like arsenic which are elementary and don't
deteriorate because they're elements and contaminate groundwater. Well we didn't know
enough about it at the time but here we have it now and now we have a problem. It's wonderful to
have an iPod but it's not so wonderful to have contaminated groundwater in the facilities that
have made the semiconductor chips that make devices like the iPod possible. So in this book
he called attention concurrently to the intellectual issue of the implications of seeing science as
a craft and the social dimension that scientific and engineering knowledge are products of social
processes and that they have an impact on social processes. Now I use that lead-in because one
of the phenomena that we need to identify before getting to the social constructionists themselves
is that in the 1970s, that is to say in the wake of Kuhn and Ravitz's book, among others and between
1965 and 1970, the early 1970s, a raft of books and hundreds of articles all of a sudden looking
at science and technology from this new social perspective, there arose an academic phenomenon
namely programs that were called science technology and society studies programs initially at Cornell
University and then at Penn State University and then at Lehigh University and but then afterwards
in the course of the 70s and 80s spread across the country and to numerous countries in in Europe
and East Asia, science technology and society programs are at one in the same time a symptom
of the perception by the public that science and technology are issues for society, that they
aren't just a cornucopia of blessings but that they also pose problems that need to be dealt with,
environmental problems, problems associated with the military, problems associated with
proliferation of nuclear materials, problems associated with multinational corporations,
the internet is wonderful for exchanging email but it is also allowing companies to
essentially locate various kinds of information work anywhere in the world to the detriment of
some national economies of the whole issue of global outsourcing. So there are issues here and
the science technology and society studies programs were aimed at gathering people together,
primarily historians, philosophers, sociologists, people in political science
who studied all of a sudden became very interested in and science and technology related issues,
intellectual issues as we have been looking at them but also social and political and economic
issues associated with science and technology. All of a sudden seeing that science and technology
are embedded in their social context, they aren't sort of up here floating in the air
and then unilaterally acting on society dropping down theories and new inventions
but that theories and inventions emerge out of their social setting in some way. Not that
theory of relativity is let's say as JD Bernal might have said well it's just another capitalist
physics but that in some sense the theory of relativity, the conceptual assumptions emerge
out of not popular society but out of the society of physicists and mathematical physicists of the
turn of the 20th century and the kinds of issues that they were concerned with and the concepts
that they were using and so on. So they were a symptom, science technology and society programs
were a symptom but they were also a cause of the social construction theory. Why? Because what
happened was that these programs created a new community of interdisciplinary scholars
who were looking at science and technology typically they didn't know much science and
technology at the technical level but looking at science and technology as factors driving social
change as forces influencing society and this naturally crossed disciplinary lines. So if you
are looking at for you're trying to understand for example the social impact of reproductive
technologies, new reproductive technologies, then you have medicine involved but you have
economics involved and you have various moral issues involved so there are social issues there
is room here for sociologists, economists, psychologists, philosophers, historians and
what happened was in the course of the 1970s and 80s a very substantial new community of scholars
grew up whose careers were keyed to studying science and technology which had never existed
before. Before that historians of science, philosophers of science were kind of marginal
characters who had day job so to speak and also were interested in questions associated with
scientific and engineering knowledge, primarily scientific knowledge in the United States,
more engineering knowledge as well in Western Europe but now you had literally hundreds and
probably more like thousands of people, sociologists, philosophers, historians and a political scientist,
economists and a small but non-trivial number of scientists and engineers who were professionally
committed to the study of science and technology in their social settings acknowledging that
scientific knowledge, technical knowledge has a reciprocal relationship with society
that it is a in some sense a response to social issues and values and has an impact and changes
the social context by the new inventions, the new theories, new applications etc. It is out of this
phenomenon, this community that suddenly was focused from a career perspective on science and
technology related social and intellectual issues that a group of sociologists emerged in the 1970s
and 80s who were willing to apply to science who thought it made sense to apply to science
the same methodology that sociologists and anthropologists apply when they go to study
a remote culture. Prior to the 1970s it would not have made any sense to do that because as we saw
in the 1930s Carl Mannheim was still privileging scientific and mathematical knowledge as value
neutral it's not an ideology so scientific and mathematical knowledge, technical knowledge
generally was considered to be somehow above the sociological fray but now it's in the sociological
fray so what do we really know about science? Well we know that they come up with these theories
what does that mean they come up with these theories? Let's go study what they do. Let's apply
the methods of sociology the methods of cultural anthropology to the scientific research laboratory
let's go sit and observe these people let's go see what they do and try to document how they
reach the conclusions that they reach. Let's make believe we're flies on the wall if they'll let us
and and document everything that goes on the same way we would do if we went to a village in some
remote area of Thailand because we wanted to understand their culture their values their
religion their their social hierarchy etc you just observe what they do and you talk to them and
ask them what are you doing why do you do that etc so one seminal work in this regard was the 1979
publication after several years of part and full-time experience living at the Salk Institute for
Medical Research in La Jolla California in the laboratory of Roger Gilliman so two sociologists
Steve Wilgar and Bruno Latour published a book called laboratory life which summarizes their
experiences documenting the whole range of activities that went on in Gilliman's lab now this was
overlapping Gilliman's receipt of a portion of the Nobel Prize for the work he was doing that
they were observing on isolating peptide hormones in the brain in particular something called the
thyrotropin releasing hormone growth releasing hormones so matastatins came out of that research
so he got he shared the Nobel Prize with a sometime friend and arch rival because they
were racing each other to isolate this hormone TRH named Andrew Shelley and so they shared
half the prize and the other half the prize went to Rosalind Yallow for her work in
radioimmunoasset techniques in in medicine so the work that they the laboratory they were in was
absolutely world-class lab you didn't pick somebody in in some provincial at some provincial
university they're at they're at the top as it were and what they argue in the book what they
document they don't even argue it but they show in the book is the way in which doing science is
a process that is not merely a function of reasoning about data that there are all kinds
of complexities associated with is the instrument working correctly how do we know that that's
working correctly I don't think that data is reliable I didn't like the way the meter was
fluctuating there or somebody put the reagent in too quickly or and and then the way they talk about
what's shally doing today does anybody know what shally is planning to publish I hear he's giving
a paper here and and then getting on the phone saying look we got some interesting results I want
you to know about it first I want you to know about it second so creating what an actor network
theory is Latour later argued that science is deeply associated with with what sociologists
call actor network theory in which in which you create a framework of allies who are who by the
time you make your announcement are already committed to saying that's good work so what
wilgar and latour were arguing was that the scientific community individual scientists working
within the community create make scientific knowledge in some sense make scientific knowledge
when they make a claim that we have isolated the following hormone which is responsible for
the following metabolic process they are making a claim whose truth is determined by the scientific
community standing up and saying yes yes they did it and we give them the Nobel Prize for that
which guarantees that what they did was correct as it were doesn't of course you know prize has
sometimes been given for work for which subsequently was decided was not correct but they don't take
back the Nobel Prize and in fact a a book was by the Karen Kenorsetina published a book in 1981
called the manufacturer of knowledge which was which further pushed this image that scientific
knowledge that now notice what's happening here it is the claim to knowledge that is determined
by the scientific community now it's the community can't say a causes b to turn purple if in fact it
turns magenta then people can look and say but but it's magenta not purple that's why we define
that to be purple no that's not that's not what's at issue when a scientist makes an announcement
that he or she has discovered x uh or that some theory explains why then the validation of that
claim is a social phenomenon as Bruno Latour the half of the will garen latour of laboratory life
wrote in a book 1987 book science in action one of his many books but that's the one that in my
opinion epitomizes the social construction theory of scientific knowledge of the 1980s
that nature plays almost no role at all in validating scientific knowledge claims
this really aggravated an outraged scientist and finally elicited some sort of response as we'll
see in a subsequent lecture but Latour's book pointed to the validation process is a social
process doesn't mean that you can invent they couldn't get together and decide that pie should
be three to just to get rid of all of those decimal places they don't get together and do that but
the validation of knowledge claims is a social process and in the course of the 1980s there were
a host of books and and and a triple host of articles in journals in america and and western
europe on arguing that scientific knowledge is a is the product of the scientific community
and is not correspondence knowledge of nature now i have to add there's a dimension here that is
that should be troubling to us it should have been more troubling back in the 70s and 80s
and that is that i think then but certainly now one can see that there was a certain glee
that humanities and social science people in the social construction movement
were taking in saying that now we're going to pull these hard scientists down a peg so we do soft
science right and you do hard science hard the term hard science is a rhetorical ploy
yours your knowledge is as soft as our knowledge is and of course from the point of view of the
social scientists as well as from the point of the humanities who aren't even soft science
that this was in some sense intellectually and professionally gratifying there and i and i
believe that that can that attitude contributed to a kind of severe overstatement that we're going
to be talking about in a bit so i want i want to talk about two other books briefly that bracket
Bruno Latour's science and action which in some sense epitomizes in my opinion the social
construction theme and and gives the most compact and and aggressive argument in favor of the view
that scientific knowledge is socially constructed one is a book by harry collins published in 1985
called changing order and the other a book by andrew pickering who a british but now
and for some years a professor in an american university that called constructing quarks and
there again the title of course gives that away that was published in 1984
a changing order collins book changing order is an example of this so-called strong program in
the sociology of science and which is to apply sociological methods to science the way you
would apply it to any problem without making any judgment about what constitutes good science or
bad science documenting bad science the same way what scientists call bad science the same way
you would document what scientists call good science you don't rely on them to tell you what's
good or bad the same way as if you went into some village and they said that person's a criminal
you know you just note that in this culture what that person did counts as a crime but that doesn't
mean that you would count that as a crime for example so collins gave three case studies in
this book one in which he showed how complex the process is of replicating a newly invented instrument
in this case it was a particular kind of new laser which in those days was
still a new kind of instrument and and the way that you have to play with it in order to get
how do you know it's working right and how do you get it to work right and how do you use it
in ways that you can rely on the purity of the light that comes out of the laser etc it's a
very complex process in which in effect you have to know where you where you're going before you
before you can go there it's a good example of how theory affects the construction of instruments
so that the observations you make already incorporate the theory and the assumptions on
which that theory is based this whole question comes up much more in the case of Pickering's book
constructing quarks but that's that's the germ the second study has to do with the a claim by a
very respected experimental physicist very respected then called joseph weber that he had detected
gravity waves which are predicted by the general theory of relativity and it turned out that his
work was not replicable and and and his career took a different tack i had to say was ruined but
it went it was definitely transformed by his persistence that he could build a gravity wave
detector based on a design that he had arrived at in the 1980s and and and that he had detected
gravity waves in 2004 collins published a follow-up book a massive book called gravity shadow in
which he tracks weber's career from 1985 to 2004 approximately and when he wrote the book it appeared
in 2004 and the second half of the book roughly speaking he looks at the laser interferometer
gravitational observatory LIGO that nasa that the nsf funded to the tune of 360 million dollars
two instruments in the western and southern united states that have yet to detect any gravity waves
and yet they cost 360 million dollars but the scientific community has a very different attitude
towards those instruments than they had to weber's so that was what collins is getting at here and the
third one had to do with the scientific community's dismissal of extrasensory perception research
as pseudoscience in spite of the fact that it looks as though in the experimental work that he
documents in the book they follow the scientific experimental method and they make claims that
are documentable in the case of pickering's book constructing quarks pickering who has a phd in
physics and is very knowledgeable of pickering writes a history of elementary particle physics
since world war two which he uses to argue that experimental data is intrinsically equivocal
that theory dominates data and that that is to say when you look at the outcome of a particle
accelerator in order to get data on which you build your theory of elementary particles
you are already using a theory that tells you what the data mean so that there is a kind of
circularity associated with it i mean when finally uh the researchers at firmy lab in
betavia illinois america's largest particle accelerator identified the top quark after
a dozen years or a dozen or more years of looking for it uh the announcement was made
after two years of analyzing millions i think it was something like 15 million events and they
isolated about a half a dozen events that they said these are the top quarks now how do you know
that how do you determine what signal and what's noise that is the issue that uh that pickering
was pointing to here that in order to make the difference between signal and noise in order
to decide what sense to make of the data you have to use the very theory that you're trying to
to uh document quote confirm by way of the data and to do this is as you need to make
non-logical judgments that we've heard this before that logic and experimental data do not
determine scientific theories that there are additional conceptual judgments that go beyond
the data that go beyond a logical methodology and that especially when you're using complex
instruments of it is the community's uh consensus that this instrument is operating correctly and
that the results tell us x y z that validates theories uh based on the application of that
instrument this should remind you of thomas hobbs criticism of the air pump that robert
boil and robert hook were using back in the 17th century and hobbs said how do you know
it's working right how do you know that the results are nature rather than something caused by the
instrument itself and this becomes of course extremely um um central when you're dealing
with an instrument like a multi-billion dollar particle accelerator uh in which the overwhelming
majority of the outcome has to be discarded and you find a dozen two three five uh events that you
say that's the signal that i'm interested in yeah that signal validates that signal validates my
theory so um come back to close with uh with brunel atours 1987 book of science in action
this is a small a minute subset of the literature that was published in the second half of the 1970s
through the uh middle of the 1990s arguing that scientific knowledge was socially constructed
that the scientific community the scientific the society of elementary particle physicists
high energy physicists quantum field theoreticians evolutionary biologists uh polymer chemists
that those communities determine the validity of scientific knowledge claims not any comparison
to nature where nature is the ultimate umpire or arbiter of scientist claims to truth and
knowledge we will in the next lecture examine the response from the other side defending the
objectivity of scientific knowledge
