Lecture 21 New Definitions of Objectivity
This lecture would definitely require you to fasten your seatbelts because we need
to cover a number of figures and a number of positions in order to do justice to the
response to Kuhn's structure of scientific revolutions and the response to the social
construction theory of scientific knowledge from the side of those defending an objective
account of scientific knowledge.
That is to say, let's just say a Scheffler sympathetic view of science.
So I have called these positions neo-objectivist because they cannot, everyone acknowledges
that you cannot simply dismiss Kuhn and so if you want to defend an objective view of
scientific knowledge today, it cannot be on the same grounds that the scientific knowledge
was presented as objective prior to the 1960s.
So let's begin by noting that realism is woven inextricably into the fabric of doing
science. You really cannot talk about doing science without talking realistically.
You cannot talk plate tectonics without talking as if you meant that the continents really
are floating, crust floating on a viscous mantle without there really being convection
currents in the mantle caused by the high temperature of the solid core of the earth
surrounded by a liquid core of iron. And the same thing of course is try to describe the
Hubble Space Telescope and the observations made by the Hubble Space Telescope without
seeming to talk about there really are binary stars there, that really is a neutron star,
that is, well in case of the Hubble Space Telescope, you wouldn't tell it an X-ray star,
but the X-ray observatory, X-ray telescope, we have discovered an X-ray star, that language
is realistic. And if you look at scientific publications, it is naively realistic.
This is a scientist talk realistically about that work as if what they were doing was disclosing
nature as it is out there behind our experience and without it being a problem for them.
In my opinion, you cannot remove that from science. Even the great figures like Ernst Mach
and his phenomenalism, well that was a way of understanding scientific knowledge, but
you really could not function in my opinion as a scientist if you strictly spoke in a way
as if what you were reporting on were meter readings and assays and different colors that
chemicals turned, that's not what scientists do. So objectivism, which is just roughly
speaking an easy way to refer to the classical view of science, that the object of science
is nature, not just experience, is really deeply woven into the fabric of science.
So that the critique of this objectivist or realist view of scientific knowledge must
be understood as a critique of the concept of knowledge. Nobody is denying that the science
works. Nobody is denying that the theories give results that are predicted or that predict
new results that had not been anticipated or that they work when they're converted into
technological applications. No one is saying don't be ridiculous, solid state physics is
just socially constructed, therefore computers don't work. So the very same people, of course,
who argue for the social construction of scientific knowledge, get vaccinations for their children.
Now these are the same people who are agitators about global warming, but global warming is a
consequence of a scientific theory. If scientific theories are socially constructed, what's the
big deal? Global warming is or is not a reality independently of what the social constructionists
claim about scientific knowledge. So the focus of the critique is on the word knowledge. What
shall we understand by the word knowledge? It is not throwing out the science baby with the
metaphysical knowledge bathwater. Second, the concepts of objectivity and universality of
scientific knowledge. Sheffler, for example, claimed that the goal of science is universal truths.
It's not just the feigned hypotheses of the Cartesian sort. So if we recognize that that's what
scientists, by their own rhetoric, are striving for, what they get their prizes for, is objectivity
and universal truths of nature, then we understand that after Cune and after recognizing the validity
of the historicist critique of scientific knowledge, that it's a critique of what we mean by
objectivity and universality. It's a tricky thing, and it's not just a semantic distinction.
The scientific content is one thing, and then claiming that that content is knowledge in the
objective sense, that it is universal. Those are problematic. Defending the claim that science
is objective in the sense of being a value-neutral description of what's really out there behind
experience, that it is universal. How are you going to defend that? So the critique must be
understood as a critique of concepts, which is why Foucault is relevant to weave into the fabric
of our story here, of doing this analysis of scientific knowledge, of what scientists know.
These are concepts. Knowledge is a concept, not a fact. Objectivity is a concept. That knowledge is
universal is a concept. Where did the justification for these concepts come from? What do they reflect
from a Derrida point of view, deconstructing this? What is it we're trying to defend by saying that
science is knowledge objective, universal, that the object is independent reality? What is implicit
here that's in a sense being hidden from us? What turf is being protected? So the structure of
scientific revolutions really only reminds us of issues, the same ones we've been discussing, that
have been explicitly part of science since the 17th century. Galileo's conflict with the church,
for example, that we discussed, and that have come up again and again as in the case of Fourier,
that it is possible to separate the ontological claims that scientists make about their knowledge from the
functional correctness of these scientific theories when applied to experience, that as functional
responses to experience, functionally or instrumentally justified responses to experience, then these
claim that science is knowledge of that sort. In the end, the social construction claim, the social
construction theory, speaking now as a defender of, for the purposes of this lecture, a defender of the
objective view of scientific knowledge, the social construction claim has a kind of a vacuous
character to it telling me that scientific knowledge is socially constructed does not tell me anything
about the reality, so to speak, with a small r of that knowledge. Illustration. Everyone would agree that a
prison is socially constructed, but it makes a big difference whether you're inside or outside. It has been
argued that internal combustion vehicles are socially constructed, but if you're crossing a street and there's
a truck coming at you, you don't say it's merely socially constructed, you get out of the way. So being socially
constructed doesn't mean that you're not real in some sense. The claim that science is socially constructed, that
the validation of scientific knowledge claims is critically dependent on the scientific community's
definitions of the concepts that it employs, the principles that it adopts, the assumptions on the basis of
which it reasons, that doesn't tell you that what the outcome is not real. The question is what does it tell you,
and that's what we need to look at. First, by looking at three programmatic approaches to restoring the objectivity
of scientific knowledge, and then at a very small subset of individual figures who have offered theories in
defense of the objectivity of scientific knowledge. So I want first to describe the work of Carl Hempel, who I've
already mentioned in the context of the logical positivism in the 1930s, that Hempel in the 1930s had already raised
the question of whether you really could have observation sentences that were pure, that were not in some sense already
infected with theory. He had raised that as a question within the logical positivist movement in the 1930s. He subsequently
emigrated to the United States and spent the war years here and then became a professor here in the United States.
Hempel in the late 1940s and after developed a, he was a logical positivist who had to carry on after, in effect, the
implosion of the logical positivist program of providing a foundation for scientific knowledge as having as its object the
world out there and for being universal and necessary and certain because of its deductive logical character. So Hempel, in a
sense, rescued out of the debris of logical positivism, I don't think he would have liked that term, what he called a
covering law model of scientific explanation. Something called the deductive nomological model,
nomological having to do with law, deduction of course, deductive logical reasoning, that scientific explanation is deductive in
character and it is based on laws, universal laws of nature from which specific phenomena are deduced. Now, what's different?
Wasn't this what logical positivism said? And that's a failure. So why is Hempel bothering us with this? He has made a critical change in
the language. This is a covering law model of scientific explanation. It is not a theory of what scientific knowledge is about.
It is a theory, it is a model of how scientific theories explain. That's much more modest. There's no talk of causality here.
This is not a theory that tells us how scientists can know that their theories correspond to what's out there in the world. This is a
theory or a model of what constitutes a good scientific explanation, which is that it has to follow, it has to be organized in a deductive
logical way in which universal laws are postulated. Now, obviously not whimsically, but we don't need to get into the details of that,
and from which specific phenomena can be deduced in accordance with the right data and assumptions, etc. So he has something called internal
principles and bridge principles, and he's put together a model which was very influential in the 1950s and early 1960s, but notice the focus has
shifted from explaining the nature of scientific knowledge to explaining scientific explanation, to giving us a theory of how scientific
theories explain anything. The second approach is called naturalized epistemology and was significantly founded by Willard van Orman
Quine, who was the man who, in 1950, published an essay which is often referred to as the smoking gun for killing logical positivism,
but in retrospect now people say, well, it was not really a smoking gun, but at the time and for decades afterwards it was taken as such. Quine
himself was very pro-science and believed that science was the only body of knowledge that we actually possessed. He was a mathematical logician
and a philosopher, a philosopher of science, and so he began a movement that has come to be called naturalized epistemology, that epistemology,
the study of how we know itself should be the subject of a science, not philosophy, that theory of knowledge should not be a branch of
philosophy. Just as physics used to be a branch of philosophy, but it isn't anymore, that epistemology should belong to psychology. Now, of course,
not the kind of psychology that was being done in 1950, but he was anticipating what, let's say today, he only died a few years ago, so he lived to see this becoming true,
cognitive neuroscience, that cognitive neuroscience would begin to give us an understanding of how the human nervous system receives input from its environment
and processes that input in ways that result in the kinds of generalizations that we call scientific laws and theories, etc.
So that this is a whole different approach to establishing that scientific knowledge is objective and is about the world.
It's objective because it is anchored in physiology, neurophysiology, and it's about the world because it is our response to the external stimuli.
If we understood how electromagnetic waves, how sound waves, the pressure waves affect our hearing and our sight, etc.,
and then how we processed the individual inputs in building up our picture of the world that we respond to by finding patterns, by identifying patterns,
these are all essentially neuropsychological phenomena, as far as Quine was concerned, and as far as naturalized epistemologists are concerned.
A seemingly related, but actually I think quite different, the third approach is called evolutionary epistemology,
and one of the founding figures, if not the founding figure, was a former colleague and good friend of mine, Donald Campbell, who died a few years ago.
Campbell was a leading social psychologist who became very concerned about the social constructionist movement for similar reasons to Israel Shefler's.
And he liked Shefler a lot, as a matter of fact, that the social constructionist, he claimed, and especially Bruno Latour's book Science in Action of 1987,
that he called these people ontological nihilists, because he believed that if you undermine the concept of the objectivity of scientific knowledge,
then you are on that slippery slope to anarchy, and to anything goes.
You are undermining the whole concept of reason in ways that I described when I talked about Shefler's, I won't go over that again.
Campbell's approach was that, look, we have to understand that our human, our nervous system evolved, it is clearly adapted to the external world.
We don't need any better evidence that science is about the world than that science is the product of a nervous system and brain that evolved in interaction with the world.
What else would science be about, if not the world, given the fact that we have evolved within the world?
So looking at the evolutionary fit, so to speak, between our nervous system and the world, according to Campbell, gives us confidence that reasoning correctly about the world,
reasoning, I should say, reasoning effectively about the world, is correct reasoning.
Now, he recognizes that of course we don't have a criterion, the correspondence criterion that keeps coming up in this course.
We don't have such a criterion, he knew that, so how do you defend not a problem?
We accept that science is permanently conjectural and courageable.
We're continually trying to get a better fit between our intellectual response to experience and our evolving experiences.
As our experiences change, or as problems present themselves that we don't feel have been adequately treated, we come up with new theories to the extent that they are better fits to experience,
that they are more effective, that they allow us more effective behavioral strategies, for example, that they translate into new innovations, then we adopt them.
Science is permanently conjectural, permanently courageable.
He used to say, he had this cute phrase, cousin to the amoeba, how could we be sure?
We can't be certain in the platonic sense, if what you want is certainty, science can't give you that, but that doesn't mean it's not objective.
It's objective by the very fact that we are, our brains are coupled to the world that we think about.
So those are three programmatic approaches to the world, to, I'm sorry, to the objectivity, the post, in the case of the last two,
especially post-cunian, even though Quine started this somewhat earlier, but naturalized epistemology and evolutionary epistemology really took off after Cune
and after the social constructionists seemed to be undermining, definitively undermining the objectivity of scientific knowledge and the whole notion of truth and reason.
Hemple's work was prior to Cune's book and to a considerable extent was sort of overwhelmed, although it made a comeback as another option,
settling for modeling scientific explanation rather than explaining the nature of scientific knowledge back in the 70s and early 80s.
Now I want to shift to looking at a group of philosophers of science who are, who qualify in my opinion, I don't know anybody else who uses this term,
so I say in my opinion as neo-objectivist as having, because as a matter of fact, if you look at the work of most philosophers of science after Cune,
most philosophers of science are objectivists, that is to say they do not accept the social construction claim that truth and reason are all relativized,
they are anti-relativists, they are anti-sceptical, and their work is often quite technically involved with issues in specific areas of scientific research,
to the extent that it seems to me that there's a danger of sterility, that philosophers of mathematics nowadays look at technical issues in mathematics,
philosophers of biology, technical issues having to do with evolutionary biology, and questions in evolutionary biology,
philosophers of physics at the interpretation of data from elementary particle accelerators, but the physicists of biologists and mathematicians by and large don't pay attention to this literature.
They're busy enough doing the real thing rather than looking at, I wonder what philosophers have to say about this,
especially since they would also have to learn the jargon of the philosophical discipline involved, which is easier than learning mathematics,
high-level mathematics, but nevertheless not trivial, and yet nobody who is not a specialist in the philosophy of mathematics can really appreciate what it is they're talking about,
but this indicates the extent to which philosophers, many philosophers of science, are closely coupled with their work to the work of scientists and mathematicians,
and most others, as you can see easily by looking at journals, are opposed to relativism and skepticism if those are taken to be the message of the post-cunian environment, intellectual environment.
So, as I said before, these people know that Cune cannot be dismissed, that the social constructionists have a point, so you have to work hard today in order to justify an objective, a neo-objective interpretation of scientific knowledge.
You can't just take it for granted, and so I want to talk about several of these thinkers and the work that they do, but necessarily briefly.
Most of these thinkers, the work of most of these thinkers, are quite accessible to non-specialists in the philosophy of science.
So, the first thinker I want to talk about is Hilary Putnam, a Harvard philosopher who is perhaps one of the most eminent, not perhaps,
who is one of the most eminent American philosophers of the second half of the 20th century,
and although, like Bertrand Russell, he changes his philosophical garments quite often and changes his opinions quite often,
Putnam published a book called Realism with a Human Face in which he developed a view of science called internal realism,
which is remarkably like Poincaré's notion that objective reality is the internal harmony of the world.
Putnam, and it's nice to see Putnam together with the philosopher Nelson Goodman, one of whose small monographs is but extremely penetrating,
small but extremely penetrating monograph ways of world-making, focus on, we need to conceptualize in order to reason that concepts are classification schemes,
and they are not themselves natural, that is to say they are not unique, there is no uniquely correct way to conceptualize any domain of experience,
and so there is, at that level, there is a certain arbitrariness to using these concepts rather than those concepts,
but that within a scheme of conceptualization, scientific knowledge is always tested against its implications for experience.
Again, we give up something. Scientific knowledge is not absolute, nor is it progressing towards the absolute,
but it is objective in the same way that I referred before to a map being objective, that a map being able to be judged good or bad,
even though it's quite arbitrary to say that this map is a demographic map of the United States, this map is a topographical map,
this map is a road map, but I'm only interested in the interstate highway system and where you can find a Walmart at an exit.
So once you say that, then I say, well, I don't personally like that kind of a map, but maybe I do like that kind of a map,
and then I can say this is a very good map because every single Walmart within a mile of an interstate highway exit is on this map,
and that's why you would get that map if you wanted that particular kind of information.
If, in fact, half the Walmart's were not on the map, then you say this is not a very good map. In fact, it's a terrible map.
So the position of internal realism doesn't give up connectedness with the world.
It retains objectivity, but without the ontological claim that the object of scientific knowledge is an independently existing reality.
And Nelson Goodman's version of this is that the only way we can respond to experience in science at any rate, it's different perhaps in music,
it's different perhaps in literature, although in fact it's not different, is under some sort of description.
And there's no such thing as a unique way to describe experience.
So we have the history of science is the history of re-description.
There's the Newtonian description. There's the Einsteinian description. There's the quantum mechanical description.
There's the dark matter, dark energy description of the cosmos and so on.
But we are always going to be, so to speak, bounded by a description.
Now, in fact, it's true in music too. If you're a composer, you've got to have some scheme of things.
I mean, for a while you can do something like John Cage and put notes down on the page randomly,
but after you've done that for a while there's no way to go with that.
If you've adopted some scheme, then you compose consistent with that scheme.
We see what Bach did, let's say the Art of the Fugue.
We see what Schoenberg did with his 12-tone system, ABC and his chromatic scale.
This is the equivalent, this is the musical analog of a description.
Different aesthetic canons in art, impressionism is a way of painting.
It's not prior to the neoclassicism of the first half of the 19th century,
nor was it superseded by post-impressionists, let's say the Cubists,
because impressionism was wrong, it's a different description.
The fulve, the Cubists, the abstract expressionists, etc.
Each one of those artistic schools represent different descriptions.
Nelson Goodman argues that science is one way of making the world through a description of it.
It is not the uniquely correct way of making the world.
So Goodman and Putnam represent, I think, one approach which overlaps in many conceptual features
the other neo-objectivists, and I want to mention a few of them here,
starting with Philip Kitcher, who in fact defends something like the mapping metaphor.
He actually defends the mapping metaphor that I've been talking about,
so I don't have to talk about any further about that.
You can be interpretive, science can be an interpretation of experience and be objective,
in the same way that a map is.
Ronald Gehr's version of this, a philosopher of science who argues that scientific theories are models.
Nowadays we might say computer simulations, they are simulations of experience.
Models in the sense that we look for that the internal relationships of the model capture features of experience.
So the logical consequences of the model mirror what we experience.
When that stops being the case, we throw that model away and we make up a new model.
Sounds like Claude Bernard with what he said about concepts and scalpels.
So Kitcher with his mapping metaphor and Gehr with his notion that scientific theories should be understood as models,
are people whose names I wanted to get on the map.
There is a physicist named Arthur Fine who has made a serious effort at defending a critically defensible version of objectivity,
which he calls the natural ontological attitude in a book called The Shaky Game,
which largely consists of his attempt to show that Einstein was not the radical realist that he is typically described as being,
that he had a more sensitive and nuanced appreciation of the kinds of issues that we've been discussing in this course
and did not really think that scientists could give us a picture of the way things were out there independently of human experience.
That's a judgment call, but he fine develops his own position, which he calls a natural ontological attitude,
NOA, which is common sense realism, accepting the obvious common sense realism,
let's say for Campbell on evolutionary epistemological grounds, that common sense realism has got to be true because we're still here.
And if it were not valid, if it were not true with a small t, we would have been eaten up by somebody or we would have been killed by something long ago.
So broadly speaking, it's got to be true, checked by empirical observations, by experiment, et cetera,
so that the natural ontological attitude is take it seriously that we believe that we are functioning in the world,
which appears to us in this way, and that it is that way at some level.
It is different, so things look solid, and then we're told by physicists that it's mostly empty space,
but those extensions of experience, those penetrations of experience are constantly anchored in an openly available body of evidence,
so that it is possible to be an objectivist about scientific knowledge without insisting that scientific knowledge be realistic in the classical sense.
And this also is the view of much more developed and much more sophisticated philosophical detail by the Dutch, Canadian, American,
philosopher of science, Bas van Frossen, who argues that scientific theories should be accepted as empirically adequate.
It calls this theory constructive empiricism, that scientific theories have a primarily empirical character,
and their realism essentially ends at the empirical level.
When you start bringing in unobservable features like dark energy and dark matter that are unobservable as explanatory phenomena,
so then we don't make any judgment about their reality, they function within scientific explanations,
and if the theories that they anchor work empirically, then we accept them, we accept the ideas of unobservables,
but the realism of science is limited to its empirical adequacy.
And I thought I would mention the one final figure, a man who died much too soon, I guess most people died much too soon by their own judgment,
Imre Lakato, who was a Hungarian refugee who left Hungary in the 1956 uprising, made his way to the London School of Economics,
where like Feyerabend he became, he studied with, he was already a mature student, studied with Popper,
he like Feyerabend also became somewhat heretical, and in fact he and Feyerabend were supposed to be collaborating on a book
in which they would effectively debate the whole question of the objectivity of scientific knowledge,
and then he died before the project could come to fruition.
Lakatos's view was an analogous to Hempel's in that it was, what we can do is reconstruct the process of scientific reasoning after the fact,
that scientific knowledge should be understood to be true if it makes novel predictions that nobody had anticipated,
and after the fact we can make it look deductive logical, we can find the rational path to the theory,
so the process of discovery at the time is obscure, something that Popper held, there is no logic to the process of discovery,
so Lakatos attempted to look at scientific theory, scientific truth as objective in that limited way.
