Lecture 7, Kant Restores Certainty
Welcome back.
You remember in the last lecture we discussed John Locke, George Barkley, and David Hume,
the three great British empiricists, and the reason for discussing British empiricism
was not for your sort of general intellectual titillation, but because British empiricism
represented an attempt to formulate a philosophical theory of knowledge that would serve as a
foundation for Newtonian science.
That would give us an explanation of how it is that scientists come to know what they
have been generating as new knowledge.
Of course, implicit and explicit in this is the idea that in fact scientists are generating
knowledge.
Well, empiricism then was invented as a philosophical school in response to the rise of modern science
or the rise of cartesian Newtonian natural philosophy in the 17th century.
The perceived failure of empiricism to anchor Newtonian science, or let's just call it scientific
knowledge appreciating the anachronism of using that term even in the 18th century.
The perceived failure of empiricism because empiricism slides into Humean skepticism for
Immanuel Kant is what led Immanuel Kant in the last third of the 18th century to formulate
the philosophical school called idealism to invent idealism as an approach to explaining
knowledge in order to provide the foundation for scientific knowledge that empiricism failed
to provide.
Now this word failed, it only makes sense if you insist that knowledge means universal
necessary and certain knowledge.
That knowledge means universal necessary and certain truth.
If you give up logical, deductive logical certainty as a requirement, then there's no
problem with empiricism.
For that matter, there's no problem with Humean skepticism.
Kant was fixated as in fact the majority of western philosophers since Plato have been
fixated on the idea that only universal necessary and certain truth knowledge deserved to be
called truth and knowledge.
And so while we're going to work our way into it, Kant's philosophy, and it is arguably
the most influential philosophy of the last 200 years, Kant's philosophy was generated
by his commitment to the universal necessary and certain truth of Newtonian physics.
He was committed to that idea.
He absolutely rejected Humean skepticism as a possibility for defining truth and knowledge.
And then in a certain sense he says now, how do we solve the problem of showing why Newtonian
physics is universal necessary and certain?
So we're going to work our way into that, but that's the connection here.
Empiricism invented in response to the rise of early modern science in the 17th century.
The perceived failure of empiricism because Kant was convinced that Hume showed that empiricism
slides into skepticism.
It does not give us certainty.
Kant responds by inventing idealism and we will be tracing the consequences of consumption
of idealism in future lectures for science and for philosophy.
Kant was an extremely interesting character, obviously all of these brilliant people are
extremely interesting and most of them extraordinarily eccentric.
Few of them as eccentric as Isaac Newton, but Emmanuel Kant comes pretty close.
Kant was a very short, very fragile individual who lived out his entire life in the immediate
vicinity of the city of Königsberg, which did not stop him from forming universal conclusions
that applied to all of mankind in all times and in all places.
But he lived in a certain sense a physically very restricted life, but obviously not intellectually.
To middle age, Kant was an intellectual who saw himself as what we would call a physicist
and a champion of Newtonian physics.
In fact, in 1755, he published an extended review of a book that had been written five
years earlier by a British natural philosopher named Thomas Wright called A New Theory of
the Universe, a new hypothesis was the actual title, New Hypothesis of the Universe, in
which Thomas Wright argued that the universe was an infinite eternal structure that was
composed of an infinite number of Milky Way galaxies and that the Milky Way itself was
composed of a vast number of stars, each of which had planetary systems just like the
Earth's.
And he then used what we were called today highly speculative science sounding talk in
order to propose this idea.
Kant reviewed that book, was very impressed with the idea of a theory of the universe,
and over the next few years, he produced a book which was actually he wrote, it was accepted
for publication in 1755, but the publisher had legal difficulties, and the book only
was sort of released from the publisher's warehouse in 1762.
In this book called A Universal Theory of the Heavens, Kant formulated what we recognize
today as a theory in which our solar system formed out of a cloud of gas, out of this
cloud of gas which collapses under gravitational attraction.
The mutual gravitational attraction causes the cloud of gas to condense into a central
sun and the various planets, and the fact that this cloud of gas was slowly rotating
would explain why all the planets rotate in the same direction and roughly speaking in
the same plane, and with some exceptions the moons as well.
And so he was giving a Newtonian mechanistic explanation of the formation of the solar system,
but he went beyond that and argued that the universe itself is an eternal and eternally
expanding structure in which stars and planetary systems are continually forming in this way,
as routinely exploding when they reach a certain age, blowing out clouds of gas which then
become the basis for new solar systems, and that these solar systems are themselves aggregated
into structures, galactic structures which are also held together by gravity, and he
developed in this way a picture of the universe which has some startling similarities, a whole
idea of an expanding universe in the way that the solar systems form, out quite mechanically,
and reform, die, etc.
This whole dynamic picture, he says, we cannot be certain about this, this is before he formulated
his philosophy and theory of knowledge, he wrote in his Newtonian phase in which he was
complacent about the new scientific knowledge, he took it for granted that it was knowledge,
he hadn't really encountered you yet, there's no infallibility here, but we can come very
close to being certain that such a theory as I am outlining here is correct, if we reason
carefully, if we use Newton's physics, if we use correct analogies, we can narrow the
gap between fallibility and infallibility between knowing for sure that this theory describes
what the universe is really like and a speculation, or maybe being just probably right, we can
narrow that gap and we can bridge it if we make predictions which are then confirmed,
ah this is the famous fallacy of affirming the consequence that we see keeps cropping
up all the time, Kant thinks that we can bridge that gap if we make predictions that
will, that are correct, and he tossed one off using his own analysis of the planet Saturn,
he predicted that Saturn had an axial rotation every six hours plus a few minutes, which
is quite startling, no one at the time had attempted to do such a thing, and today we
hold that Saturn's day is ten hours plus some minutes, so you might say well, Kant came
pretty close, so he made a flat prediction, if in the future astronomers should discover
that Saturn's day is six hours plus a few minutes, which he deduced from his assumptions
and from using Newtonian physics, then that will be a strong confirmation that my whole
speculative system of the universe is correct, so we see here, if you read this book, which
is available by the way, it's in, available actually in a fairly recent English translation,
and it's short so it's actually quite readable and quite fascinating to see this, you feel
that you're in the presence of somebody who is quite convinced and complacent about the
truth of Newtonian physics. Kant wanted a university professorship, and however he
did not get it until he was well into middle age, at that time he did get a post as a university
professor, and he read Jung's treatise of human nature, treatise of human nature was
the book that Jung thought would win him enduring fame, he wrote it as a young man, and it was
a total failure, critically and commercially. Many years later he published an excerpt of
it as the enquiry concerning human understanding, and that made a significant impression. Kant
must have been one of the very few people who read the whole thing, the treatise of human
nature, and he recognized that Jung was right. He himself says, in his own cautious way,
that Jung roused him from his dogmatic slumbers. Jung roused Kant from his dogmatic slumbers
by showing him that he could not dogmatically assume that Newtonian physics was true, that
if you take an empirical approach to knowledge, then it slides into skepticism because of
Jung's critique of causation, which we discussed in the previous lecture. So Kant had to now
find a new theory of knowledge, which would be a foundation for universal necessary and
certain truth in Newtonian physics, and for knowledge generally. It took him quite a few
years. He essentially starts with his conclusion. He knows, he knows he must come out, the end
result must be a theory that justifies the claim that knowledge is universal necessary
and certain. What does he have to do to do it? The book that he published, and which
essentially redirected Western philosophy, was the critique of pure reason, subsequently
followed by the critique of practical reason, and then the critique of judgment, three quite
fat books that he published in a relatively short period of time because then he slowed
down, became ill and died. Kant, in the critique of pure reason, did what he called, he performed
a Copernican revolution in addressing the question of knowledge. What did Copernicus
do? What was his revolution? Before Copernicus, the sun, the earth was in the center of the
universe, and the sun and the planets rotated around the earth. Copernicus flipped it around.
He put the sun in the center, and the earth and the other planets rotated around the sun.
Kant said, in order to solve the knowledge problem within science, generally, so he is
a philosopher offering a comprehensive theory of knowledge, in order to solve the knowledge
problem, we need to reverse the way it had been conceptualized in the past. The assumption
in the past had been that knowledge results when the mind takes in information about the
world from the senses. That experience is sort of neutral. It is what experience is made
up of, what the world does to us, and then the mind responds to that. Kant says what we
need to understand is that experience is constructed by the mind. That the mind, this is a very
important term here, has a self-activity that determines how we experience the world. Experience
is not neutral. The mind is not a neutral instrument that has no coloration of its own,
so to speak, but instead the mind has an intrinsic structure to it so that what we call experience
is the result of the mind transforming whatever it is that the world does to us. The logic
of this transformation, the rules that the mind follows, it says Kant, are universal
and timeless. They are necessary. There is one and only one way that we can experience
the world. It's built into us. He might have said, if he had had today's knowledge, that
there are neural circuits that we are born with that cause us to experience the world
in the way we do. According to Kant, this is the way he broke it down. Our senses contain
what he called intuition, so our sense of space and our sense of time are, according
to Kant, intuitions that have an innate structure. We experience space in the way that came to
be formulated as Euclidean geometry. Euclidean geometry is an articulation of the only way
that we can experience spatial relationships. Euclidean geometry wasn't cleverly invented
by Greeks. It wasn't a recognition that there are abstract mathematical objects out there
that we can put together and use in order to describe spatial relationships. No, we have
no choice in the matter. Euclidean geometry is the only possible geometry because that's
the way our senses respond to whatever is out there. Similarly, our time intuition is
the basis for arithmetic. Arithmetic and geometry are the two foundations of all of mathematics,
algebra arising out of arithmetic. So we have arithmetic and geometry for Kant. Mathematics
is a name for the way that our senses pre-consciously, so we're not talking about the mind yet, with
pre-consciously the senses structure whatever is out there so that it appears to us in the
forms of spatial relationships and temporal sequences that we are conscious of. But we're
not conscious of them because space and time are facts about what's out there and we're
just receiving those. We have imposed those forms and there's only one way to impose them,
so there's only one possible geometry. Notice by the way what's happening here. Mathematics
historically was the exemplar for the rationalists and for the mainstream western philosophical
tradition of universal necessary and certain knowledge. The implication being that the
objective mathematical knowledge, universal necessary and certain knowledge of something
external to the mind. Certainly that's what Plato had in mind and in fact that's what
many mathematicians to this very day believe that mathematical objects exist independently
of the human mind. Kant says mathematics is an example of universal necessary and certain
knowledge but that's because we construct it. It is what, to use a Kantian term, a synthetic
priori judgment. It is a judgment about experience but it is a priori the truth of the judgment
is prior to experience. It sounds like a contradiction in terms. Kant's whole philosophy and theory
of knowledge is based on the first time in western philosophy that the claim was made
that there could be such a thing as synthetic judgments, judgments that apply to experience
what David Jung called matters of fact and said you can't have knowledge of, that are
true a priori. Judgments about experience that are true prior to experience. How can
that be? Because experience is produced by the mind. The self activity of the mind structures
what we call experience. Now that was before we get to the mind. When we get to the mind
and this is what took Kant years and years of work, Kant identified 12 concepts which
he called the categories of the understanding. These 12 concepts he believed were the 12
building blocks of all knowledge. 12 generic concepts that were the building blocks of all
knowledge. Newtonian physics is that particular combination of these concepts which describes
the kinds of relationships that Newtonian physics covers. It is the only possible physics because
those are the only concepts that we can possibly use they're built into the mind. The mind,
the understanding structures experience conceptually just as the senses structure experience
intuitively. So that Kant comes at the end, it's not the end for Kant but at the end of his
initial problem what Kant comes up with is showing that Newtonian physics is the only possible physics.
Therefore is universal necessary and certain. He has solved the knowledge problem within science
by creating a philosophical system which is based on deductive reasoning.
Kant claims that he has arrived at this philosophical system deductively. He didn't
invent it in order to solve the problem. He was able to, so to speak, he uses this notion of what's
called a transcendental deduction. He was able to deduce what must be happening in the mind
that we are unconscious of in order for experience to have the form that it has and he was able to
abstract from what the mind actually does when we see the products of intellectual activity.
He was able to abstract by a kind of reverse deduction not induction at all reverse deduction
a system that then allowed you to deduce Newtonian physics, Euclidean geometry,
mathematics and physics and eventually ethics as well deduce how we must experience the world.
So Kant has answered you but at a price. The price is, and it sounds kind of odd,
the price is that we do not have knowledge of the world. The world as it is in itself
independent of the mind is unknowable because since experience which is a response to whatever
out there is doing whatever it does to us, experience is the way we respond to that.
So we have no way of getting outside experience, our minds are incapable of conceptualizing
what might be out there independently of the ways our minds conceptualize.
So the Dinganzig, the world as it is in itself, things as they are prior to affecting us,
we have no knowledge of that. We can have probable opinions about what the world must be like in
order for us to respond to it in the way that we do but we can never know it because we can never
conceptualize it. We can know in the universal necessary and certain sense that there is a
world out there that the content of our conceptual activity was not invented by us. So Kant is not
what philosophers call a solipsist coming from a Latin expression solis that that that that
means that I am the only thing that exists. If everything is in my head, if I am experiencing
the world inside my head, then how do I know there's anything except me and my thinking?
No philosopher has ever defended that has ever held this position, although there was a peculiar
19th century philosopher who wrote under the name of Max Störner. His real name was Johann
Kaspar Schmitt, who wrote a book called The Ego and His Own, which is perhaps the only attempt
at a philosophical defense of solipsism. He's on the face of it. It doesn't make any sense at all.
I mean, it seems to be a complete violation of common sense. Kant claimed that one could
deductively prove that there was an external world but what that world was like independently of the
way we responded to it in accordance with the sensory intuitions of space and time and the
12 categories of the understanding, we can't know that. And so he has answered Jung but at the price
of separating knowledge from that which is independent of the mind. I guess you have to
decide whether this was a price worth paying. Has he really answered Jung? Well, he's got knowledge.
Jung had said that we can have knowledge about the relationships among our own ideas.
What we cannot have knowledge of, according to Jung, if you recollect from the last lecture,
is knowledge of matters of fact. Kant also says we cannot have knowledge of matters of fact if,
by matters of fact, you mean the way things are out there in the world, which is, in fact,
what Jung meant. So it seems to me that if Jung had been alive, Jung died in 1776,
just missing the American Revolution and also missing by just four years the Kant's critique
of pure reason. If Jung, who was a genial fellow, not at all dogmatic, if Jung had been alive when
the critique of pure reason was published, it's not clear to me that Jung would have responded
by saying I am refuted, as opposed to putting his arm around Kant and saying we're really very
close to each other, Emmanuel. You hold that there is no knowledge of the thing in itself.
I hold that there is no knowledge of the thing in itself. I call that matters of fact. You claim
that knowledge is real, but it's a relationship among our ideas. I hold that we can have knowledge,
that is, a relationship among our ideas. Kant said that the way to solve the knowledge problem
is by attributing self-activity to the mind. A word that will occur in the 19th century and
that we're going to be using in subsequent lectures is originary, that the mind originates
its own activity. The mind has an innate active structure. It is not neutral.
Kant really started a line of thinking. What happens if you take seriously the idea of the
self-activity of mind? Kant gave the self-activity of the mind an ahistorical, an ahistorical
character. It is timeless, universal, rigid. According to Kant, these are the only categories
that human beings have ever had or ever will have. It's part of the definition of being a human being
to think in this way, that the understanding is structured in this way, that the senses are
structured in that way. When in a subsequent lecture we discuss briefly non-Euclidean geometry,
that becomes a refutation, one refutation of Kant, because it turns out we can conceptualize space
in ways other than Euclidean geometry. In fact, in the 19th century, the role attributed to history
in the development of nature, including the development of the mind and concepts,
also refutes the ahistoricity of Kant's theory. One can say that at a certain level,
Kant's theory of knowledge was refuted within decades in detail, but his broader conception
of an idealistic approach to knowledge, reality, and truth, in which the mind plays a critical,
active role in determining what we call knowledge, truth, and reality, and the objects of knowledge
and truth become very, very influential ideas. We're not going to explore it in this course,
but for example, Kant's greatest heir was the German idealist Hegel, who was enormously
influential in the 19th century, including in this sort of inverted way, in his influence on
Karl Marx, who as he said in his own words stood, Hegel was standing on his head and I stood him
upright. He flipped around Hegel's focus on spirit and mind, and made it a focus on matter,
and Marx's scientific materialism has some similarities to Hegel's version of Kantian
idealism, which he extended rather dramatically, so that the mind could have knowledge of reality,
but in Kant, of course, the mind does not. The object of knowledge is constructed by the mind,
but there is one last comparison to Jung that I want to make before concluding this examination
of Kant, and that is that Jung can also say, Immanuel, I also attributed self-activity to the
mind. I also had a theory, I referred to it in the previous lecture briefly, as Jung's
associationistic psychology. Jung had formulated what he thought was a Newtonian physics of the
mind, that's what he called it, a mechanics of the mind in which our ideas are not freely chosen
by us at all. They appear in lawful patterns and sequences, key to what Jung thought were three
fundamental laws of association. Ideas follow one another in the way that they do. We think of
what we do when we do, not because we decide, I think I'll think about going on vacation now.
There are ideas are linked by laws of resemblance, contiguity in space and time,
contiguity, not continuity, contiguity, closeness in space and time, space and or time,
and cause and effect relationship. And so we have, the mind is not a thing with a little
homunculus inside that decides, I think I'll think about this now. Well, that wasn't very
interesting. Now I think about that. The flow of ideas within the mind is not under our conscious
control. It observes certain laws of nature. And so Jung can say, I also had a theory that the
self-activity of the mind, in this case, it is the natural laws that guide the sequencing of our
ideas is also a factor in determining how we think, what we think, what we think of, etc.
So that there are some startling similarities between Kant and Jung in spite of the fact that
Kant initially drew this very sharp distinction between the two of them. And you remember I said
that Kant was roused by Jung from his dogmatic slumbers, but then a number of philosophers
subsequently said, and then he promptly went back to sleep again after he had formulated
his own theory and decided that his theory solved the problem. And that was the end of it,
as we will see as we move on to the 19th century. This turns out not to be the case,
but we need to look at one more aspect of the 18th century before we can do that. And that is
the social perception, the social and cultural impact of the perception that science was generating
knowledge, not just the philosophical impact, but the social and cultural impact in England
and Europe, especially in Europe, that natural philosophers were now the new source of knowledge.
