These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled, Science Wars, What Scientists Know, and How They Know It, Part 2.
Lecture 13. Scientific Truth in the Early 20th Century.
With this lecture, we move into the 20th century.
And as I've mentioned before, centuries, of course, are artificial periodizations.
Nevertheless, we do have certain expectations, doubtless for psychological and social reasons.
We tend to think that centuries represent breakpoints and that something different happens in the 20th century,
because it's the 20th century and it's no longer the 19th century,
as if the century could exert some kind of influence on the events that take place in the century.
And as a matter of fact, what we're going to be looking at in the next lectures
is the shift in the treatment of the knowledge problem in science, as we've been calling it,
from the 19th century in which the problem was dominated by scientists seeing this as a problem
for science that needed to be addressed by scientists to a problem that was perceived to be a problem
in science to be addressed by philosophers.
So there is going to be a shift, although it doesn't occur, obviously, on January 1st, 1900.
There's a transition, and I'm going to be speaking in this lecture in particular about three figures,
about the French mathematician and mathematical physicist Henri Poincaré,
the American physicist Percy Williams-Bridgeman, and the English mathematical logician Bertrand Russell.
They will be placed in the line of thinking that we have been exploring throughout the 19th century,
beginning with John Herschel and his revival of the Baconian theory of scientific knowledge, you'll recall.
His colleague William Ewell and his sort of historicized Kantian view of scientific knowledge
as critically dependent on fundamental ideas which are creatively invented by scientists
and which anchor the deductive character of scientific knowledge.
Auguste Comte and his developmental theory of mind and of the way we experience the world
and the way we conceptualize the world.
John Stuart Mills enhanced version of inductive logic in order to anchor the objective reality of scientific knowledge.
Ernst Maas' phenomenalism, the view that the object of scientific knowledge is not the world at all, but our experience.
Pierre Duem's version of that, his conventionalist version of that,
with reaching effectively the same conclusion or a similar conclusion,
and the physicist Heinrich Hertz's theory of scientific knowledge as essentially logically consistent,
but not giving us a picture of the reality behind experience.
Now before adding Poincaré, Bridgman and Russell to this line of thought,
I want to share with you what seems to me in the context of this course a rather delicious irony
and one which is very important in terms of revealing the nature of what we have been exploring,
what will eventually erupt explicitly as the science wars in the 1980s and 1990s,
the way that the knowledge problem is anchored in an empirical reality about science.
By 1900, science mattered to society in ways that it had never mattered before.
Science was no longer an intellectual curiosity or a prestigious intellectual accomplishment,
by the early 1900s science mattered to society in quite practical and concrete ways.
Science in the second half of the 19th century had developed theories in chemistry and in physics,
for example, and also in biology, that were creating wealth, power and prestige
at the national level for nations, but also for individuals.
Industry was increasingly seen as driven by science-based technological innovation.
Think of the chemical industry in the second half of the 19th century with its invention of synthetic dyes,
of new kinds of pharmaceuticals, of synthetic fertilizers, of the first synthetic materials,
bake lights, for example, and the first plastics in physics, the relationship of physics
to emerging electrical industry technologies, the telegraph, the telephone, radio,
new transportation technologies and the role that thermodynamics played in improving the efficiency
and the power of internal combustion engines, for example, so that in industry,
in government, which increasingly saw science as providing both military power
and economic growth through its stimulation of technological innovation,
and in the public mind as well, all of a sudden science and especially science-based engineering
and medicine were in the early decades of the 20th century perceived as very important.
And of course, as the 20th century advanced, the science mattered more and more to society
and continues to matter more and more to us in more and more complex ways.
So, science in the early 1900s was recognized broadly as being important.
Now, what's ironic about this is, is that what made science matter to society in the early 1900s
was the consequence of the theories of the 19th century, some of which we've referred to in earlier lectures,
the mathematical, physical theories, the thermodynamics, the chemistry, etc.,
that 19th century theories turned out to be pregnant with important applications
that were literally transforming our lives and the world.
But the opening decades of the 20th century were also the time when radical new scientific theories
were being formulated, the special theory of relativity, the general theory of relativity,
quantum theory, genetics, and those theories were throwing out the 19th century theories.
That's the irony. Science mattered because of the fruits, as Francis Bacon predicted,
the fruits that suddenly were flowing from the cornucopia of scientific knowledge,
that when we had knowledge of nature we would get control over nature, and we've got it.
And we're proud, and we know that science now is knowledge of nature,
and that's happening at exactly the time when scientists are saying,
you know those 19th century theories of electromagnetism and Newtonian mechanics,
it's all wrong. That is an irony that should remind us of Fourier's move.
You recall Fourier in 1822 published his analytical theory of heat in which he explicitly separated
the functional value or the functional correctness of a scientific theory,
namely a set of equations that correctly describe the way heat behaves
without making any statements whatsoever about what heat is ontologically, what it really is.
Separate those two issues. Forget trying to identify scientific equations with a picture of the world
and say, do the equations generate logical consequences that parallel what we experience of the world?
So this move, whose echoes in mathematical physics, thermodynamics, statistical mechanics,
the kinetic theory of gases we've talked about in previous lectures,
this move manifests itself in this irony here, that science was being productive for society
based on theories that the scientists themselves were in the process of disproving as knowledge.
So that as we had done in an earlier lecture in which I asked the question
from the perspective of the 19th century, what did the pioneers of modern science in the 18th century
really know, whereby know we mean having universal and necessary and certain knowledge
of the external world, of nature, of the causes of experience.
And we have to say that they didn't really know it.
They had developed a set of ideas that in some important respects worked,
but did not really qualify as knowledge.
And here we see the same thing about 19th century theories seen from the perspective of the early 20th century.
So we are going to explore this transition in the next few lectures
and the implications of these new theories which are not improvements of 19th century theories, as we shall see,
but create new realities, redefine reality in deep and significant ways.
In this lecture though, I want to now focus on Poincaré, Bridgman and Russell
as three thinkers that in some respects transitional, but represent three scientists,
mathematicians and scientists, in the case of Russell, a mathematical logician,
who developed important theories of scientific knowledge,
sort of the tail end of that movement we've been tracing since the early 1800s
in which scientists felt that it was necessary for them to address this problem.
Let me begin with Henri Poincaré.
Poincaré was quite an elegant French mathematician and mathematical physicist.
He was a bit unusual in that he not only was a world-class mathematician,
but also was deeply made important contributions to mathematical physics
and even to problems in engineering and engineering mechanics.
He did not have any sort of highfalutin notions about pure science being somehow superior to applied science,
as if you did pure science brilliantly, then you didn't bother with applied science.
So he actually made a wide range of very profound contributions.
There is something in mathematics called the Poincaré conjecture,
which is extraordinarily subtle and complicated,
even to describe qualitatively having to do with three-dimensionality
and the properties of three-dimensional space,
which he generalized to the properties of any dimensional space,
that there would be certain features of any dimensional space
that could be generalized based on what he had been exploring
as certain so-called topological features of three-dimensional space.
Though the Poincaré conjecture remained a conjecture of Poincaré's,
he couldn't prove it, he conjectured that this theorem was true
and attempts by mathematicians to prove it had systematically failed over the 20th century
and just at the very end of the 20th, at the beginning of the 21st century,
a young Russian mathematician named Grigori Perlman proposed a proof,
offered a proof of the Poincaré conjecture,
which is being tested and seems to be definitive,
that it is, in fact, finally a proof,
and it's very important from the point of view of developing certain aspects
of what's called differential geometry and topology.
Poincaré himself, in an essay that he contributed to a congratulatory volume
on the 60th birthday of the king of Norway and Sweden,
they were then the same country with a single king,
and it's interesting that the king thought that to celebrate a 60th birthday,
it would be nice to have a collection of essays written by prominent scientists and mathematicians.
And Poincaré contributed an essay which, interestingly, had an error
which was just caught in time to be corrected before publication,
but in the paper he actually had what is now considered
the first known mathematical description of chaotic motion and chaos,
and so he's sort of a founder of chaos theory.
Poincaré was deeply committed to philosophy of science
as an activity that was appropriate for scientists,
and Poincaré's philosophy of science was a very distinctive one.
For Poincaré, and this is why I've emphasized,
his practical contributions to pure and applied science
as well as his genius as a mathematician,
for Poincaré the only objective reality was what he called
the internal harmony of the world,
and that mathematics was a convenient language
for articulating the internal harmony of the world.
Now, what does this mean, the internal harmony of the world?
Think of the game of chess.
In effect, chess is the game is the set of rules.
It has nothing to do with the pieces.
The pieces can have any shape whatsoever,
as long as they are marked so that you know which is a pawn and which is a knight,
and so which piece is permitted to make which moves
which are derived, of course, from the rules of the game,
so you could play chess with human beings taking the place of plastic pieces
or ivory pieces or carved aluminum pieces,
and they could be any shape you want.
They don't have to be in the shape of a king and a queen or a horse and a bishop.
All that matters in chess are the rules that determine the internal harmony
using Poincaré's language of the game.
Analogously, Poincaré said that what we mean by objective reality
is the internal harmony of the world that we experience.
In order to explicate this internal harmony and to articulate it,
we need to use mathematics because it is the language of relationships.
It is a convenient language.
Now, Poincaré is often called a conventionalist,
but there's a big difference between what he meant by a convenient language
and to say that, for example, that the concepts scientists use are conventional,
that they somehow vote on how you should define what space means, what matter means.
For Poincaré, the convenience of mathematics is somehow related to the fact that mathematics
in fact captures the patterns of the internal harmony of the world,
that the rule-based behavior of the world is captured in mathematics.
The word convenience for Poincaré means that there's a closer relationship
between the mathematical equations in science and the world
than is suggested by the term convention.
The only objective reality is the internal harmony of the world.
What makes it objective?
According to Poincaré, what makes scientific knowledge objective
is that it is a shared conceptualization of experience.
This is a very powerful and profound notion, which we are going to see echoed
in later thinkers in the course of the 20th century,
and it kind of telegraphs what scientists perceived as a radical conception of knowledge
in the 1970s and 80s, the notion that scientific knowledge is socially constructed.
But Poincaré was among the most eminent of all scientists and mathematicians,
and for him, what made scientific knowledge objective
was that it was based on a shared conceptualization of the world,
not the only possible conceptualization of the world,
but a description of the world, which is based on a group of concepts
that are shared by anyone who's willing to make the effort to adopt those concepts
and to use them and mathematics in order to describe experience.
On Poincaré's view then, the object of scientific knowledge
is not a reality existing independent of experience.
The object of scientific knowledge is experience under a particular kind of description,
namely a description under the shared concepts that the scientific community uses
because they turn out to be convenient for describing the internal harmony of the world,
for capturing the internal harmony of the world.
So, for Poincaré, truth, science is truth and science is knowledge,
but not in the sense in which we philosophers have thought of it as absolute truth,
as knowledge that is unique, uniquely true,
in capturing what reality is like out there behind our experience.
The second thinker that I'd like to discuss is Percy Williams Bridgeman.
Bridgeman was born in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
He was raised in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
He went to Harvard as an undergraduate and got his bachelor's degree there.
He went to Harvard for his master's degree and his doctoral degree,
and he got his first job at Harvard and he stayed at Harvard.
In 1926, being appointed a full professor of mathematics and natural philosophy,
that term hung on in many elite intellectual institutions as opposed to science,
professor of mathematics and natural philosophy.
Bridgeman was an eminent experimental scientist.
He was famous for and won a Nobel Prize in physics
and his researches on the behavior of materials at very high pressures
and at high temperatures.
So, for example, if you subject a metal to pressures of thousands of pounds per square inch,
what will its electrical conductivity be like?
What will its thermal conductivity be like?
And in order to do this, he had to, in many cases,
put new kinds of equipment that would achieve extremely high pressure
and sensors to measure the physical properties of materials under these extraordinary conditions.
And it turned out, and the reason why he got the Nobel Prize,
it turned out that this turned out to be very fruitful.
Both the instruments that he helped pioneer and the studies that he made
turned out to be very fruitful in scientific theory,
but also in technological applications.
Bridgeman was a first-rate experimental scientist
and he was also, as Poincare was, committed to the view that as a professional scientist,
he needed to articulate a theory of scientific knowledge,
which he did in at least two books, especially one called The Logic of Modern Physics.
Bridgeman was deeply impressed by the role that measuring operations played
in the special theory of relativity and the general theory of relativity.
Einstein, in, so to speak, inventing the special and general theories of relativity,
asked some very simple questions about how you would measure a spatial interval,
how would you, at rest in your laboratory, measure the length of a moving body?
How would you measure that two events occurred simultaneously?
Now it turns out that these were fundamental measurement operations for the special theory of relativity.
In the case of the general theory of relativity, it had been an assumption of Newtonian mechanics
that gravitational mass, which is what we call weight, and inertial mass,
the resistance of a material object to moving, to being accelerated, that they are always equal.
Einstein made that a principle of the general theory of relativity
that they are equivalent, that inertial mass and gravitational mass,
and that was based on a generalization by Einstein of a series of experiments
by a Hungarian physicist named Erdfersh of showing that to a high degree of precision
these two numbers were in fact equal.
Bridgeman looked at the theory of relativity.
He felt that Einstein's line of reasoning here revealed something very important about science,
about scientific knowledge, which was this,
that measuring operations are capable of causing us to reconceptualize reality,
what we mean by reality.
For, Bridgeman developed a philosophy of science, a theory of scientific knowledge,
that he called operationalism, in which the meaning of a scientific concept
is the set of operations that must be performed in order to measure that concept.
Every concept to be meaningful must be translated into a set of operations
that are specified for how you measure it.
So what does momentum mean? What does velocity mean? What do we mean by space?
What do we mean by time? You have to flesh that out by telling me,
how do you measure spatial intervals? How do you measure temporal intervals?
How do you measure momentum? How do you measure velocity, etc.?
The meaning of the concept is associated with the set of operations
that you must specify in order to measure that concept.
From Bridgeman's point of view then, the object of scientific knowledge, again,
is not external reality, is not a reality that is independent of experience,
it is the product, the object of scientific knowledge is the resultant
of a network of concepts that scientists use,
most of which are operationally analyzed,
some of which they never get around to operationally analyzing,
that are left ambiguous operationally,
and the result of using this particular network of concepts
defines what science is about.
Science is about objects that scientists themselves create
through the concepts that they use.
We're going to be exploring this idea in much greater detail
in the course of the subsequent lectures,
and so it will become clearer exactly what this means,
but that's a very powerful notion that the object of scientific knowledge
is somehow created by the activity of doing science.
We don't find those objects in the world, the scientific community
creates those objects through the concepts that they use.
The third thinker is Bertrand Russell,
an Englishman with a rather checkered personal history.
He was the son of a Viscount, his mother was the daughter of a Baron,
he himself ascended to the earldom in 1931,
very strong political beliefs and activism,
right from the First World War through the Vietnam War,
but Russell was a very important contributor to modern mathematical logic
and he was also one of the founders of a movement in philosophy
called analytical philosophy,
and that is part of his legacy because in the next lecture,
but one, we're going to be looking in detail at logical positivism,
one of the dominant approaches to the philosophy of science,
the theory of scientific knowledge in the middle 20th century.
Russell's philosophy of scientific knowledge was based on his absolute conviction
that the key to knowledge is logic.
So unlike Bridgeman and Poincare,
for Russell, science is knowledge of the external world.
Scientific knowledge has a deductive, logically necessary universal character
and it is capable of doing that because according to Russell's view,
the world is an ensemble, a collection of atomic facts,
atomic in the sense that every fact out there in our experience
that what we experience through our senses contains what's out there in the world
and that they are independent of one another.
We cannot take one fact and from that fact find its relationship to another fact.
Relationships among the facts of experience are themselves facts
and that logic, if you have the right logical language,
you could write a set of sentences in this logically perspicuous, transparent language
in which that would stand in a one-to-one relationship to the world
because the world is a collection of facts,
the facts and their relationships can be captured in logical sentences,
sentences in which the logical connectives are either true or false,
that's called truth-functional connectives,
and so every statement you make about the world is either true or false
and if it's based on facts, observable facts,
that can be compared with the content of the sentences,
then you can have a description of the world, a picture of the world if you will,
that is decisive.
This is this approach to knowledge and truth
in which logic is the key to our descriptions of the world,
to our logic, to our knowledge claims,
was also fundamental to Russell's attempt in the early decades of the 20th century,
which in fact is what made him initially famous,
first with Alfred North Whitehead and then on his own,
to reduce all of mathematics to logic.
This was the project that Gottlob Frege at the end of the 19th century
was attempting in the case of arithmetic and published a large work
in which he claimed to have reduced arithmetic to logic
and was now working on another volume to reduce geometry to logic
and those are the two foundational branches of mathematics.
If you could reduce both arithmetic and geometry to logic,
then mathematics reduces to logic
and Russell sent Frege a note indicating that there was a fundamental logical flaw
on his book on reducing arithmetic
and Gottlob Frege had to acknowledge it and say,
well, you know, there goes my life's work,
but the book was published in any event,
but the effort clearly had failed.
Russell then thought that he could repair the flaw
and that he could figure out how to reduce mathematics to logic.
Very important move because at the end of the 19th century,
the questions had arisen about the nature of mathematical truth and knowledge.
For Russell, if you could reduce mathematics to logic,
then these questions are resolved
because logic is what we mean by knowledge and truth.
Knowledge is logical knowledge, truth is logical truth,
and so for physical science, he was doing the same thing
that he had attempted to do for mathematics.
The project after many volumes and a tremendous amount of work
was perceived to be a technical failure,
but it was enormously rich because it founded 20th century mathematical logic
in some respects along with the work of Frege,
but for our purposes, Russell's book,
Our Knowledge of the External World, in a semi-popular way,
contains the germ of what we call analytical philosophy,
analytical logical approach to philosophical questions,
which identifies as a central feature of philosophizing analysis of language
because many philosophical problems, Russell claimed,
are the result of not having a perspicuous language,
of not having a language which minimizes connotation and equivocation,
and so he caused, in a certain sense, philosophers,
he and others in England especially in the early 20th century,
to become very sensitive to the analysis of language
rather than plunging into solutions to philosophical questions
to analyze the terms that were being used carefully,
and this is indeed related to the analytical philosophy of science,
the idea that if one could use a logically perspicuous language,
one could capture these atomic facts about the world that our senses give us,
sense data is the name given to these objective inputs from the world,
and if we pay careful attention to them and to their relationships,
then we would be able to have a science that was about the world,
not just about experience that actually captured the world and its relationships,
and it would be a deductive system and would therefore give us true philosophical knowledge
and not merely summarize experience.
This, as I said, was an important influence on the movement called logical positivism,
but we will see how this story becomes more complex and unfolds in the next few lectures.
