Lecture 16 Truth, Ideology, and Thought Collectives
At the end of lecture 14, with the discussion of the perceived failure of logical positivism to ground an objective theory of scientific knowledge, it seemed as though we were poised to move into the 1960s because I mentioned, for example,
that there is one more strand of that we need to weave into the story that I've been telling before we can actually appreciate the upheaval that took place in the 1960s and 70s with respect to the possibility of objective knowledge.
That strand has to do with the claim that scientific knowledge, that thinking, that reasonable, reasoned thinking, reasoning is a social enterprise, is a social activity, not an individual activity.
Quite a startling idea given the Western cultural tradition and the Western philosophical tradition from the time of Plato's character Socrates clearly embodies this notion that thinking is something that is carried on by the individual,
that a recognition of truth, that the achievement of wisdom and knowledge are activities that individuals engage in and only rare individuals achieve inevitably only after overcoming limitations from their social environment.
So that reasoning is an individual activity and truth and knowledge are accomplishments of the individual and the individual has to fight against negative influences that come from the social environment.
We saw this, for example, in Francis Bacon's arguments about the idols, the idols of the tribe, of the cave, of the marketplace and of the theater, all of which in one way or another represent negative obstacles, negative influences or obstacles to clear thinking that come either from our natures as biological creatures or from our social environment.
Descartes really epitomizes this idea of clear thinking as something that goes on in the individual mind. Mind for Descartes and in fact mind in the Western intellectual tradition generally is what we essentially are.
Mind is what makes us human. We are rational animals and it is thinking and it is reasoning clearly that is our highest achievement according to this tradition.
In Descartes, the individual mind is the centerpiece of philosophy, of the pursuit of truth and knowledge and the individual mind is that which Descartes says, the individual knows best of all.
Our mind is who and what we essentially are, most essentially are if they're so quintessentially. That's what we are, mind, and our mind is available to us if we make the effort.
We can know our minds. Our minds are transparent to us in principle even though our social interactions clutter up access to our mind through the equivocal nature of language and all kinds of opinions and beliefs that have been drummed into us since childhood, etc.
But we can overcome all of that. So this matches very well this notion of reasoning and thinking and of the accomplishment of knowledge as an individual activity that each person has to fight their way through, has to fight that battle in order to win truth and knowledge matches very well the individualistic thrust of modern Western culture.
The political individualism, the social atomism, the idea that each human being is a kind of a social atom. So this individualistic notion of reasoning matches that political notion and it's reinforced by the Renaissance concept of the genius as genius as something possessed by individuals who are to be admired because they have this personal quality.
And we still see this, of course, in modern society as well, in which we go much too far in assuming that people of high accomplishment did it all themselves and we think that it somehow detracts from a person, from a writer, when we discover that their editor played an active role in trimming their manuscript.
Or that a colleague made suggested modifications to a poem or that an effort was a team effort, a collaborative effort, rather than doing it all yourself.
This notion of individualism at the intellectual level, that intellectual accomplishment is an individual accomplishment, which requires that the mind be perspicuous, that it be clear to itself, was challenged in a number of ways right from the 17th century.
And some of these we've already seen. For example, one challenge came from naturalistic theories of mind, which said that we in fact did not control our minds. We did not control the content of our consciousness.
We have already seen this in a piece of this in Hobbes, much more of it in Jung with his associationistic theory of psychology, that the flow of ideas in our minds is determined by certain laws of association resemblance, contiguity and space and time and causality are the three great laws, the primary laws that are essentially a Newtonian physics of the mind.
So what Jung was saying was just as Newtonian physics imposes a kind of deterministic scheme on the motion of matter. So his Newtonian physics of the mind, his mechanics of the mind, meant that there's a deterministic flow to our consciousness.
We don't choose to think of what we think of when we think of it. Those are the ideas that pop up in our heads, in Hobbes and in Leibniz and in the 18th century, in the Frenchman Condiac and in such pioneer neuroanatomists as Pierre Cabanes, that the idea that thinking is a kind of materialistic response to external stimuli.
And that reasoning is a form of calculating. There's nothing special about it if you could figure out a clear language with no connotation, where every term in the language meant one specific thing.
And then you defined the appropriate syntax and semantics for that language, then you could, as Leibniz argued, you could calculate solutions to problems in a quite mechanical, logical, mechanical way.
Analogous to the way a mechanical calculator calculated the solution to an addition problem. So that reasoning on this view is not all that special. It can be made artificial.
Hobbes clearly thought that that was the case and the idea that reasoning was a species of calculating and all the rest is emotionality is quite prominent by the end of the 18th century.
And the idea that the content of consciousness is not freely chosen is also prominent, especially in the wake of Hume's associationistic psychology, which was developed even further by the Frenchman Condiac and by others.
A second challenge came from the idea that the content of consciousness is in fact driven or determined by unconscious factors so that we have no right in a certain sense to be proud of the content of consciousness.
What we are consciously aware of is a response to factors that we are not conscious of and therefore not in control of.
Now the history of the unconscious actually goes way back beyond Freud. The 19th century, especially attempting theories of hypnotism, were very concerned with trying to identify the activity of an unconscious level in the mind that affects the conscious level.
But of course, for us, the most prominent figures in dealing with the unconscious are Freud and Carl Jung, who extended the power of the unconscious to the collective unconscious and these archetypal forms of experience that we inherited and that shape of the way we experienced the world.
There is a figure that is typically ignored nowadays, although he was very prominent in the first decades of the 20th century, a German psychoanalyst named George Grodeck, who wrote what was essentially a bestseller called the Book of the It, thus Book von Es, the It being an unconscious real self inside us, inside the mind, that really determines how we behave and experience the world.
And if the ego of which we are conscious gets out of sync with the It, then that is what causes neurosis and psychosis. This was of some influence on Freud and Freud was quite friendly with Grodeck.
He was probably the only psychoanalyst who was not a Freudian that Freud accepted and maybe tolerated his little unkind. But there was so this notion of the unconscious as shaping consciousness is a second challenge to the Cartesian and more generally western notion of the mind as transparent to itself.
And that's important because if thinking is an individual activity and then in order to get clarity in thinking we need to be able to in a sense control and discipline our mind.
But the challenge to the Cartesian, what I will call the Platonic Cartesian view, Socrates view of the individual achieving wisdom and the Cartesian view of the individual achieving knowledge, the challenge that I want to focus on for the rest of this lecture is the challenge that came from the side of arguing that reasoning is a social and activity.
And in the 19th century, well actually we already have mentioned an 18th century figure, Montesquieu, who in his books The Persian Letters and the Spirit of the Laws argued that physical factors affected social values and institutions, environmental factors for example.
But it was really in the 19th century that we get this historical view, this historicist view that maybe can be said to begin with the German Gottfried Herder, who built on the ideas of the Italian Giambattista Vico, whose book was published early in the 18th century but ignored really until Herder sort of represented those ideas, arguing that every culture has a distinctive character that ideas are
can only be understood in the context of their time and their individual cultural, the total cultural context. And this in the course of the 19th century was echoed, for example, we have already talked about Nietzsche's notion that consciousness is
perspectival, that reasoning is always from a perspective, for us that means always within the context of a certain set of assumptions. I've referred earlier to Gestalt psychology in the early 20th century, the concept of selective attention, building on an idea in William James that our consciousness is always selective.
But Marx, Karl Marx initially with Engels, but then Marx really argued most aggressively for the idea that consciousness is determined by social factors, which are themselves determined by economic relations and those are significantly influenced by the state of technology of a society.
The important thing here is Marx had a theory that consciousness, that thinking is influenced by material factors and social relationships. And that meant for him that in a society in which there was a class conflict that thinking was inevitably ideological, which meant that you could have a false consciousness.
With the best of intentions, the way you saw the world was a reflection of the particular constellation of social factors that you experienced. It wasn't that you were deliberately lying or deceiving or pretending, but that if you were a member of the ruling class, if you were a member of the working class, if you were a member of the bourgeoisie, then you experienced the world in a way that determined the way you thought about the world.
Only in a classless society could there be what you might call clear thinking, non-ideological thinking. All other thinking was shaped in perspectival ways to use Nietzsche's language, was shaped in parochial ways by the particular set of social factors that influenced you.
This idea in a non-Marxist form occurs, for example, in the anthropologist Franz Boas in the early 20th century, especially his work in American, is influenced on relativistic cultural anthropology and on the effect that languages have, that the language we speak influences the way we experience the world, which is sometimes called the Sapir-Warf hypothesis, both influenced by Boas, Boas' teachings as an anthropologist and a comparative linguist.
Boas was a very powerful and fertile thinker, influenced sociology and linguistics and anthropology very substantially.
This whole line of thought comes to a head, as far as we're concerned, in the 1930s with two primary figures.
The first one is Carl Mannheim, a German sociologist who published a book called Ideology in Utopia, which is, in a certain sense, the founding text of sociology of knowledge.
Not that there were no people before who had, obviously people had, talked about the social dimension of knowledge before, but Mannheim was focused attention on this concept that knowledge, knowledge is a social construct, that knowledge has a social dimension to it.
Now, for Mannheim, influenced by Marxism, intellectually influenced by Marxism, Mannheim argued that knowledge is ideological in the sense that all claims to knowledge reflect a particular kind of bias, reflect a particular set of influences,
so that claims to knowledge are not truly neutral, they always incorporate values that reflect the biases, the prejudices, the experiences of the individual or the groups that claim that knowledge.
For us, the important thing is here that knowledge is, has a social, and essentially social dimension to it, but Mannheim excluded science and mathematics, because Mannheim was also influenced by the prevailing social phenomenon that I have called the imperialism of scientific knowledge.
So, Mannheim said, of course, scientific and mathematical knowledge are purely technical, purely, they are value neutral, so they are outside the, all other claims to knowledge are ideological, but not science and scientific and mathematical knowledge.
And so the sociology of knowledge between the 1930s and the 1960s, largely focused on the conduct of science, but not the content of scientific theories.
The content of scientific theories was, of course, about nature, and the warrant for that is what we discussed in our last lecture.
But the conduct of science, well, of course, who becomes a scientist and how many of them are members of the upper class and the working class and why they study what they study, those, the conduct of science is something that can be studied sociologically.
And one of the founding texts of that was Robert Merton, who in the late 1930s published his doctoral dissertation on the relative presence of Catholics and Protestants in the Royal Society in the 17th century, when modern science first emerged, as we have discussed so many times.
So, this turned out to be a very influential book, a very influential study, in which he argued that there was a wildly disproportionate percentage of Protestants, arguing that the Catholic character of Englishmen in that generation somehow influenced whether they would become scientists,
and that the Protestant characters strongly influenced that they would, and the Catholic that they would not. That has nothing to do with whether he's right or wrong, but this was an example of a sociological study of the conduct of science.
A dissenting voice in the 1930s and after came from the physicist or physical chemist right on the border of physics and chemistry, J.D. Bernal, who was an aggressive political Marxist as well as intellectual Marxist, a communist activist, and he was, he argued that the content of scientific theories also reflects the prevailing, prevailing values.
So that, for example, Newtonian physics is capitalist physics, and that there would be a decisively different kind of physics in a classless society, in a society in which the class comes.
But I would say that these ideas of Bernal's were pretty much dismissed as, well, that's Bernal and his Marxism. Bernal, perhaps as a scientist, was underappreciated because of his explicit and overt political activity.
He is said to be one of the characters in C.P. Snow's novel, The Search, and if you read that, you can easily pick out who Bernal is. His scientific accomplishments are substantial.
The figure in the 1930s, the second figure, so the first figure was Mannheim, the second figure, is really peculiar, and he's the one that I want to spend the rest of the lecture discussing.
A Polish immunologist by the name of Ludwig Fleck, who lived in the city of Lviv, Poland, and can be said in some sense to have been outside the center of Western European intellectual activity, not necessarily scientific activity,
and of course, at this time in the 1930s, Polish logicians were playing perhaps the dominant role in the development of mathematical logic in the first half of the 20th century.
So it was not as if he were functioning in an intellectual vacuum, but in so far as these questions of sociology of knowledge, the nature of scientific knowledge, the object of scientific knowledge, all of those questions that we've been discussing,
those were not issues in Fleck's immediate environment, and he himself was a world-class immunologist, and yet he produced in 1935 a monograph called The Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact,
which remained relatively unknown until the 1960s and was only translated into English, I believe, in 1979. But the content of this monograph is really quite startling.
Fleck was a perfect example of a scientist who believed that it was his obligation as a scientist to address what we have been calling the knowledge problem in science.
And he took the history of syphilis and the development of what was by the 1930s accepted as the definitive test for syphilis, the so-called Wasserman test for syphilis, which identifies the presence or absence of a particular spirochete,
the spirochete called palida in the blood as a sign that the individual has or does not have syphilis. He took the history of this disease and the history of the test for it as a vehicle for exploring the way that scientific knowledge is socially produced,
that scientific reasoning is a social phenomenon, not an individual phenomenon. He adapted or paraphrased a saying by Ludwig Gumpelowitz who said, this is Fleck's version of it, individual scientists do not think, scientific collectives think through individual scientists.
Let's think about that. This is 180 degrees about from Socrates and Plato and the modern western cultural prejudice for the individual, for the genius, for thinking as something, well of course thinking goes on inside the mind of individuals,
but what Fleck was arguing was the thinking going on in the mind of an individual scientist is shaped and controlled to a degree by the collective to which that individual belongs.
And if the individual does not belong to a collective, they cannot be doing science for the same reason that you cannot be speaking a language if you make noises that nobody else understands.
In the same sense that language is a fundamentally social phenomenon, science is a fundamentally social phenomenon in that what it means to do science is to employ assumptions, to employ terms and definitions,
to reason in ways that other people called scientists will recognize and respond to. They may agree with you, they may disagree with you, but they recognize that what you are doing is science.
So one, Fleck argued that there was such a thing we can see in the history of the disease entity called syphilis. We can see how social and cultural values affect the assumptions that scientists make when they reason about a phenomenon.
In the case of syphilis, what complex of symptoms defines this unique disease entity? Is there such a unique disease entity given the fact that the symptom set overlaps the symptoms of other diseases?
What makes you think that there is such a disease as syphilis? Maybe this is just a variety of other diseases that are analogous to syphilis.
He showed how over time from the 16th century, when syphilis became of deep concern to Europeans, until the early 20th century, the conceptualization of syphilis as a disease changed in ways that reflected prevailing social ideas and values.
So the content of science was not free of influence, because the influence from society could affect the assumptions that were made, which affected the reasoning that scientists engaged in.
That's one observation. Second observation, and this is something that actually echoes Dewey, although not that Fleck know, that scientists have a clear prejudice to reify, to make things out of processes and patterns.
That syphilis, once you give it the name, is now a thing as opposed to a name for a certain symptom set and its evolution over time.
This phenomenon that science proceeds by thingifying, reifying aspects of experience that occur within processes and patterns and giving a name to them, making a noun out of what we experience as a verb, so to speak.
That making a thing out of it is fundamental to doing science, that, to put it more broadly, classification is fundamental to doing science, and that classification schemes are not unique.
That leads us to the third and perhaps most powerful of Fleck's observations, which is that in order to do science at all, you must begin with what he called active associations.
You must begin with what I have been calling assumptions, but which are better looked at here as measures.
Percy Bridgeman would have loved that, that you must first impose a metric on experience before you can reason about it.
Let me give you a really simple illustration of this. Suppose I ask you to measure the volume of the room.
We'll set aside the question at the moment of what do you mean by the volume of the room?
Is it enclosed by the walls, the floor, and the ceiling, or are we going to take into account furnishings, for example?
But let's say we agree what the room has a volume. So I ask you, what's the volume of the room? I can't tell you that until you tell me what metric you want.
You want it in feet, meters, centimeters, inches, what do you want?
As soon as you tell me the metric, there is one answer that everyone will get if they measure it accurately, and we can say that is the correct answer.
But until you tell me the metric, I can't tell you what the volume of the room is, even though I agree with you that there is a volume.
Nobody denies that the room has a volume, but I can't answer the question what is the volume of the room until you give me a metric.
Fleck did not use such a simple-minded example, but he said this is the nature of all scientific reasoning.
In order to answer any questions about nature scientifically, you must first start with what he called active associations.
You must first start with setting up some metrics. What are the principles and assumptions in accordance with which you're going to respond to that question?
Once you identify the active associations, then what he called the passive relations, the actual number, 72 cubic feet, comes out deductively.
The passive relations, the answers to the questions that we ask scientists about nature can be deduced from the active associations together with relevant data.
I'm measuring the volume of the room. With the approved ruler in feet, I come up with an answer in cubic feet.
And everybody will get that same answer. That means scientific knowledge is objective. It's the same for everybody.
Scientific knowledge is real. It tells me something about the volume of the room, something definitive about the volume of the room,
but it is non-unique in the sense that I will get different numbers if I use cubic feet or if I use cubic meters or cubic inches or cubic centimeters.
So that scientific knowledge has a deductive character and an objective character given the active associations.
But there is no unique set of active associations. There is no logical reason why the active association should be one set of assumptions and principles or another.
We use the active associations that seem to us to give us, to allow us to deduce passive relations that actually match what's going on in experience.
Active associations cannot be decided by an individual. Only a collective can say, OK, those assumptions make sense.
Let's reason on the basis of those assumptions. An individual can come along, like Einstein, and say, I think we need to change our active associations.
But if nobody listens to that individual, then they're not doing science, they're doing pseudoscience.
So science is a fundamentally social enterprise according to Fleck. It looks like individual geniuses are at work here,
but what's really at work are thought collectives, groups of individuals that agree to practice reasoning about natural phenomena under certain sets of assumptions and principles, which he calls thought styles.
So thought collectives practice science in accordance with certain thought styles.
So one thought style in the 19th century that began in the mid 19th century is evolutionary biology.
A thought style is quantum theory after 1912.
Between 1912 and 1925, it was a revolutionary thought style, practiced by a thought collective that was growing, made up largely of graduate students and young professors of physics.
But it grew and grew, and the larger the collective was, the more firmly quantum theory as a thought style was not simply a thought style.
It was now accepted by that thought collective as a theory of reality.
So Fleck's monograph, which we are now in the next lecture going to hear echoed unintentionally in one of the epical books dealing with the problem of knowledge and science,
Thomas Kuhn's structure of scientific revolutions, was an extraordinarily fertile book and quite startling to have come out of Lviv, Poland in the mid 1930s.
