Lecture 6 Lock, Hume and the Path to Skepticism
We ended the last lecture by asking a retrospective question, the question of what did the founders
of modern science who were generating what they believed to be knowledge of nature, what
did they actually know, using the term know in the strict sense, the sense that we learned
from Plato, about which we could not be wrong, and that which was universal, necessary, and
certain.
And we have to say in retrospect that they didn't know anything.
They didn't know almost anything.
Maybe there are a few pieces of empirical fact that you could pull out, but in terms
of theoretical knowledge of nature, we think that they were wrong, but we have explanations
for that.
We'll come to it.
But at the time, the founders of modern science, the nature philosophers of the 17th century
were perceived to be generating knowledge of nature, and that perception drove philosophers
in the 18th century to formulate theories of knowledge that were capable of serving as
the foundation for modern scientific knowledge of nature.
The theory of knowledge would explain how it was possible for nature philosophers to
generate knowledge of nature, because knowledge within philosophy had been contentious from
the time of Plato and Aristotle right into the 18th century.
In this lecture, we are going to look at three of the philosophers in the 18th century, the
ones that are associated with empiricism, and in the next lecture, we're going to look
at the philosophy of Immanuel Kant, who was the founder of a philosophical tradition called
idealism, and in all cases, however, the three, John Locke, George Barkley, and David
Hume that we're going to discuss in this lecture and Kant in the next, all of them formulated
their theories of knowledge in response to the perception that modern science was generating
what was clearly recognizable as knowledge of nature.
John Locke is the founder of empiricism, of the empirical philosophy of knowledge, theory
of knowledge within philosophy.
We have to sort of fudge a bit because centuries are artificial, of course.
The whole that centuries have on our thinking, as if somehow at the end of, when 1700 comes
around, then events suddenly come to an end, and then they pick up again as 18th century
events.
For example, actually a perfect example of what Francis Bacon had called the idols of
the market, the idol of the marketplace, namely those prejudicial ways of thinking which are
shaped by the way language causes us to make distinctions, to take distinctions as real
that are in fact quite arbitrary.
I say this because John Locke's major work in theory of knowledge, his essay concerning
human understanding, was published in 1690.
Of course, it's not an 18th century theory, but here's where the century division is just
a useful artifice, but we use it so much that we tend to forget that it's an artifice and
treat centuries as if they had some kind of influence, well if he's a 17th century thinker
then he should think this way.
So Locke published his essay concerning the human understanding in 1690, just three years
after Newton's Principia was published, and he wrote it in response to the Principia,
not that all of the ideas in it had never occurred to him before, but he, we know as
a matter of historic record, that Locke looked at the Principia, it was beyond his capacity
to understand the mathematics of it, but he asked experts, is this right?
And he was told that yes it is right, and this is the major intellectual achievement
that it appears to be, and so Locke formulated his theory of knowledge on the assumption
that Newton had cracked a barrier, that Newton had achieved a breakthrough in achieving knowledge,
knowledge strictly speaking of nature, especially in the Principia.
Locke is of course much better known as a political philosopher, a social philosopher
and a political philosopher.
He was also a social contract theorist, as Thomas Hobbes I said in the last lecture was,
but unlike Hobbes' vision of the natural state of mankind, which is the war of all against
all, Locke argued that societies arise because people, because of their inequitable physical
strength, they lack security in their private property, as they accumulate private property
and they form societies and governments in order to protect private property.
And so Locke's vision was benign enough that his theory of government, especially as published
in his two treatises on government, which had a tremendous influence on the founding
of the United States, the whole theory of the separation of powers for example, argued
that the function of a government is primarily to protect private property and to enhance
the general welfare and that means very strict limits on the authority of the central government
as opposed to Hobbes' Leviathan in which the central figure must be a real tough person
because they need to keep people from killing each other.
So Locke is better known as a social philosopher and a political philosopher.
Like Bacon, he rose to fame by sort of writing the coattails of a man who became extremely
powerful politically and extremely influential politically.
In the case of Bacon, it was the Earl of Essex who pulled Bacon into the court after he had
been disgraced by publicly opposing attacks that Queen Elizabeth particularly wanted and
she basically banned him from the court.
Essex brought him back but when Essex fell out of favor as I mentioned and at the time
Bacon's job that Essex had gotten him was to be essentially a royal prosecuting attorney,
the Queen asked Bacon to prosecute Essex and he did it and Essex was executed.
Unlike Bacon, Locke rode to a position of influence on the coattails of the Earl of
Shaftesbury who was very controversial politically in the 1680s when England was undergoing the
transformation that in 1688 led to the so-called Glorious Revolution when James II was thrown
out and William and Mary were invited to come in and take over as King and Queen but during
those tumultuous years before William and Mary came in, Shaftesbury was always in trouble
several times in the tower condemned to death at least once and Locke did not abandon Shaftesbury.
When it was prudent he left England but he would not turn against Shaftesbury or denounce
him or betray his debt and loyalty to him.
Locke's theory is explicitly designed in opposition to Descartes' theory of knowledge in the same
way that Newton said that his mathematical physics, that his approach to the study of
nature contrasted with Descartes.
Descartes you remember had a theory of knowledge which required that we have innate ideas and
a certain kind of intuition and inner light that allows us to see in our minds, to recognize
in our minds the truth of certain kinds of seminal ideas, then using deduction we can
proceed to universal necessary and certain knowledge according to Descartes.
Locke begins by saying all of our ideas, all of our knowledge comes through the senses from
the world.
That's what empiricism means.
A theory of knowledge in which the mind is as Locke called it a tabula rasa, a blank
tablet, a blank slate, that the mind is a blank slate like a blackboard on which the
teacher has not yet written and nature writes on that slate.
Nature tells us through our senses we acquire all the knowledge that we will ever acquire.
Using the word knowledge very loosely at the moment because there's no satisfactory substitute
for it.
Now if all of our ideas come through the senses and as I have said several times now and as
has been recognized since ancient Greece, if all experience is particular, how can we
have knowledge because knowledge must have a universal character?
How can we go from particular experience to universal knowledge without innate ideas
or without some kind of revelation that tells us the truth of certain universal ideas?
All of the ideas we have according to Locke come through the senses and are particular.
So according to Locke when we talk about knowledge what we really mean is a relationship
among our ideas, the agreement or disagreement of some collection of ideas.
That's what knowledge means.
Knowledge is not a relationship between an idea and what's out there, it's a relationship
among our ideas and that's why we can have universal, we can have true knowledge set
aside the universal necessary and certain for the moment, ideally universal necessary
and certain knowledge because the knowledge is not of the world, it is of our ideas but
and this is what prevents him from being the kind of philosopher that we will see you emerging
as in a little while.
Our ideas include direct input from the world in the form of what was called primary sensations.
Already in the generation of Descartes, Bacon and Galileo, philosophers were distinguishing
between primary sensations and secondary sensations.
Descartes acknowledges that secondary sensations, color, odor, taste, texture, feelings, those
are all produced somehow by our own bodies, by the sensory apparatus.
There is nothing out there in the world that is strictly speaking colored.
Color is the way our eyes and our mind responds to whatever stimulus they receive from objects
out there in the world.
The primary sensations are size, motion, shape for example.
So size, motion, shape, they really do belong to objects out there and they, the objects
out there have certain, as Locke called them, powers to act on our eyes, our nose, our ears
to produce the secondary sensations.
By focusing on the primary sensations we have ideas in our mind that do stand in a one-to-one
relationship with facts in the world, with objects out there in the world.
We have to be careful not to be seduced by the secondary sensations and attribute them
to the world.
We have no way of knowing whether the world has any color, but color as we perceive it,
odors as we perceive them, they are in us, but shape, size, motion, those are out there
and they are properties of objects that are out there and we can now correlate the powers
of these objects, specific objects have the power to cause us to have the specific sets
of secondary sensations that we associate with them and Apple has a shape which is primary
but it has a texture and a taste and an odor and a color, those are secondary, they are
the effects of these external causes.
Furthermore, we have in our heads, we have ideas that correspond to the powers that external
objects have to act on one another so that if you mix water with sulfuric acid and there's
an explosive reaction, that is a fact about the world that we have discovered.
So when John Locke says that knowledge means the agreement and disagreement among our ideas,
there's a catch here, that is that our ideas include direct input from the external world
so that if you reason correctly and you keep your eye on primary sensations and the powers
that we have identified, that external objects characterized by particular clusters of primary
sensations, how they interact with us and with one another, then we can in fact achieve
knowledge of nature even though what we're doing is finding relationships among our ideas,
we're studying relationships among our ideas because our ideas correspond to input from
the external world, we are concurrently reasoning about the external world, however, Locke had
to admit at the end of his essay that we cannot achieve demonstrative certainty, all through
the text, he talks about knowledge of nature, but eventually he has to acknowledge that
because we lack knowledge of the truth of universal descriptions of the world, the universal
descriptions are formulated by us in response to the multitude of particular experiences
that we accumulate, the ideas that we have of objects and their interactions in the world,
they can never amount to a true universal, that's the problem that we've seen before,
that bedevils the knowledge problem in philosophy, how can you go from particular experience
to knowing the truth of a universal statement, for thousands of years, logicians use the
example, all swans are white, thinking that indeed believing that swans were by nature
white, and then in the 19th century, black swans were discovered in Australia and that
example had to be dropped out of all the world's logic textbooks.
You can see a million swans, the million and first swan is black and then the whole concept
that all swans are white goes out the window, so they replaced it with all crows are black,
so far nobody has found a chartreuse crow happily.
So Locke says that we cannot have demonstrative, you know what demonstrative means now, prove
it deductively, demonstrative certainty in knowledge of nature.
We also cannot have demonstrative certainty with regard to the existence of God, but he
says we can be certain enough for all practical purposes.
And he lets it go with that, as if he had not done something startling here, knowledge
is knowledge, knowledge has to be certain, what do you mean?
It's not, it's certain enough, well remember what I said in the last lecture about Joseph
Glanville, the Protestant theologian who also had to acknowledge that the Protestant theologians
could not come up with an absolute criterion.
That would allow us to say that we know with certainty the meaning of God's revealed word.
Locke is here saying we cannot say with certainty that our representation of the world in our
ideas corresponds to the way the world is, but it's certain enough for all human purposes,
for the purpose of human action.
In fact he says if we needed universal necessary and certain knowledge in order to act in the
world we would be paralyzed, because we cannot have universal necessary and certain knowledge
of the world.
And yet he keeps talking knowledge talk.
He doesn't abandon knowledge talk, he keeps using knowledge talk, but he has subtly redefined
knowledge, he has taken the core out of certainty by saying certain enough, continues to talk
about knowledge, certainty, but in fact it's a new ball game now, because certain is certain.
You can't be 99 and 40 or 100 percent certain, you're either certain or there is some uncertainty.
So empiricism talks knowledge of nature, but it has, it does not deliver knowledge of nature
in the strict sense.
Nevertheless we have in Locke the founding document for an empiricist theory of knowledge.
One and the empiricist theory of knowledge we're going to see unfold over the next couple
of hundred years, right up to the present, but particularly influential into the 1950s.
George Barkley is a very curious kind of empiricist and I want to only say one thing
about Barkley, because his philosophy is so fascinating in his own right and sounds so
ridiculous that you would think that a brilliant person could not possibly, that no one who
formulated it could be a brilliant person and Barkley was very smart.
Barkley was a bishop in the Anglican church, he was born and raised in Ireland and he was
deeply committed to Ireland and to the Irish poor in particular, rejecting higher office
in the church in order to serve a poor Irish constituency.
And he wrote a number of philosophical essays, formulating his own theory of knowledge in
response to science, but unlike Locke and Jung, who responded to Newtonian science positively
that is seeing in it the embodiment of an important breakthrough in knowledge, Barkley
recognized that Newtonian science and the continental version of Cartesianism mixed
with Newtonian science were going to lead to atheistic materialistic determinism.
And Barkley, without denying that the natural philosophers like Newton were giving us equations
and theories and experiments that worked and that had some truth to them, he formulated
a theory of knowledge that explained scientific knowledge and knowledge generally without
requiring matter.
And he eventually made our experience in fact a projection from God's mind into the world
is a projection of an idea of God's and that's the part that I don't want to get into, not
because it's not, it sounds weird, in fact it actually makes a great deal of sense in
its own way.
Barkley, for our purposes, launched a serious critique of the concept matter in modern science.
The criticism of matter turns out to be crucial to understanding David Jung's criticism of
the concept of causality.
Barkley argued that the concept matter is a metaphysical concept that even though the
natural philosophers that we call early modern scientists talked about their approach to
the study of nature as empirical, experimental, based on facts, the word matter refers to
a metaphysical concept.
How so?
Because no one has ever seen matter, no one has ever felt matter.
Matter is a name we give to what stands under the properties of an object.
So an apple I referred to before, it has a taste and a texture and a color and an odor
and a certain weight and a certain size and we say that, well, those are the attributes
of the matter of which the apple is made.
But if you take away all the attributes, do you see matter?
Can you find the matter behind the attributes or do you just somehow propose that, well,
the attributes don't float around, you don't have the color of the apple here and the shape
there and the texture here, they stick together, they cluster?
Well, said Barkley, that doesn't require proposing that matter is what holds the universe together.
This is where he brings in God's mind, is just as metaphysical a concept and it is much
more comforting to know that reality is projected by a providential deity than an atheistic
theory that the ultimate reality is blind matter.
The crucial thing to focus on here is Barkley's critique of matter as a metaphysical concept
that scientists have imported a metaphysical concept and made it a foundational concept
in science.
David Yume, we have not done anything like justice to Barkley's theory of knowledge,
but for our purposes that piece of it is very important because it makes for the transition
to David Yume also typically included as one of the big three British empiricists, founding
British empiricists in 18th century philosophy.
David Yume was a Scotsman born in Edinburgh, died in Edinburgh, one of the very few let's
say portly philosophers, chubby philosophers.
He was a bon vivant, he was a very friendly sociable man, not exactly a party animal,
but a man who enjoyed his social life, enjoyed good food, good wine and recognized that philosophy
in the western tradition over emphasizes reason as if human beings were only reasoning
creatures as opposed to people who lived in society, who had to function in the world
feeling creatures in addition to reasoning creatures.
Yume identified causality as a pivotal concept for the claim to knowledge of nature and let
me say at the outset that he had tremendous regard for Newton and he himself formulated
what he called a Newtonian physics of the mind, a mechanics of the mind, laws of the
mind, he called it experimental psychology and it was what he was proudest of, he said
he hopes that this would be what he would be remembered for, his associationistic psychology.
So he was not debunking natural science, what he was attacking was the idea that what Newton
and others were giving us was universal necessary and certain knowledge of nature.
Yume's particular focus here is on the concept of causality.
As Barkley said that materialism is a metaphysical concept, that we have no empirical experience
of matter per se, matter in and of itself, we only have experience of the properties
of matter.
So Yume argued that causality is not a fact in the world, we do not experience causes,
causality is an idea in us, it's an idea in the mind.
Well if causality is only an idea in the mind then we have no knowledge of the connections
among the matters of fact in our experience because cause is the name that we give to
the connections among matters of fact.
If you don't have universal necessary and certain knowledge of the connections among
matters of fact out there, if all the matters of fact so to speak float free as individual
facts that cluster in various ways but we have no universal necessary and certain knowledge
of what causes them to cluster in the ways that they do to have the effects on us that
they have then you can't have knowledge of nature.
And so Yume said we cannot have knowledge of matters of fact, what we can have knowledge
of is our own ideas and so for example he thought mathematics was an example of universal
necessary and certain knowledge of those ideas that come from defining a circle in a certain
way, defining a triangle in a certain way, defining a parallel of pipette in a certain
way and then you get arithmetic and geometry with numbers, you get arithmetic with these
geometric shapes, you get geometry but there's no triangle out there.
Triangle is an invention of the mind in so far, take the game of chess, we can have universal
necessary and certain knowledge that the horse can move in this way, that a move in a chess
game is a legal move, we look it up in the rules and the rules say yes you are allowed
to make the following move, the bishop can go here.
This is the way you castle, we are absolutely certain about that, why because we made up
the rules.
Fine says Yume, in all such cases where we make up the rules, where we define what we
mean by our ideas then we can have knowledge but if you're talking about the world then
we can't have knowledge, we can have only knowledge in the strict sense, universal necessary
and certain knowledge, we can have probable knowledge.
He didn't bother with certain enough, no he went right to the heart of the matter and
saying empiricism slides into skepticism, now skepticism and philosophy and in western
culture generally has been a dirty word, skeptics, we know skeptics are free livers,
skeptics are people who don't believe in anything, skeptics are people who say that
anything goes, skeptics are say there are no truths, there is no knowledge, that is
a radical form of skepticism that Yume dismisses completely, he embraces what he calls following
Cicero academic skepticism, that is to say a recognition that while knowledge cannot
mean universal necessary and certain that it cannot be that about which we cannot be
wrong that we can have probable knowledge of experience and he pointed out a serious
problem with induction based reasoning that has yet to receive a definitive answer and
that is that what gives us the right to suppose that the experiences, the patterns we have
seen in the experiences we have had in the past will continue in the future.
Not possible experience can we point to that says that patterns will continue indefinitely,
so according to Yume when we use the word cause what we are really talking about are
uniformities in our experience that we have identified and that for non logical reasons
we project into the future and we expect those patterns to exist in the future, but there
is no necessary reason why those patterns should continue that is to say there may be
a necessary reason but we can't know it because we cannot experience the necessary connections
among the matters of fact in our experience. Now to appreciate the force of Yume's point
here you must recognize that the word cause for him and for all philosophers means necessary
and sufficient condition, so if you think you cause the light to go on when you turn
the switch, the light switch on the wall you are wrong because you could turn the switch
and the light won't go on for lots of reasons, the electricity is off, there is no bulb,
the bulb is burned out, there is a short circuit, so that is only a very casual and non philosophical
use of the word cause. Cause in the sense of necessary and sufficient condition goes
beyond what we can experience, we do not experience the necessity with which A and B interact
in the world, only that they have interacted in the past and they produce C and then we
expect C to occur in the future. So Yume's criticism of causality undermines the empiricist
theory of knowledge but he really was exposing the flaw that Locke left dangle, the flaw
that after all we can't have demonstrative certainty when it comes to knowledge and nature
but it's certain enough and Yume then drove a Mack truck through that wedge, through that
little opening and saying that in fact empiricism slides into constructive skepticism, probabilism,
Kant will now change his entire career after he reads Yume in order to defend Newtonian
science as universal necessary and certain knowledge of the world.
Thank you.
