Lecture 3, Galileo, the Catholic Church and Truth
Welcome back. In the last lecture, we contrasted the methodologies of Francis Bacon and Rene Descartes.
It was quite clear that these two methods are totally opposed to one another.
For Bacon, the mind was the problem and experience was the solution.
For Descartes, experience was the problem.
Mind was the solution.
For Bacon, experiment was everything and mathematics was at best tertiary.
For Descartes, mathematics was primary and experiment was at least at most secondary and maybe tertiary.
But both of them agreed that the upshot of the method applied to the study of nature that they championed would give us knowledge of reality.
They both converged on the idea that the object of scientific knowledge is that beyond experience which is the cause of experience.
Bacon's method was empirical with a small a whereas Descartes was the epitome of modern rationalism.
That is to say, the defense of the notion of knowledge as universal, necessary and certain.
In this lecture, I want to extend our probe into the way that scientists reason by looking at the case of Galileo.
And of course, the centerpiece must be Galileo's trial for heresy by the church because he defended the Copernican theory of astronomy as true.
However, we want to step back before we reach that and understand something about Galileo and his conception of method.
Because Galileo too articulated a very specific conception of method in order to acquire knowledge of nature.
And his method was different from Bacon's and different from Descartes.
Galileo's method one can say, I believe, is the closest thing to what people ordinarily mean by the scientific method.
With modifications, it was the one that Isaac Newton used and we'll see that when we get to Newton and therefore in some sense became the benchmark.
But I hope it's becoming abundantly clear that when we talk about the scientific method, we are speaking very loosely and in truth rather imprecisely.
Because there are too many methods being used by the founders of modern science for us to identify a single method as the scientific method.
Now Galileo was strongly influenced by Archimedes, the thinking of the great ancient Greek mathematician and physicist Archimedes,
who applied mathematics and the deductive reasoning associated with mathematics to problems in physics, most notably in his time to problems in hydraulics and hydrodynamics,
in figuring out the laws of buoyancy of when an object floated and when it would not float.
For example, you know the famous story of his jumping out of the bath and because he figured out how to determine whether a crown was made out of real gold
or had been alloyed by the goldsmith who was then pocketing part of the gold.
So Galileo adopted and described, especially in his last major work, the Discourses on Two New Sciences, an Archimedean method of studying nature
in which modern mathematical physics manifests itself for the first time.
Galileo was committed to the idea, and he said this over again, that nature was a book and its language was mathematics.
The characters are circles, triangles, spheres, etc., because in those days in Galileo's lifetime, algebra, which Descartes had recently upgraded
and had developed as a tool for solving geometric problems, was not yet widely disseminated,
and so for Galileo it was natural to think of mathematics in geometric terms, we tend to think of mathematics more in algebraic terms.
Galileo believed that mathematics captured the essence of physical reality.
This was a view that in antiquity was defended by the Pythagoreans, the followers of Pythagoras of A squared plus B squared equals C squared fame.
Pythagoras argued that reality was mathematical at its core and that the orderliness of nature was the result of matter essentially being shaped by inner mathematical principles.
And so for example that the difference between music and noise is mathematical proportion, a discovery that Pythagoras made
and so he discovered the octave and that all the notes in the octave are related to one another as mathematical fractions.
Galileo bought into this and while he called himself a Platonist because the word Pythagorean in the 17th century had negative connotations,
he was in fact a deep believer that mathematics was the essence of physical reality and that through experiment we could identify the mathematical forms underlying physical processes.
And so almost all of you must have heard about his discovering the equation for a freely falling body, s equal one half gt squared,
which was not an equation that he actually used in that form, but he did discover that the relationship between the distance covered by a freely falling body
and the time is directly proportional to the time squared, which was news at the time and in fact contradicted all of the prevailing theories in physics
and so it was in a sense a major discovery. For Galileo this was a revelation of nature.
This was not a useful way of figuring out how long it's going to take you to fall to the ground if you fall off the top of the Tower of Pisa.
This was a revelation of this is the way nature works and this was the goal of the natural philosopher was to discover through experiment,
ah but not Bacon's experiments. Galileo specialized in idealized experiments.
He knew very well that in fact if you climbed to the Tower, not to the Tower of Pisa, which he almost certainly did not do,
and you dropped a bullet and a cannonball, that the cannonball is going to hit the ground first.
You'd have to be a fool to think that they would both hit the ground at the same time.
Galileo understood that if you abstracted things like the effect of air and wind,
that as a matter of fact in the mind's eye, if you had a gigantic evacuated bell jar, which didn't exist in Galileo's time,
then the two would in fact fall at the same rate.
Now he figured this out by way of a thought experiment and in fact Galileo can be said to be the father of thought experiments in modern science
and he frequently got carried away and put too much confidence in these thought experiments in a famous passage for example
in his analysis of mathematical analysis of the motion of a pendulum critical for the invention of the pendulum clock,
which allowed accurate timekeeping for the first time in the 17th century.
The pendulum clock, Galileo claimed that he had done experiments that showed that the period of a pendulum was constant
even if you pulled the bob way the heck over to the side and we know that that's not true.
So he didn't do those experiments but in his mind's eye he didn't see any reason why it shouldn't be true
and so here and there in Galileo's writings there are such evidences that his conception of idealizing a physical situation
and doing an experiment that looked to find the ideal mathematical form of the underlying natural process was the key to him
and that sometimes it misled him.
He was of course the first person that we know of to use the telescope to make astronomical observations.
He did not invent the telescope but he was the first person we know of to actually point the telescope at the sky
and study the moon and Venus and of course as we all know that discovered that Jupiter had moons circling it
four moons that he was able to see in his primitive telescope which he cleverly named after the Medici family
who then rewarded him handsomely with the highest paid academic position in Italy at the time
and was able to move from a provincial university to the equivalent I guess of the Harvard of Italy in the 17th century.
Galileo's conception of knowledge was universal necessary and certain in his major astronomical work
the dialogue concerning the two great world systems, the book that got him tried for heresy.
He has what his mouthpiece say that when we know, when we know something then we know it the same way God does.
Knowledge that is universal necessary and certain knowledge is the same for us as for God qualitatively.
Now quantitatively God knows a lot more than we do but it is as well known to us as to God that s equal one half gt squared
because that can be demonstrated.
I emphasize the word demonstrated because in Galileo and in fact in general in the writings of 17th, 18th, 19th century scientists
the word demonstration means deductive logical proof.
To demonstrate something as in QED just there thus as it demonstrated the word demonstration is a deductive logical proof.
To claim knowledge for Galileo is to be able to show to demonstrate that what you claim follows deductively from appropriate principles
we'll leave for the moment where you get those from and as applied to facts.
So Galileo's method is not Baconian by any stretch of the imagination but it's not Cartesian either.
He was not interested in feigning hypotheses in order to that would work in deducing phenomena.
He was interested in discovering using experiments as probes including thought experiments in discovering the fundamental processes of nature.
Now let's turn our attention to the dialogue and the claim that Galileo essentially makes.
He's very careful nowhere in the dialogue where you find a character who says that the Copernican theory in astronomy is true.
But the book is structured in such a way that at various times characters say you would have to be a fool not to recognize that Copernicus' theory is true.
This was not enough to satisfy the church but this controversy between Galileo and the church epitomizes the problem of knowledge within science that we are tracing in this course.
What is the issue? The issue is the claim that Copernicus' hypothesis, Copernicus' theory of the heavens in which the earth and the other planets orbit around the sun
in circular orbits, in uniform motion, that that is a true account of the heavens.
If Galileo had said that this theory is the best theory for calculating positions of the planets in the night sky as a function of time,
it is the best theory for calculating calendarical time so that we will be able to know exactly when the various religious festivals come out.
Then the church has no problem with that. That's what they told Galileo 20 years before.
As long as you teach this as a mathematical tool for calculating, no problem. Do not teach that it is the truth for a number of reasons.
One of which is that the church in the middle, this is happening in the middle of the Thirty Years' War, 1618-1648,
in which millions of Europeans are being slaughtered in the name of Protestantism and Catholicism.
The northern European Protestant armies, generaled by Gustavus Adolphus, the Catholic armies being generaled by Wallenstein,
and more or less fighting on the soil of what we today call Germany by mutual agreement and killing huge numbers of people.
The church is not interested in academic distinctions between mathematically true, physically true.
The church is fighting for its life to defend its position as the authority on God's word.
And the church, for better or for worse, has taken the position that the literal biblical text says that the sun stood still in Ayalong for Joshua,
which means that normally the sun moves, and Galileo says now the sun stands still, the earth moves.
The Bible has to be read figuratively.
So the issue here, the issue here for us is, here is a theory that Galileo defends as true, not merely that it works,
and that becomes key to the dispute between him and the church.
Let's understand how complex it is to claim that the Copernican theory is true by Galileo.
Copernicus' theory requires us to believe, contrary to all experience, that the earth is rotating on its axis at approximately 1,000 miles an hour.
The Earth's circumference is about 24,000 miles, so in a 24-hour period we have to cover 24,000 miles.
If you throw a ball up in the air, how come it doesn't get blown backwards?
If a bird takes off, how come 1,000 miles at the equator, how come 1,000 miles an hour wind doesn't blow it backwards?
Why don't we see any evidence of this motion?
Can't answer that question.
If the earth is circling the sun, then it means that in June and in December the earth is on the opposite sides of the sun.
Then how come two stars that are lined up in a row in June are still lined up in December?
They should not be lined up anymore.
That's called parallactic displacement.
There were a number of obvious empirical questions that Copernicus could not answer.
If you wanted to say, well, should a reasonable person have accepted the Copernican hypothesis, the answer is it's not at all clear.
And in fact, most astronomers did not accept the Copernican hypothesis at the time.
Most astronomers by 1620, 1630 believed that probably something like Tico Brahe's theory was true.
Tico Brahe was a Danish astronomer who at the end of the 16th century built the most sophisticated pre-telescopic observatory there was using instruments of his own design,
that allowed more precise observations than it had ever been collected before.
And Brahe rejected the Copernican hypothesis in favor of a theory of his own in which the earth is stationary, although it rotates on its axis so that the stars don't have to whirl around the earth in 24 hours,
but that the sun orbits the earth, Mercury and Venus, the inner planets orbit the sun as it orbits the earth, and the three outer planets, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, then orbit, in effect, both the sun and the earth.
Now, this perhaps sounds complicated, but let me just say that this theory, even with a telescope, is empirically indistinguishable by Galileo from Copernicus's theory.
There is no experiment Galileo could have done. There is no way that Galileo could have disproven the Brahe hypothesis theory in favor of the Copernican hypothesis.
He never mentions Brahe's theory in the dialogue. It's the title, the dialogue concerning the two great world systems.
What are the two great world systems? The system, loosely speaking, of Ptolemy, that the earth is in the center of the universe and everything rotates around the earth, the stars in 24 hours, and the sun and the planets in their appropriate ways.
And the Copernican hypothesis, which for Galileo is essentially as Copernicus left it, with the sun a little bit off-center of the universe and the earth and all the other planets orbiting around the sun, in uniform circular orbits.
Now, by the time Galileo wrote this book, so first of all, he doesn't mention Tico Brahe at all. Clearly, a rhetorical ploy on Galileo's part to simplify the presentation.
Why did he ignore Brahe? Because he could not disprove Brahe, but he didn't believe Brahe. He did not think Brahe's theory was correct.
So he just dropped it out of consideration, because if he had three systems in there, he would have to admit that even with the telescope, for example, what evidence is there using Galileo's telescope that Copernican theory is correct?
Well, all you can say is that there are moons maybe circling Jupiter.
All you can say is that Venus has phases, which suggests that just as the moon has phases, because it circles the earth and reflects the sun's light to a different degrees as it circles the earth, so Venus has phases means that Venus must orbit the sun.
And that's why it reflects, to the naked eye, Venus looks like a disk, but even in a small telescope, you can see that in the course of time, Venus goes through phases.
But it goes through phases on Tico Brahe's system as well, because Venus does orbit the sun on Brahe's system. Mercury and Venus both do.
And so all of the questions that you could ask about Mercury and Venus, the inner planets, are answered by Brahe as well as by Copernicus.
All of the questions you could ask about the outer planets, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, especially the very peculiar fact that the planets at various times seem to go backwards in the night sky, could be handled by Brahe.
And so why did he drop it? Because he didn't believe it.
And he wanted to set this stark contrast between Copernicus and the Ptolemaic system, as if the Ptolemaic system were the only option.
Now the Ptolemaic system, everyone understood, could not be physically real.
Ptolemy himself had said that his theory was mathematical astronomy, not physical astronomy.
It was a device, it was a theory that was actually quite wonderful for predicting and for writing almanacs and calendars.
This was very, very important in antiquity and continues to be for predicting where the planets will be in the course of the year in the night sky.
When will Mars rise? Where will it be on January 15th? Where will Jupiter be in the night sky? Of course astrologers also love this.
But it was for astronomical and calendarical reasons that Ptolemy's hypothesis was embraced because in the pre-telescopic era it worked.
It did not work with Tico Brahe's very good data.
And so Tico Brahe had no doubt that the Ptolemaic hypothesis was wrong, but he thought that the Copernican hypothesis was wrong as well.
Now another factor here, Galileo's work, Galileo published this book, decades literally after Kepler, Johannes Kepler, who was a Copernican,
had revealed that using Tico Brahe's data, which he gained access to by serving as his assistant for two years,
and then Tico Brahe died and Kepler sort of snatched his data away from Tico Brahe's son, who Kepler thought didn't deserve it.
So Kepler, using that data, discovered and published in a book called Astronomia Nova, New Astronomy in 1609,
that the orbits of the planets are not circular, they're elliptical.
Galileo ignored that. To the end of his life, Galileo believed that circular motion was privileged motion,
it did not require any force, and that therefore the planets moved in circular orbits.
Kepler went on in 1619 to publish a second book, which extended his mathematical account of the planetary orbits,
and Galileo effectively ignored Kepler, who wrote several letters to him, very congratulatory, very impressive in his admiration of Galileo's early work in science,
but Galileo seemed indifferent to Kepler for some reason.
So Galileo's position as a scientist must be understood in the dialogue concerning the two great world systems,
his position as a scientist must be understood as a polemicist for the Copernican theory.
Subsequent historians of science, and in fact culture writers generally, have made Galileo a hero,
but in fact I think a case can be made that the church had a point.
What evidence is there that this theory is true with a capital T, as opposed to a theory that works,
and we embrace it and you can teach it and we want you to use it,
but calling it true causes us serious problems at a critical time in the church's history,
and what's more important, clarifying an intellectual distinction for a handful of people was saving the souls of millions.
That's the argument from the side of the church, of course,
but one must recognize that the dialogue is also to some degree a deceptive book,
in which Galileo ignored Kepler's corrections of Copernicus,
and those corrections of Copernicus are in fact the basis for our admiration for Copernicus.
We're going to see this happen again and again, but scientific theories are not static entities, they're dynamic and evolving entities.
The Copernican theory, as Copernicus left it, is wrong in almost every particular.
The grand vision that the earth is not the center of the universe, that's what sticks in people's heads,
but as a scientific theory, it is flawed. Galileo himself admitted,
because he couldn't answer these questions about the wind at the equator,
a thousand mile wind and the parallactic displacement, that Copernicus rapes the senses, he wrote,
because experience explicitly contradicts what Copernicus tells us is the truth,
and yet it is the truth, because for Galileo we are able to penetrate through experience.
Now we can use reasoning, scientific reasoning, to correct experience.
That sounds very nice, until you ask, wait a minute, if experience is untrustworthy,
what is the standard against which we correct it?
Do we have access to reality independent of experience? No.
Well, then what does it mean to correct experience, correct relative to what?
Ah, so here we see, by studying, by looking at Galileo in this way,
we tease out another fact about the way scientists reason,
that scientific reasoning always proceeds on the basis of assumptions.
Now these assumptions are sometimes called principles, sometimes they're called hypotheses,
sometimes they're called axioms, Newton like to call them axioms,
Descartes like to call them hypotheses, but as a class they are assumptions,
they are that which you assume in order to explain something else.
Now of course you assume what you believe to be true,
at least you assume it if you're going to wind up in the end claiming
that your theory is true with a capital T, that it describes reality rather than experience.
You don't have to worry about things, if all you're interested in is building a bridge that works.
So you don't have to have a whole metaphysical theory of knowledge
in order to justify what you did in order to build a bridge that works.
But if you're going to claim that your theory is true with a capital T,
then you need to make some assumptions.
Descartes made his assumptions and coming up with his mechanical philosophy of nature,
which argued that nature was matter in motion and that except for the human mind,
which was immaterial, everything in reality was matter in motion,
Galileo made certain assumptions having to do with how he was going to explain motion mathematically,
the assumptions that he had to make.
I'm leaving that fuzzy because when we get to Newton, we're going to get the clearest expression
of the role that assumptions play in forming a scientific theory,
the way Newton defines space, time, motion in order to be able to write the equations of motion that he did.
Now Newton was born the year that Galileo died.
So what we're seeing here is between the Bacon who was the oldest and Descartes and Galileo who are contemporary,
we see a development here in which there is a gradually more explicit consideration of method
and the assumptions that are necessary to be made in order to achieve universal theories of nature,
to find universal laws of nature.
What is going to be the justification for those assumptions?
Well, in the next lecture we're going to talk about the dispute between Newton and Leibniz over exactly this point.
But for now, I want to call your attention to two approaches to scientific knowledge,
to what scientists do when they study nature that capture the contrast that I'm trying to develop
in terms of what I've been calling the knowledge problem within science.
I'm going to call one method the archaeological method.
That is, that's the view that what scientists do is analogous to what archaeologists do.
Archaeologists dig things up.
So if you dig up a vase and you scrape off the mud, and very carefully of course,
and there it is, it turns out to be red and black in some figurative pattern.
So that's not the archaeologist's decision.
I mean, it is what it is.
The vase is what it is and it has the shape that it has.
It has one handle or two handles.
Does it have a picture on it?
Is it just a geometric pattern on it?
What are the colors?
These are completely independent of the archaeologists.
So one way of looking at science, one philosophy of science,
is that scientists are like archaeologists in that they are uncovering nature.
They are not interpreting nature.
They are uncovering what's there.
Einstein used to say, lifting a corner of the veil.
Nature is hidden from us by the way that we experience the world,
but by using reason and experiments, somehow we can lift a corner of the veil
and we can see what's really there.
The second philosophy, the contrasting philosophy of science,
is that what scientists do is construe experience.
And I use the word construe deliberately because in the late 20th century,
we're going to encounter a theory of science that claims that
scientific theories are socially constructed.
Now the word construe is to interpret.
Do scientists construe experience?
So if they construe experience, then that's different from uncovering reality
because construals are interpretations.
They are non-unique.
There is no such thing as a unique interpretation.
You can have a unique description, but you cannot have a unique interpretation.
Interpretation, by definition, is pluralistic.
There are multiple possible interpretations of any given experience,
just as there are multiple possible interpretations of a novel, let's say, or a poem.
So our scientists construe experience and experience is constantly changing,
especially when they invent new instruments that let us have new kinds of experiences.
So then they need new construals.
Ah, scientific theories are construals.
They are interpretations of experience that follow a certain set of rules,
having to do with mathematical formulation and experimentation, etc.
Or are they uncovering reality?
The gods say uncovering reality.
The earth giants say construals of experience.
