The therapeutic benefits of water have been recognised for centuries by many different
civilisations, including the Hindus, Romans and Ancient Greeks. The father of medicine
and apocrates advocated the use of water not only for the treatment of a wide variety of
diseases but also as a tonic and a cesarean. Today, taking to the waters is recognised
as a highly effective and widespread therapeutic exercise utilised by physiotherapists to rehabilitate
their patients. In addition to treatment of specialist populations, exercising water has
been proven to be of great benefit for all, from complete beginners to the moderately fit
to the very fit. But just how effective is aqua exercise as an alternative to lamb-based
formats for improving physical fitness, promoting relaxation and reducing tension and stress?
Over the course of the next 30 minutes, I aim to tell you just about all there is to know about
exercising water, who can benefit from it, how it works and why you should seriously consider
taking the wet route to improved well-being. For me, there's just something really appealing
about exercising in the pool. I once heard that we favour it so much because on a subconscious
level we liken it to the return to the safe nurturing environment of our mother's womb.
In all honesty, I think the reasons are less serious than that. It's the joy of making
noise splashing around, the fun of using floats, waddles, webbed mitts and foam dumbbells and
just simply the opportunity to release our inner child for a few moments. And I'm not
alone. The Centers for Disease Control report that many people enjoy water-based exercise
more than exercising on land. As I've mentioned before, enjoying your exercise is a key component
in maintaining a routine. Also, according to the CDC, swimmers have about half the risk
of death compared to inactive people. For people with arthritis, water-based exercise
improves use of affected joints without worsening symptoms and can actually decrease pain in
some circumstances. People with rheumatoid arthritis have more health improvements after
participating in hydrotherapy than with other activities. They can also exercise for longer
in water than on dry land without increased effort or joint or muscle pain. For people
with fibromyalgia, exercise therapy in warm water has been shown to decrease anxiety and
depression and improve mood. So you can see, aqua has many proven benefits. But why and
how is it so effective? Let's look at the physical properties of water as that will
clarify its potential for helping us to reach our fitness goals. Boyancy is the degree to
which your body floats when it's immersed in water. This has the positive effect of
reducing impact on contact with the floor and so lessens the stress on the joints. However,
it also reduces the body's stability, so you have to engage the deeper postural muscles
to fix your position. In addition, wide-leg stances or movements of the upper body limbs
will also help you to retain your stability. Aboyancy is determined by our body composition.
Body fat increases floatation, whereas highly muscular or lean physiques tend to sink due
to muscle and bone being considerably denser than body fat. The distribution of body fat
will also affect how the body floats. For example, individuals with muscular legs may
have difficulty keeping them up in exercises which require the legs to maintain a floating
position. Another factor which determines buoyancy is the water depth. The deeper the
water, the greater the floatation effect due to the decreased impact of gravity. At waist
depth, approximately 50% of the gravitational forces exist and therefore 50% of impact forces
still remain. However, at chest depth, the impact is reduced to close to 10% and so the
body is around 90% weightless. The resultant effect is that water cushions movement and
thus is ideal as an exercise medium for anyone unable to fully bear their own weight as would
be necessary on dry land. In addition to the elderly and those with musculoskeletal injuries,
buoyancy of the water guarantees a much more enjoyable exercise experience for the obese
individuals. Resistance provided by the water requires us to exert greater force with our
muscles to overcome it, thus potentially increasing the intensity of a water-based
workout. Water is around 800 times denser than air, so it affords a greater opportunity
to challenge the muscles and achieve high levels of calorie burn but, as mentioned earlier,
with less risk of injury to the joints. However, the resistance of water also reduces the
speed of movement possible and it reduces the ability to change direction quickly, so
you have to be motivated to put some work in when exercising in the water or it could
become extravagant bath time. The good news here is that the resistance you feel is proportional
to the speed at which you move, so if you wish to, you can really ramp up the intensity
by moving your limbs faster and therefore you will accelerate your results. In addition,
the constant resistance alters the way in which muscles contract. That is to say, eccentric
contractions are virtually eliminated and are replaced by a dual concentric muscle work.
So what we mean by that is that when I move my arm in this direction on dry land, I'm
working the biceps muscle concentrically. When I lower them, I'm working them eccentrically
because actually now the muscles lengthening. What happens in water is gravity doesn't
lower the arm down. We actually have to push down, so I'm using the tricep, so it becomes
dual positive. I have to pull up and I have to push down, so it's quite a difference compared
to lamb-based exercise. Now propulsion is unique to exercising in water. It's not something
we experience on dry land. To move the body in one direction when immersed in water requires
a strong pushing movement of the limbs in the opposite direction. For example, to move
backwards, we need to push the arms and kick the legs forwards. The stronger the propulsive
movement, the greater the distance you'll achieve. For this reason, to remain stationary
when performing upper body exercises requires a wide leg base and the strong fixation of
the core muscles. To remain stationary during lower body work will require an opposite propulsive
movement for the limbs. For example, if you lift one leg up in front of you, you need
to press the arms down to balance that out. Alternatively, you can use sculling type movements
like those of a synchronized swimmer. Hydro-static pressure refers to the constant pressure exerted
by the water equally around the body. The good news is this helps to improve the circulation
of the blood and reduces the risk of blood pooling in the muscles which can cause dizziness.
Fluid dynamics impact in two ways via the smooth flow of water molecules known as laminar
flow and turbulent flow that is caused by molecules rebounding from an object in all
directions. Laminar flow offers the least resistance to the exercise and turbulent flow is the
white water you see around you and the bubbles you feel against your skin when you move. Now
fluid dynamics is key to the effectiveness of the exercise as the intensity of our movements
for example can be varied simply by turning the angle of the palm to slice through the
water or turn it face on where we'll get more resistance and then a better toning effect
for the muscles. In addition, spreading the fingers or keeping them together will affect
the flow and so the resistance also. So when combined how do these five properties
of water affect the body? Okay, hydrostatic pressure is the force upon the body when it's
immersed in water. The force is greater as you go deeper under the water and is multi-directional.
This increased pressure on the body effectively squeezes the blood vessels increasing the
amount of blood returning to the heart known as an increased venous return. This then has
effects on the cardiovascular respiratory and renal systems. Firstly, let's look at
the cardiovascular system. Cardiac output is a measure of the heart's functioning capacity
and is quantified as the volume of blood ejected by the heart in a minute. It's calculated
by multiplying the stroke volume which is the volume of blood ejected by the heart with
each beat and the heart rate in other words the number of beats per minute. In chest level
water the stroke volume increases by around 50% but the heart rate decreases by approximately
10 beats per minute and so cardiac output increases by about 30%. This is due to the
point made earlier which is that hydrostatic pressure causes an increase in venous return.
The increased blood returning to the heart stretches the walls which in turn increases
the force of the contraction of the heart muscle and so the stroke volume goes up. Since cardiac
output is determined by multiplying stroke volume and heart rate the increase in stroke
volume leads to the increase in cardiac output because the heart rate drops during immersion
it raises the question whether we can get our heart rates up in an actual workout as
this is essential to making our fitness gains. Of course once we start to exercise in water
the heart rate will increase just as on dry land but training heart rates will be lower
in water and so often rates of perceived exertion are a more suitable measure of the intensity
and that's scoring the intensity of the workout from 1 to 10. So the feeling that aqua is
a soft option in terms of cardiovascular fitness training is really a misconception.
Let's now consider the respiratory system. When you're immersed in water the hydrostatic
pressure leads to an increase in the rate of breathing. Breathing mechanics change as a
result of hydrostatic pressure acting on the chest and the abdomen and also by this increased
venous return we've just mentioned shifting more blood into the thorax from the extremities.
Interestingly this leads to a reduction in tidal volume which is the amount of air taken in with
each breath so the respiratory muscles are required to work around 60% harder than normal.
The result of getting into water therefore is a strengthening effect on the respiratory muscles
which can help to increase the efficiency of the respiratory system. Now this could be a plus
point in helping to alleviate the symptoms of some specific conditions but for example
asthma but it's important to note that cautions needed in people who already experience difficulty
in inflating the chest. In this case sufferers would be more suited to aqua exercise in only
waist-high water. Finally we take a moment to think about immersion and how it affects the kidneys.
Some of you may have experienced the urge to visit the toilet after a while in the water and
wonder why this is a consequence of that hydrostatic pressure increasing the blood flow around the
body as we discovered a moment ago. The problem is that as more blood re-enters the heart the brain
is tricked into thinking there is excessive fluid on board and so switches off the antidiuretic hormone
that is producing the pituitary gland and that controls the action of the kidneys.
Most importantly however as a fitness instructor I like a lot of my clients wish to be sure that
I can improve my fitness levels through aqua workouts. Fortunately a number of studies have
shown that shallow water sessions have the capability to significantly improve maximal
oxygen uptake which you may remember from our second lecture in this series is the ability
of the lungs to take on board oxygen and for the heart to transport it around the body and then
for the muscles to use it. Now this is accepted universally as the best measure of fitness
and one particular study in 1995 showed that subjects improve their maximal oxygen uptake
by an amazing 19% after just 11 weeks of taking three aqua sessions per week. Surprisingly at
one point the effects on fitness level of training in deep water didn't appear to be quite so
favorable with a 1994 study stating that maximal oxygen uptake actually dropped by 7% over four
weeks. Since then however there's been other research that contradicts this and confirms it's
also a viable training technique to improve fitness levels. You may also remember from
our second lecture on assessing fitness that in addition to the maximal oxygen uptake we just
mentioned we also examine body composition as there are healthy limits for the percentage of
your body weight that is attributed to body fat. This is where aqua exercise really does take the
stand as a study of 20 women who were not regular exercises who engaged in eight weeks of combined
shallow and deep water workouts recorded an average 12% drop in their body composition score
and this is very encouraging indeed for anyone who's looking to change their shape.
If you also consider that research has shown flexibility can improve by as much as 11%
after eight weeks and many studies have shown significant improvements in muscular strength
and endurance then aqua well it can have a serious impact upon all those vital health
related components of fitness. Water is indeed the elixir of life but not only when you drink it
the great thing about aqua exercise is that it also offers participants many secondary
benefits as follows think of this provides a valid variation to your existing training
regime and it's important to have that variation it keeps you cool so it's a much more enjoyable
exercise experience it can help to increase your confidence in water the supportive properties
make it ideal for specialist populations to participate comfortably the fun factor is high
due to splashing around like a child as we mentioned earlier and how can i put this water hides any
lumps and bumps which can be a barrier for some of us getting into our kid in exercising it promotes
social interaction provides a whole body toning effect so there's an awful lot to to gain from
aqua exercise there beyond exercise for members of the public water-based exercise is invaluable
for both rehabilitation and elite sports training aqua exercise is actually the clear leader when it
comes to the area of rehabilitation are supported by the fact that it's a key factor in the operations
at walter reed hospital formally in washington dc and now in Bethesda maryland where the us army
treat wounded soldiers the program there has two facets firstly aquatic rehabilitation for soldiers
soldiers undergoing physical therapy and also the aquatic warrior designed to help those with
continued limitations rebuild strength and fitness so they can resume regular unit training
both curriculums were designed to deal primarily with musculoskeletal injuries though the neurological
and psychological impact of traumatic brain injuries and post-traumatic stress disorder
also appear to benefit it's getting harder for those who still think of aqua exercise as soft
option and only suitable for seniors when there are so many examples of water workouts that are
going high performance the pool has become a wet gym for all ages and all levels of athletic
conditioning with a wide range of specific equipment designed to improve strength speed
and stamina now on the market pools with built-in treadmills water jets and tv cameras are now
being used by nfl teams such as the philadelphia eagles and the greenbeck packers you can increase
cardiovascular fitness running form balance and even some strength with less normal wear and tear
on your joints said the eagles athletic trainer in the elite running world water workouts hit the
news when kenyon distance star launa kiblegat set the 10 mile world record after spending the
preceding seven days running in the pool wearing aqua running shoes which have a plastic scoop that
increased the resistance many sports performers will be familiar with plyometrics the explosive
exercises that work on the principle that stretching a muscle right before it contracts will engage more
muscle fibers than starting from a static stopped position and so lead to gains in power i.e. the
ability to generate force quickly it's worth noting here however this might not be purely of
benefit to elite athletes as in addition to helping you to wallop a tennis ball it could also help a
leisure cyclist to swerve around a sun obstacle and assist anyone in saving themselves from an
unexpected trip as we mentioned earlier there are no eccentric muscular contractions where the
muscle lengthens under resistance and according to a study published in the journal of strength
and conditioning research this dual positive movement i spoke of earlier leads to less soreness
and reduced injury risk compared to practice in plyometrics on dry land for a lot of people then
the pool is becoming the new gym if you plan to dip your toe in the water literally and then here
are a few tips to ensure you get the most from your pool workout depth the water should be at
about chest level with shallower depths used for participants who are less confident walking in
chest level water burns 50 more calories than walking on land and get this running in the pool
burns an incredible 90 percent more calories warm up as always adequate time should be allowed
for warming up before the main activities to get a good cardiovascular workout exercises need to be
large and rhythmical you will sweat during swimming heat loss from the body is mainly
through convection whereby heat is transferred from the body to the water as there is a reduced
role for evaporation of sweat from the skin surface that's the normal cooling mechanism on dry land
however there will still be some fluid loss through sweat whatever the sweat rate and this will
vary between individuals it's clear that it's important to have fluid available during an
acral workout so keep a bottle on the side of the pool and drink during rest periods medical
conditions if you have musculoskeletal issues especially joint problems make your warm up
more gradual and a little bit longer is this can give stiffer joints more opportunity to loosen up
and move more freely take time to move your joints through slowly through their natural range start
with small arm sweeps side to side under the water and build up to say breaststroke style movements
forwards and backwards now if you're swimming rather than doing water workouts pace yourself
as you warm up pick an easy stroke and and do it slowly gradually picking up the speed you'll
know when you're ready to swim at a higher speed because you'll literally be feeling warmer in
the water unless you're swimming in a hot pool of course be functional with your acral workouts
consider prioritizing exercises in order to improve your functional ability and support
for those painful or weakened joints and muscles there are lots of activities that you can incorporate
mimic daily life movements for example pushing your arms forwards against the water could replicate
the action of pushing open a door and you could always add a float in each hand for extra resistance
just walking forwards briskly in the water is like walking outside on a windy day and it's great for
improving abdominal strength to support a painful back and helping you to keep your balance and then
a cool down we know we need a cool down at the end of your session the cool down needs to be
more gradual too to allow blood flow to return efficiently through the muscles and flush them
of the waste products such as the lactic acid some swimmers will again change to an easier stroke
for instance and slow down gradually over two or three laps of the pool those doing water robics can
do exercises similar to when they were starting up in other words the behaviors are the same
whether the workouts in or out of the water when it comes to warming up and cooling down
now speed plays a part because the pace of the session may need to be slightly slower
in order to accommodate any range of movement restrictions or alterations or gait changes
and allow time to transition between exercises too in case balance is affected for example
after traveling sideways to the right in the pool it may be do something on the spot there before
we go back the other side rather than trying to change quickly from direction to direction
some swimmers alternate strokes for instance side stroke on the right for one length and then
on the left on the return length on your intensity for those participants free of
impairments always use the water effectively keep your arms under the surface to aid movement
through the water and keep the shoulders under the water to maximize resistance of the water
so making you work harder swimming in particular is considered one of the best all-round exercises
because it works all the major muscle groups while giving you a good cardio workout at the same
time but you won't maximize these benefits if you don't push yourself a muscular balance in the same
way you use all your muscles in a land workout try to work all your muscles in the pool and to get
a good all-round workout swimmers need to vary their strokes if you're working with aqua exercise
equipment again make sure to work biceps and triceps back and chest and so forth so you're
engaging all the muscles probably the best way to sample extra aqua exercise is in a class situation
allowing an instructor to take you through a range of different drills and also to give you the
motivation to push yourself and so get the results you desire the great thing about aqua classes
is that having been around for some time now there are some fabulous variations on themes on the
market often taking land-based themes and adapting them to the pool if you like a particular group
exercise class in the studio why not venture into the wet version so look out for the following
these are all worth a try aqua chi derived from tai chi moves and is influenced by flowing continuous
graceful movements that typify many eastern physical disciplines the class focuses on enhancing
internal energy referred to as chi in chinese a healthy flow of which reflects optimum balance
in mind body and spirit participants practice in warm chest deep water standing with knees
slightly bent so the body is immersed to the neck a typical session combines breathing exercises
with slow combat style techniques that are based on the movements of animals and the arms legs
torso flowing continual patterns criticized characterized by softness and roundness creating
a feeling of harmony another option pilates h2o is a posture-based class many of you may have tried
this on dry land and the main aim here being to promote strength in the core muscles to help
stabilize the spine our posture is compromised on a daily basis due to often due to our studentry
lifestyle and but also to the reliance on technology we're just not as active as our ancestors
anatomically the spine is designed to move to flex extend latsally flex to rotate however
technology has led to us being less mobile and hence not using our bodies in the way they were
designed in particular the thoracic spine is very immobile in the general population so this is an
area that gets a lot of attention in an aqua class work on aligning the shoulders will help people
who carry tension in their shoulders which can result in an excessive kyphotic curve in the upper
back which is this and following on from that yoga takes the principles and movements of hatha
yoga and adapts them to the water environment with the release of gravity the body is able to find
the optimum stretch by using the rhythm of the breath and in a sense of relaxation can be achieved
yoga strengthens and tones the body whilst relieving tensions and renewing energy traditional
yoga done on land might incorporate might incorporate foam blankets blocks mats straps and
maybe even the wall for practicing whereas yoga might use foam noodles that float and can help
with stretching and the savasana the the rest pose is achieved simply by doing that by using the floats
yoga is also a lower impact than traditional yoga putting less strain on the joints and allowing
those who have trouble moving or standing for long periods to get excellent exercise and
meditative yoga practice in contrast to that aqua attack is one of today's sport specific training
programs that's been adapted to an aqua environment and used by many trainers and coaches as well as
fitness enthusiasts for their training regime this session combines the benefits of training in water
with the hottest moves and skills that are setting the trends today in fitness boxing
martial arts self-defense and mind-body conditioning aqua attack offers an exciting
time-efficient workout that builds on four essential ingredients self-defense self-awareness
fitness and fun so as you would guess particularly from this last format aqua exercise can be
effective in weight loss um Dr. Robert Bielin former chair of the sports medicine and science
committee on the men's u.s. Olympic water polo team suggested that you can burn as many calories
as dryland activities provided you put in the effort hopefully now when you think of exercising
the pool you won't just think of swimmers plowing up and down lens but you'll appreciate this can
actually be an exciting wet gym no longer does aqua exercise have to be married to the words
easy or gentle but can be the route to pushing yourself to the levels of fitness you perhaps only
previously dreamt of with such choices to keep you interested and motivated it's no wonder exercise
in water continues to grow in popularity as the elderly those carrying injuries fitness enthusiasts
and even elite sports performers alike begin to appreciate the many ways in which you can help
them to move closer to their goals allowing you to comfortably move the upper and lower limbs
through optimal ranges of motion while minimizing stress on the joints ensuring you burn calories
while also toning the muscles and providing the ideal setting for reducing stress and tension
isn't it time you took the plunge
