With 650 muscles in your body contributing to around 50% of your body weight and governing
an almost infinitesimal number of movements, it's worth getting to know at least some of
them a little better.
If you truly wish to achieve any degree of success from your exercise efforts, an understanding
of how your muscles work is essential to planning a safe and effective route to a healthier,
fitter and slimmer you.
Beyond this, digging a little deeper into the unique structure of the muscles is a fascinating
journey.
The very essence of movement itself relies on the coordinated action of groups of muscles
and so harmony, balance and timing become key components in even the simplest movement
patterns.
So let's explore how muscles put us in motion.
Muscles can be divided roughly into three categories.
We have voluntary muscle, also known as skeletal muscle, due to it attaching to the skeleton.
It's also called striated due to its striped appearance and it's controlled consciously
by the nervous system.
The triceps in the back of the arm, the quadriceps in the front of the thigh are examples, particularly
that we might focus on in an exercise domain.
Involuntary muscle, also known as visceral muscle, is smooth in appearance and it's not
contracted intentionally as skeletal muscle would be.
And these muscles are found in the respiratory system, the walls of the blood vessels where
they're squeezing has the effect of keeping the blood moving through the body.
We talked about this in our cardiovascular lecture.
And then there's cardiac muscle, which again at the same time we talked about and it's
specific to the heart, the myocardium and it's an involuntary muscle.
Now when we're investigating how muscles work, a key principle to understand is that the
muscles and bones of the skeleton form a series of levers with the joints acting as a fulcrum
and the muscles can only exert a pulling force they can't actually push.
Clearly then, muscles can only bring about movement around the joints they span and their
force is exerted on the skeleton through three different contacts, either via a tendon at
the end of the muscles such as the biceps or directly onto the bone, an example being
the triceps or via a fibrous sheath that's known as an aponeurosis with an example being
the large abdominal muscle and the way it contacts at the bottom.
Being the amazing spectacle of human engineering design the body is, it conveniently features
a balance of muscles at the front and back so enabling a wide range of movement in all
directions.
Examples of these opposing pairs would be the bicep and tricep, maybe the quadriceps
and hamstrings, maybe the abdominals and the erector spinae at the back and these pairs
have to work in unison in that one will have to relax while the other contracts in order
for movement to take place.
When analyzing movement we use the term group action it describes the relationship between
various muscles as the skeleton moves.
So as a practical example let's look at the case of elbow flexion as in picking up an
object or even you know taking a drink from a cup.
So this movement is brought about by a contraction in the bicep muscle as I lifted up and this
is referred to as the agonist muscle or sometimes called the prime mover.
Now the tricep muscle at the back of the arm has to relax in order for this to take place
so it's called the antagonist muscle but the story doesn't stop there because as the muscles
really work in isolation there's probably something else at work here and that's actually
the muscle in the forearm here and that's referred to as the synergist but then finally
there are muscles involved in holding the body in a fixed position to allow for this
to happen and in this case it'll be the deltoid muscle that's holding my upper arm in place
otherwise I'd just be swinging the cup away from me when actually I'm trying to bend the
elbow and lift it up.
So this is the group action of muscles and it actually applies to every movement around
every joint.
Now you may have already noticed I've talked of muscles contracting or shortening to move
bones closer together but how does this occur?
Well in order to explain this we must first establish the construction of a muscle which
is made up of various components.
Firstly the epimysium is a strong connective tissue that surrounds the whole muscle and
within this we find bundles of muscle fibres and each of those again being covered in its
own sheath, its own connective tissue called the perimysium.
Each of these bundles is again in turn made up of other bundles of fibres wrapped in another
covering and this time it's called the endomyceum.
So each of these muscle fibres is made up of myofibrils that feature blocks of sarcomeres
each block containing the key proteins actin and myosin arranged alternatively in thin
and thick strands.
Now when a nerve impulse stimulates the muscle to move the result is that the actin and myosin
elements are attracted to each other forming what's known as cross bridges, a phenomenon
that's often referred to as the sliding filament theory.
As a result of that the sarcomeres shortens and as this happens down the whole length
of a muscle fibre it'll clearly shorten.
Now if one end stays fixed the other end will move so if we think about that bicep work
shortening as we lifted the cup if this end stays fixed then this end is going to move.
Now the force generated by the muscle is dependent upon the number of muscle fibres brought
into play so a light weight like the cup wasn't really too demanding for me so I only engaged
a few muscle fibres whereas a heavy weight will be the opposite.
So more specifically rather than fibres we talk about the number of motor units recruited
that's the key to handling differing loads and a motor unit is the label given to a group
of muscle fibres and the nerve that links them to the central nervous system i.e. the
spinal cord and these work on an all or nothing basis so once the nerve is stimulated all
the fibres it attaches to will kick in.
Now motor units differ in that those that require precise movements such as the eye muscles
may have one nerve controlling only a few muscle fibres whereas for example the buttock
muscles may have one nerve serving hundreds of muscle fibres because we don't need too
much dexterity in our movement there.
Now interestingly not all muscle fibres are the same our muscles are made up of a mix
of what we call slow twitch and fast twitch fibres we talked about this earlier so just
as a reminder slow twitch muscle fibres tend to be red in colour as they hold myoglobin
which is where oxygen is stored they also contain a high concentration of mitochondria
which you may remember is an enzyme that's vital for the production of energy in the
muscle cells we talked about that in lecture 13.
Now these muscle fibres are slow to contract but also slow to fatigue so they're ideally
suited to activities of a lower intensity and a longer duration.
Now the fast twitch fibres however are white in colour and they actually hold low levels
of mitochondria they contract quickly but they also tire equally rapidly so they're
really suited to activities that are high intensity but short duration so unlike the
slow twitch fibres fast twitch fibres can be divided into two categories with some fibres
able to contract quickly but actually having a little bit more staying power than typical
fast twitch fibres and these are what are referred to as a type 2a or pink fibres they're
called and they're incredibly useful because they can assist the slow twitch fibres if
the intensity increases in an endurance activity but they can also support the fast twitch fibres
when they begin to fail and we need a couple of extra repetitions or a couple of extra
yards or a few more seconds.
Now the percentage of which fibre type we're composed of I'm afraid is genetically dependent
in fact someone once suggested that if you wish to win an Olympic gold medal you need
to choose your parents and your grandparents very carefully.
So having already mentioned muscle contractions let's take a moment to define what this means
in detail specifically how muscular contractions can be split into three classifications.
Firstly a concentric contraction now this occurs when the muscle develops tension as
it shortens.
Now I reckon you're probably watching this sitting down so what I'm going to ask you
to do is to stand up for me please up you get come on I'm waiting.
Now the movement you've just performed was brought about by a concentric contraction
in the quadriceps at the front of your thigh as they lifted you up okay so I'm sure you
won't mind now I'm going to ask you to sit back down please but while you do that focus
on the feeling in your thighs.
Now you've just performed here an eccentric contraction of the quadriceps muscles they
were tense in order to lower you slowly rather than just falling down under the influence
of gravity so they're protecting your joints from injury but this time they were also lengthening
as you sit down as you worked your muscles against the resistance of your body weight.
Now surprisingly it was as long ago as 1882 it was first discovered that muscles contracting
eccentrically can exert a greater force than when contracting concentrically and this is
due to the longer duration of the cross bridges that we talked about earlier of the protein
filaments.
Now much time has been devoted to research in this phenomenon as a result negative training
as it's known is now regularly deployed by elite sports trainers and in rehab applications.
Now in order to execute the two movements you just did your spine had to remain fixed
and so your upper body was raised and lowered with you staying upright and the deeper abdominal
muscles the erector spinal muscles in the lower back had to brace but they didn't actually
move and this type of contraction where the muscle doesn't shorten or lengthen is referred
to as an isometric contraction.
So in our previous example if we think about the quadricep muscles that I said contracted
concentrically when you stood up and eccentrically when you went down if you were to stop halfway
in that kind of halfway between sitting and standing position that would be an isometric
contraction in those quadriceps.
So in designing exercise fitness professionals need to understand precisely which muscles
create movement and about which joints to ensure that the workout is effective and safe
and this takes into account awareness of the origin of the muscle which is the end generally
nearest to the centre and the insertion where it attaches on the other side of the joint.
So here are some key examples of movement and muscle.
So let's start with the elbow.
So if we start at the elbow the movements that we get about the elbows we've already
seen a flexion this bending that's brought about by the biceps.
We also have a straightening extension that's brought about by the triceps.
We have supination turning it up which is brought about by the biceps and then we have
pronation turning it down which is brought about by the pronator terrace.
The shoulders movements available here are first of all flexion lifting them up to the
front and this is the deltoids.
Lowering them back down to your side pulling down is actually brought about by the latissimus
dorsi.
We have abduction lifting out to the side which again is the deltoid and pulling down
is again the latissimus dorsi that's adduction.
We also have another movement in the shoulders called horizontal adduction which means if
the arms are out but we move them in a horizontal plane this is down to the pectoralis major.
Now the shoulder joint is the only one capable of what we call full circumduction i.e. it
can move in a full circle and that relies on the combined action of various muscles.
The shoulder girdle has movements such as elevation and that's really brought about by the trapezius.
Depression which is the lower fibres of the trapezius in the back.
Retraction which is the rhomboids and protraction pushing forward which is brought about by the
serratus anterior at the front here it's a fan shaped muscle that attaches to the front
of the scapula.
The lumbar spine the lower back allows us to flex we can bend forwards which is brought
about by the abdominals that's our sit-up movement.
Extension bending backwards the erector spinae at the back.
We've also got lateral flexion we've also got rotation and both of those are brought
about by the oblique muscles at the side and they work contralaterally and what that
means is that the internal obliques on one side work with the external obliques on the
other side to work this way and similarly this way.
Hip movements of flexion which is simply lifting the thigh up and that's brought about by the
iliosoas muscle deep in here.
We have extension taking the leg behind the line of the body and that's the gluteus maximus
there.
We have abduction lifting the leg out to the side and that's the gluteus medius and minimus
the small gluteal muscles.
And adduction bringing it back into the center is working the adductor muscles a little group
of muscles on the inner thigh.
The knee movements we have extension straightening the leg which is the quadriceps.
We have bending the knee which is the hamstrings and then down at the ankle we really have
pointing the toes which is plantaflexion and that's brought about by the calf muscles
the gastronomius and the cilius and then we have pulling it back up which is dorsiflexion
and that's down to the tibialis anterior on the front of the shin.
So having now established which muscles bring about the major movements in the most common
joints since this lecture series is all about fitness naturally our next step is to look
at how we can increase the efficiency of these muscles specifically in terms of strength
and endurance.
Now you may remember from an earlier lecture in the series that strength is defined as
the ability to generate force in one instantaneous maximal contraction whereas endurance is the
ability to continually contract at submaximal loads for a given duration.
So resistance training is the route to bringing about gains in both of these parameters and
many different methods of resistance training have been developed to improve strength and
endurance for health benefits and also for sports performance demands.
Now designing a resistance training program is founded on your goals primarily because
this will then determine the number of repetitions you should perform.
Now an important unit here is the one repetition maximum and you may remember back in lecture
two we talked about the one repetition maximum as being a strength test you may undergo
at a gym.
So let's take a look at how this relationship works in terms of determining in our goals.
The relationship between the result we're after the number of repetitions and the load
that we're lifting is known as the strength continuum.
Now the drawback with this approach as we've said there is that it relies on identifying
this one repetition maximum and that can be a timely process and it presents a potential
injury risk for anyone who's not already accustomed to regular resistance training.
But fortunately trial and error can help to identify the appropriate weights to work with
and we use the rule of thumb that if the last couple of repetitions are difficult to complete
whether you're in the low for strength mid for the mix or high for endurance repetition
range then you'll have the right load and you'll be in that correct percentile area.
Of course over time you'll become stronger if you're working out regularly and therefore
these loads will need to be incrementally increased to get to that point where you're
achieving fatigue on each exercise.
Now in addition to the repetition range and the load there are a number of other variables
that warrant consideration when designing a safe and effective workout plan.
Exercise selection should address specific individual desires for example to achieve
a flat stomach but should ideally follow a whole body approach that ensures all round
development and this helps to reduce the risk of injury due to muscle imbalances.
Compound exercises that engage a number of muscle groups are favoured over isolation exercises
as they're more likely to mirror everyday movement patterns.
So a compound exercise would be something like a chest press a press up.
So if I were to lean against the podium and take a little press up position I'm actually
working here through the triceps at the back of the arm the shoulders at the front and
the chest however if I were to simply take a weight and extend my arm backwards I'm
really isolating there to just the tricep at the back.
So that's the difference between our compound and isolation exercises.
Now the exercise order is important and generally it follows a couple of guidelines.
It's a good idea to attempt the most demanding exercises at the beginning of the workout
because then you have more energy but also alternating upper and lower body exercises
allows you to avoid having to stop due to local muscular fatigue and rest periods between
exercises are important and they can vary according to your training program.
Strength trainers will need to allow probably somewhere in the region of one to five minutes
in order for the recovery before the next maximal exertion whereas endurance training
features rest bounce certainly no longer than 90 seconds because you want to keep the muscles
working as much as possible and then recovery between successive workouts and this is really
governed by the length of time it takes for the muscles to repair themselves.
It's usually around 48 hours although for novices it could be a little bit longer but
importantly you shouldn't attempt exercise before the muscles are ready to go again as
this can result in what we call a catabolic effect which is the opposite of anabolic which
means muscle growth.
Catabolic actually means the muscles breaking down.
So if this happens the muscles will constantly break down through not being afforded enough
time to absorb the protein they require and repair and actually they'll become weaker,
smaller and this mirrors what happens in starvation where the muscles are deprived of
protein because your body begins to take it out and use it as a fuel to keep the vital
organs running.
So let's now consider a few different resistance training formats that you can follow.
We'll start basically with the single set and as the name implies this approach dictates
that we only perform one set of each exercise but remember it must be to fatigue, remember
those last couple of repetitions we must be getting to fatigue.
Now the benefit of this approach is that there's a raft of evidence to confirm that it produces
results and also that it's time efficient.
On the negative side though overload is not always achieved in just one attempt so practice
is required to get the right resistance and guidance is that exercise should be performed
at a slow to moderate speed.
Now moving beyond that naturally from a single set we go to multi set exercises and this
is founded upon performing usually three to five sets of the same exercise before you
move on to a different exercise and the rest times will usually be a little bit longer than
the previous example especially if you're handling heavy weights in order to build up
strength as we mentioned earlier.
Now although this may be too demanding for those new to exercise and requires a good
deal of time it is a simple format and it encourages a deeper concentration on the work
in muscles and that can help to accelerate results.
A possible disadvantage however is that in the gym this can potentially present a small
issue in that you need to sit on one piece of equipment for a while to do it.
Now circuit training is something certainly I remember from school days and this term
describes a number of exercises done in rotation usually one set at each station with a short
rest as you move on possibly completing even more than one circuit if you're advanced.
Now the great thing here is that exercises will be varied to allow for a focus on all
the major muscle groups and the target at each station might be a specific number of
repetitions or it could be a set time duration but in both cases the goal is really to improve
your endurance.
Now a sensible approach here for circuit training is to alternate upper and lower body exercises
at stations next to each other and this format is known as peripheral heart action training
or PHA training because it requires the blood to constantly shift oxygen carrying blood
from one part of the body to the next.
So what this does is something called vascular shunts it leads to a greater calorie burn
because the body is moving the blood from the legs to the upper body and then back down
again and then back up again so we get that extra calorie burn.
So if you have a look here you can see we've got an example of a circuit and it requires
nothing more than a pair of dumbbells and a small space and typically the work period
here would be 25 repetitions or one minute with a rest of 30 seconds.
Now this method has the advantages of allowing for a large number of exercises it's ideal
if you wish to work out with friends and it allows the exercises to choose how many circuits
you'll complete.
So moving on now to pyramids pyramid training now this describes a technique of repeating
sets on a given exercise but with different loads and so a different number of repetitions
on each.
So this allows for either an ascending set where we go from a light to a heavy load or
a descending set where we go from a heavy to a light load.
We could even do a full pyramid where we go from light to heavy and back down again and
perhaps something that would look like this.
Now pyramids have the advantage of allowing for development of both strength and endurance
in the same workout but they do need lots of time especially if you consider the full
pyramid and applying this to every exercise in your routine.
In addition there's a school of thought that believes so many sets will not produce any
greater or speedier gains than just one or two and also this is a demanding approach
so it's certainly not best suited to beginners.
And now super sets so what are super sets this is a term that actually refers to two
different methods of training that both rely on moving directly from one exercise to the
next with no rest and the option is either to target the same muscle group or to work
in opposing pairs which you'll remember I discussed earlier.
So an example of the former might be a bench press like so with a fly and then a press
up so each of those exercises will involve the pectoralis being engaged as the prime
mover whereas if we took a shoulder press and then a pull up and a lateral raise and
then maybe a bent over row what we're actually doing there is alternatively working the deltoids
and the latissimus dorsi in the back.
Now due to reduced rest periods here these are time efficient because you're going straight
from one exercise to the next and it allows for muscles to be worked through varying movement
planes and it will be of high intensity so it's going to produce good results.
However by definition it's not ideal for novice exercises and if you're performing it at home
it requires a few pieces of equipment and also you could run into trouble in the gym
if other members are using the piece of equipment you need to get on to.
And then let's have a look at drop sets.
Now drop sets actually are a type of descending pyramid it's quite an advanced technique used
by those looking specifically to increase muscular size.
Now the intensity will be high as the aim here is to perform four to six repetitions
to failure with a heavy weight and then quickly remove a small amount of the load known as
stripping and then immediately go again to see how many you can lift and then do it again
and then do it again until we reach complete fatigue.
So as you can see we start to strip the weight and continue to pump a few extra repetitions
out.
Now since the result of resistance training will be muscle growth let's investigate just
how this takes place.
You may be shocked to learn that the aim of resistance training is actually to injure
the muscles at cellular level which are to effectively cause small tears in the cell
structure as a result of overloading them.
Now the result of this is that we then get satellite cells drawn to the area to repair
the damaged fibres and this leads to an increased number of protein strands as an adaptive response
more dietary protein will be absorbed and then the cross-sectional area of the muscle
increases and the activity of these satellite cells is governed by the hepatocyte growth
hormone which is released by the pituitary gland that in turn is controlled by testosterone
hence the reason males can achieve much greater muscular development than females even though
they both go through actually it's an identical biological process.
Now this may be a common fear for women when advised to embark upon a resistance training
program but it's simply not founded due to lower concentrations of the male hormone women
just will not grow big muscles but rather will achieve good tone and as an interesting
aside it's worth noting here that fast-switch fibres respond better to strength training
and are capable of splitting into what's known as a parent and daughter fibre so it leads
to an even greater increase in muscle size as the cross-sectional area of each of these
fibres will then be increased and this explains why if we take a look at athletes lining up
at the Olympic Games for the 100 meters compared to the marathon whilst their training regimes
may differ according to the table we looked at earlier regarding loads and repetitions
the major difference is actually genetic in the way their bodies respond to the training
stimulus as the cellular regeneration process slows down when coupled with generally declining
activity levels this leads to a loss of muscle mass with ageing and it's referred to as
sarcopenia fortunately as we will see in our lecture on age and exercise the above process
will take place at any age so resistance training can not only slow the effect of growing older
but actually in terms of skeletal muscle it can even reverse it yes you heard me correctly
weight training can actually make you look younger now the American College of Sports
Medicine recommends that resistance training should be performed at least two times per
week one set of 8 to 15 repetitions to failure on around 8 to 10 different exercises and
professors this will significantly improve your health status there exists a considerable
amount of research to prove that in addition to obvious and potential huge weight loss
and aesthetic benefits weight training leads to adaptations such as reduced risk factors
associated with heart disease osteoporosis and diabetes so when it comes to exercise
for improved health isn't it time that you raise the bar
