Perhaps due to its proven simplicity and comparably easy access, walking is the most undervalued
exercise format that exists. A sweeping generalisation, a lot of people view it as only being suitable
as a route to fitness for the elderly or the very outer shape. How wrong that statement
is. Both the American Heart Association and the American College of Sports Medicine recommend
walking as an exercise intervention that can improve a number of health measures. So there
must be some weight behind these claims. Over the next 30 minutes, I will convince you of
its value as a workout mode, prove to you it's not just a soft option and teach you
just how to do it correctly to ensure optimum health benefits. Firstly, let's look at a
few facts about walking and I find some of these wealth, nothing short of amazing. Race
walkers can cover a mile in just over 5 minutes and a full marathon in around 3 hours. Although
over 40% of journeys in the US are less than 2 miles, only 10% of these short trips are
not made by car. These short trips offer a lot of opportunity for walking. Walking
a mile burns just as many calories as running, it just takes longer. Walking has been proven
to be an effective treatment for mild depression, reducing symptoms by 47%. Walking can reduce
your risk of type 2 diabetes by 58% and a 2011 study by Erin Richmond showed that brisk
walking at least 3 miles per hour for 3 hours or more a week lowered the risk of prostate
cancer progression. Walking for fitness first gained popularity in the US in the 80s after
cardiologist James Ripp, a graduate of the Harvard Medical School, published details
of how beneficial walking was for his patients recovering from heart attack. Dr Ripp wanted
to know if these benefits could be extrapolated to the general population and so with a team
of researchers he set up the Rockport Walking Program in Massachusetts. In 1989 when the
results were published they caused quite a sensation in the mainstream media and there
to a sudden boom in fitness walking across the nation. The program showed how walking
can not only reduce important health parameters such as high blood pressure and cholesterol
but could also significantly aid weight loss. So let's take a look at what the research
tells us. Firstly let's consider whether walking can be truly effective as a training stimulus.
Ripp's study tested 500 people and found that 67% of the men and 90% of the women could
reach their target heart rate by walking 4 to 4.5 miles per hour. Dr Astrand found that
during competitive walking intensity reached approximately 85% of maximum heart rate. It
was even higher uphill. In another study Michael Pollock at the University of Florida's Centre
for Exercise Science found that middle aged men who walked at a pace of 3.5 to 4.5 miles
per hour for 40 minutes, 4 times a week, had the same cardiovascular improvements as men
the same age who jogged for 30 minutes 3 times a week. These walkers didn't reach the same
level of intensity as the runners yet the increased duration and frequency of walking
gave the walkers similar aerobic benefits. Now specifically consider the area of cardiovascular
disease. A British study by Adrianne Harman looked at the effects on the health of previously
sedentary women who walked regularly for one year. The women walked on average 2.5 hours
per week at about 4 miles per hour. This added up to approximately 10 miles per week and
around 70% of maximum heart rate. The results of the study showed enhanced exercise tolerance,
improved metabolic response to exercise and changes in the lipid profile of the blood
significant enough to predict a decreased risk of coronary artery disease in the walking
group when compared to controls. The conclusion exercise doesn't have to be vigorous to reduce
cardiovascular risk factors. In other words even strolling can reduce the risk of cardiovascular
disease. One of the most comprehensive and renowned of these studies looked at the physical
activity of 17,000 Harvard alumni across 20 years. Ralph Paffenberger and his colleagues
concluded that walking can reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease and reduce the risk
of heart attack by 28% or more. You can do this in 5 30 minute walking sessions per week.
Now clearly for a lot of us weight management, weight loss is the primary motivation. So
how effective is walking in this domain? As with any activity walking uses energy and
therefore adding walking to your daily activity will use extra calories. So long as you don't
compensate by eating extra food, regular fitness walking will result in weight loss. Back to
Dr James Ribb, he estimated that brisk walking for 45 minutes per day, 4 times per week is
sufficient to lose an amazing 18 pounds over a year even without any dietary change. Not
surprisingly, if you walk up a steep incline and or increase your pace, you burn more calories.
For example, if you weigh 150 pounds, that's 68 kilos and walk three and a half miles per
hour, that's about 5.6 kilometers per hour on flat ground, you're going to burn around
300 calories an hour. However, if you walked up just a 4% incline, you'd burn 400 calories
an hour. And if you walked up a 10% incline, you'd burn a whopping 500 calories per hour.
Now, if you pick up the pace as well, say to just 4 miles per hour, 6.4 kilometers per
hour on level ground, you'll burn 350 calories in an hour. And that's pretty good for just
walking. Race walking speeds of over 5 miles per hour will burn as many as 600 calories
per hour. A 12 minute mile pace around 5 miles per hour can burn 50% more calories than a
20 minute mile pace, which is 3 miles per hour. If you're walking faster, you'll not
only burn more calories, but you'll also spend less time each day exercising. For example,
walking 3 miles at a 12 minute mile pace 5 days per week will save you 2 hours per week
over a person walking 3 miles at a 20 minute mile pace. As a weight bearing exercise, walking
can also positively impact upon bone density. Osteoporosis is a major health problem, affecting
around 25% of women and 8% of men in the UK and some 15 million people in the US. Osteoporosis
reduces the density of bones and can be life threatening since many older people die as
a result of complications suffered from broken bones. Several studies have reported that regular
walking at moderate to brisk speeds increases bone density, even just walking for 30 minutes
a day. As we discuss in our lecture on stress, exercise can help reduce stress, particularly
regular aerobic conditioning, which is precisely what walking is. A walking program has been
shown to produce significant gains in self-image, confidence, feelings of well-being and just
reducing depression. In one particular study, AF Kramer and his colleagues examined the
effect of brisk walking on mildly obese sedentary women and found that walking markedly improved
their psychological well-being. It's easy to understand why Hippocrates is quoted as
saying walking is man's best medicine. But where walking really displays its value is
in the area of injury, as exercise-related injuries are shown to be much lower than for
most other exercise formats. During running, for instance, the body has to absorb impact
equal to around five times your body weight, but walking causes impact stresses of only
around two to three times your own weight. This means that walking is less likely to
produce injuries and is consequently being recommended as a rehab activity for injured
runners. Studies have shown that increasing the intensity of a walking program, unlike
other modes of exercise, doesn't carry any increased risk of injury. During one 24-week
study, not one of the 59 participants who walked five days a week at speeds of between
three and five miles per hour sustained a walking-related injury that necessitated consulting
with a physician. Another 28-week study compared the injury rate of subjects running versus
those doing fitness walking four days a week at 80% of their maximum heart rate for 40
minutes. Preliminary results indicated that runners lost 11.1 days of training due to
injury, but fitness walkers only lost an average of one and a half days of training. When it
comes to exercise for seniors, it can be argued that walking is the foremost option, although
of course, every type of exercise has some risk associated with it. However, because
walking is a low-impact activity, the risk is lower compared to other forms of exercise
such as running. Now, for those of you who might consider walking too easy or maybe
even too boring to adopt as a fitness technique, I'm going to give you a challenge. Pop on
the treadmill next time you're at the gym and just two miles an hour, set the pace at
two miles an hour, but every 30 seconds, I want you to increase the speed by two miles
an hour. Somewhere around five miles per hour, you'll naturally want to break into a jog
because biomechanically, it's more efficient for your body to do this, but at this point,
don't. Don't run, just walk faster and see how it feels after about five minutes. I'm
pretty sure you'll then be convinced of the fitness credentials of walking. Walking obviously
uses similar muscles to running, but let's look at how your body achieves the walking
motion. Let's work from the upper body downwards and see what's really going on here. The shoulder
muscles are used when you pump your arms vigorously while walking, and of course they provide
balance as they swing in opposition to your legs. Walking with an upright posture is the
most efficient way of locomotion, so pulling in the deeper abdominal muscles is important.
Moving a little lower, the hip flexor muscles at the front and top of the thigh are responsible
for lifting the leg and swinging through the striding phase of the wall. The quadricep
muscles on the front of the thigh are used to extend the knee as the leg is straightened
on that reach. Your hips actually will rock side to side as you walk, and the gluteals
are responsible for this motion. Now, drawing the leg back and pushing off requires hip
extension, which is working into the back of the thigh and also into the gluteals. The
tibialis anterior is on the front of the shin, and that will raise the toes as the leg swings
forwards to ensure your heel touches down first, and the calf muscles will provide that
upward and forward momentum from the push off as the heel lifts and you project forward.
As you might imagine though, the real science is going on down in the feet, so let's investigate
a little more closely what's really going on here. The heel strike describes the moment
the foot first touches the ground and lasts for literally just a split second. This is
followed by the early flat foot stage, defined as the point where the whole of the foot is
now in contact with the ground and the body center of gravity located in the pelvis just
in front of the bottom of the spine is now moving forwards through the foot. This is
an important stage as this is where shock absorption takes place, which is a key to
preventing injury. The next phase is called the late flat foot, and at this point this
is where the center of gravity actually passes forward of the neutral position and subconsciously
the whole body structure changes from being flexible to absorb shock to being more rigid
enabling us to propel forwards. Around two to three times the body weight pass through
the foot as the heel raises, something that happens between four, anywhere from three
to ten thousand times each day, so it's not surprising that the foot can suffer chronic
injury due to repetitive stress. And then the final phase, obviously the toe off, the point
at which the swing begins again. This is where the difference between walking and running
is most obvious. Since in walking the next heel strike occurs immediately on the other
foot, but a runner will go through what's called a floating stage, describing the moment
where both feet are momentarily off the ground. As an experienced trainer, I've been around
a while and I'm always being asked questions, all sorts of questions, but these two are
really common and they relate to walking and I've been asked these questions so many times
I've lost count over the years. Surely walking can't be as good for me as running. Actually
it's a much healthier choice as you'll get all of the benefits of running such as toning
the muscles, improving the cardio respiratory system, strengthening the immune system, controlling
blood fat, stress hormones, but without the same risk of injury to your joints. Runners
put a strain on their joints as I mentioned earlier, equals around five times their body
weight with each impact in stark contrast to what we've just learned about walkers.
Another question, can walking really help me to lose fat? Without doubt, although the
caveat here is that just like any other form of exercise, the more effort you put in, the
better results you'll achieve. To turn a simple walk into a workout, vary the intensity by
alternating between a moderate but brisk pace and then some full out sprint in inverted
commas, pumping your arms as you vigorously move yourself across the ground. Just 30 minutes
like this, including 30 second sprints and one minute slow pace for recovery, will lead
to a serious calorie burn and so will considerably help you in your weight loss efforts.
Another question, I'm already running. If I'm running, what's the point in walking?
Well, this completely misses the point because unfortunately, walking's not just a simpler
easier version of running. As we've already discovered, you actually burn more calories
walking fast than you do jogging. The two activities are obviously similar and offer
some common benefits, but walking also has the bonus of reducing the likelihood of impact
injuries we've seen. It affords an opportunity to still keep your fitness level up by exercising
with certain injuries that running might not allow. It also provides the ideal gentle workout
mode on the day following a race or a particularly heavy training session. Finally, it allows
partners of disparate abilities to exercise together as the fitter person's speed walking
will be working hardest if trying to keep up with the less fit person who's jogging.
So now hopefully you're convinced. Here's a few tips to get you started. Exercising
outdoors, perhaps even in extreme conditions, can dampen your enthusiasm to walk. So a few
necessary precautions are needed in such conditions. When temperatures are high, profuse sweating
leads to considerable water loss. This reduces the amount of blood returning to the heart
which could result in cardiovascular stress as indicated by very high heart rates. So
on a hot day then, you must take your water bottle with you. When humidity is high, say
over about 60%, air temperature is up, the body's ability to dissipate internal heat
produced during exercises impaired. So you may need to reduce your speed or continued walking
during these extreme conditions because it could result in heat exhaustion or perhaps
heat stroke. Now the symptoms of heat exhaustion include weakness, dizziness, headaches, nausea,
pale skin, profuse sweating and a weak but rapid pulse. The best treatment for this
condition is replacements of fluids and prolonged rest in a cool location. So on warm days you
need to choose light, loose clothing that will allow air to circulate around the body
and thus improve the body's ability to stay cool. If the sun's strong, a hat or a visor
may be advisable and a smear of petroleum jelly across the forehead just above the eyebrows
will prevent sweat from running into your eyes. By the way, petroleum jelly is also useful
to lubricate the tops of the legs and under the arms to avoid chafing. Layering clothing
will keep walkers warm at the start of exercise on a cool or cold day. As the body becomes
warm, outer layers can be removed before the under layers become wet from perspiration.
If your clothing becomes wet it should be changed as soon as possible. Dressing advice
for cold days is to start with a thin layer of thermal fabric that traps the air but releases
moisture next to the skin, followed by a warm synthetic such as a sweatshirt or a fleece.
All these layers should allow perspiration to escape so they need to be non-absorbent
and dry quickly. There are many lightweight thermal garments on the market designed for
walking and whilst not essential they'll help to ensure you're a little more comfortable.
Obviously gloves and a hat are advisable if the weather is very cold as a lot of heat
is lost through the hands and head. In wet weather you'll chill very quickly unless you
protect yourself from the rain but try to avoid plastic garments as these don't allow
perspiration to escape so you could end up getting chilled. Windy conditions can significantly
alter the intensity of exercise. For example on a calm day a 3 mile walk on level grounds
could be completed in an hour at a level intensity that feels somewhat hard. The same person
however may find the same 3 mile walk very hard in windy conditions so adjust your workouts
accordingly if need be. You might by the way, talking about walking outdoors, want to try
Nordic walking. Now this has been around for a while now but it involves using poles so
you're using your upper body and that can help to burn a few more calories if it's done
correctly. If possible avoid vigorous exercise in areas with high levels of air pollution.
While environmental hazards in highly polluted areas can be reduced by walking in the early
morning, late evening or weekends it might be better to exercise indoors. Bear in mind
that at even just moderate altitude your circulatory system might find it more difficult than
usual to deliver as much oxygen to the exercise in muscles as is required. Walkers who are
accustomed to exercising at lower altitudes will need to decrease their exercise intensity
and increase warm up and cool down periods at higher altitudes until they've acclimatised
to these new conditions. It usually takes weeks to adapt to major changes in attitude.
A lot of people ask me about walking shoes and a walking shoe is a performance product
designed specifically for this activity just as basketball shoes and running shoes are
designed for those activities. The mechanics of walking are quite distinct from other sports
and there are different requirements for the footwear. Firstly a walking shoe doesn't
have to absorb as much force as a running shoe and so should have a slightly lower heel.
However it should still have adequate cushioning at the heel strike point. The lower heel which
usually has a slight bevel in the rear also accommodates the heel strike and forward
roll of the foot seen in walking. A higher heel will tend to cause the toe to slap down
rapidly possibly even causing soreness on the shins. The shoe must be flexible in the
forefoot. It should also have good toe spring to further aid in the forward roll of the
foot from heel to toe. A runner shoe will only need to allow for probably around 30 degrees
of bend but a walker shoe really needs to allow around 45 degrees. A stiff heel lends
lateral support when the heel first contacts the ground and will choose a slightly firmer
yet still comfortable midsole. This also improves lateral stability and increases the durability
of the shoe since the firmer material is less likely to compress over time. There's no need
for the sometimes bulky lateral support structures found in the forefooted basketball, tennis,
aerobics and similar shoes. These only add weight and they're unnecessary in an activity
which has little side to side movement and is essentially linear such as walking.
That's another tip, wear well fitting seam free socks to prevent chafing and to absorb
perspiration. They need to fit well and a cotton wool mix is usually most comfortable
and more absorbent. I'll now take you through walking technique,
introducing three distinct intensity levels. We'll start at level one and this is referred
to as health walking. First, focus on your posture by lifting up through the centre of
your body trying to maintain a large space between your ribcage and your pelvis. Relax
your shoulders down and back and swing your arms in rhythm with your stride. Keep your
arms swinging naturally and comfortably. Relax your elbows as you swing your arms in opposition
to your legs. The forward swing should never cross the centre of the body and the arms
should swing from the shoulder and not from the elbow. The length of each stride should
be comfortable with stride length varying from one individual to another. Stride length
is determined by leg length, hamstring tightness and pelvic rotation. A person with short legs,
tight hamstrings and limited pelvis rotation will therefore have shorter stride length
than someone with longer legs, flexible hip joints and a greater amount of rotation.
When you plant your heel, your forefoot and toes are raised towards the shins. This is
called dorsiflexion. Then you lower your foot to the ground with control, not slapping
or pounding. Finally, your foot rolls from heel to toe. Of course, the faster you bring
your rear leg forward, the faster your walking rate. Level two is called fitness walking.
As although posture remains as in level one, there are various technique modifications
that will enable you to increase the pace now. For fitness walking, bend your elbows
so that your arms will swing faster. Swinging the arms faster will cause you to increase
your stride frequency. Don't cross the body with the arms. It should be a forward and
backward movement coming from the shoulders rather than the elbows. Fix your elbows at
about a 90 degree angle. Swing and hold the forearms close to the side. Keep your hands
in loose fists in line with your forearms. By the time your foot is planted on the ground,
your legs should be almost fully extended. Be careful not to lock your knee, that is
to push your legs so straight that it's rigid and can't move back anymore. If you find yourself
bobbing or bouncing somewhat as you walk, you may be bending your knee prematurely.
Your hips should be rotating slightly as you walk, so one hand should be moving slightly
as you walk, so one hip will be forward while the other hip is back. Let this hip rotation
occur naturally. Don't wiggle your hips to make it happen. If you're walking properly,
you'll notice the rotation. As you speed up, you're naturally going to lean more forward.
Make sure this is from the ankles up. Don't bend just from the waist forwards as this
can cause pain and discomfort in your lumbar spine.
Level 3 is known as speed walking and is an effort of around 9 on a scale of 1 to 10.
So it can't be maintained for long durations but should be used in short spurts. The technique
is as follows. As the arm swings from the shoulder, focus on driving your elbows back
and keep them close to the sides of the body. As we said earlier, pumping your arms as fast
as you can will naturally increase your stride frequency. Concentrate on increasing stride
frequency, not stride length. The hips move or rotate forwards and backwards with a minimum
of side to side motion. Remember our aim is to get from A to B in a straight line forwards
so we want our movement to be forwards, not side to side. As the hip of the advancing leg
reaches maximum forward rotation, the hip will drop or tilt down slightly. So there's
a fair bit of movement going on around the pelvis. Ensure you keep the ball of the rear
foot on the ground until the heel of the forward leg has contacted the ground. At the heel
plant, the ankle should be dorsiflexed to about 90 degrees, i.e. the toe lift should
be more pronounced. The point of contact between the foot and ground moves smoothly from the
heel to the ball of the foot in a continuous rolling motion with a strong push off the ball
of the foot. At these higher walking speeds, the placement of the foot should form a continuous
straight line with the inner edge of one foot landing in front of the inner edge of the
other foot, almost like walking on a tightrope rather than walking on tram lines. For most
people, the toes are turned outward from the heels approximately 10 degrees and this angle
tends to decrease as you increase your speed. However, this angle of gait varies from one
individual to another. Lean forwards from your ankles as this will give you a feeling
of being able to push against the ground harder. It will also help you to avoid overstriding
that can slow you down. Leaning too far forward, however, can cause you to land flat footed
or to lift the rear off the ground prematurely. Now that you know the three levels of walking,
let's talk about structuring your walking workout for maximum benefits. Like any other
exercise class, begin with a warm up, then do the aerobic training section and follow
with a cool down or stretch. As we've discussed previously, the purpose of the warm up is
to prepare your body for exercise by increasing the internal body temperature about one or
two degrees, increasing the blood flow to the muscles and lubricating the joints by pumping
synovial fluid into them. Now level one walking is ideal for this purpose. This should be
followed by a pulse razor to bring your heart rate up, increase blood flow to the working
muscles and provide neuromuscular activity that mimics that of the training section of
the class. Simply start to increase your walking speed then from level one to level two, concentrating
on good posture, relaxed technique with the foot rolling motion. You're aiming to reach
an intensity of around five to six on a scale of one to ten. Next is the aerobic section
where the aim is to elevate your heart rate for a specific period of time, leading to
calorie burning, improved fitness, reduction in the risk of lifestyle related diseases.
These are all the benefits we're after. This section should form the major part of your
walk and should feature alternate bursts of level three with level two for recovery.
You could work for set time periods, perhaps thirty seconds on, thirty seconds off, or
use physical markers. For example, walk level three between two trees and then level two
between the next two trees, alternating the speed. Your cool down follows as this will
return your body to its pre-exercise state by reducing the heart rate and breathing
rate gradually to more normal levels, followed by stretching the muscles used to maintain
or develop flexibility. For a section of stretches, don't forget to take a look at
the stretch workout at the end of this series. So, what are you waiting for? Even if you
don't fancy striding out solo, there are plenty of options to help you get started.
It's easy enough to locate a mile walking, race walking, American Volksport Association
or Nordic Walking Club near to you, so you can have company while you're getting fit.
Now you may have heard the saying that good things come to those who wait, but I hope
you'll agree with me now, we've uncovered so many health and fitness benefits that go
with walking, that actually good things come to those who walk. And remember, walking might
be cheap, but life is priceless.
