The main function of muscles is to provide the driving force that brings about movement
of the skeleton's complex system of levers. If they can operate through a wide range of
motion, then they'll obviously be more effective in creating movements of the limbs. And this
range of motion is what's known as flexibility. Now you may remember from our very first lecture
that flexibility is considered one of the health related components of fitness as a
poor score in this area is likely to lead to alignment issues that could increase your
risk of postural problems with the potential to negatively affect your quality of life.
So it would be useful to know how to stretch effectively to help you to keep mobile well
into your later years. And that's a key part of this presentation as I intend to equip
you with a range of techniques to promote your flexibility and the understanding behind
why they work. You'll also learn a few interesting facts about stretching along the way.
For instance, does stretching before activity really help to reduce the chance of you injuring
yourself? Is it truly the root to reducing feelings of muscle soreness? Can stretching
actually make you stronger? You might be quite surprised to learn the answer to these questions.
So let's start by defining flexibility in a little more detail. We know flexibility
refers to the range of motion around a joint or a group of joints. And it not only varies
from person to person, but for each individual, it also differs from joint to joint. It's
primarily dependent upon the specific joint structure and is significantly influenced
by the connective tissues around each of the joints. Now as discussed in my lecture on
the joints, there are three different types. First of those joints that are fused and exhibit
no movement such as those found in the skull. Secondly, there are joints with limited movement
such as the spine. And then thirdly, there are synovial joints such as the elbow and
the knee that allow for a higher degree of movement. And clearly it's in this latter
group that our focus is in a stretching program. And these joints rely upon both a capsule
that envelops the whole joint and the supporting ligaments to hold the bones together. The
capsule can actually be friend or foe as it fills with synovial fluid to lubricate
the joints and that makes movement easier. But fortunately, it's also tough enough to
restrict potential damaging movements. The ligaments are made of fibrous tissue similar
to the capsule and serve to attach bone to bone. Importantly, they also give the joint
stability by preventing movement that could cause dislocation, for example. Since joint
health is related to activity levels, age and gender, then it's no surprise these are
key considerations in determining our flexibility. A clear link exists between the amount of
exercise taken and mobility of the joints. It's well established, with even just regular
walking positively affecting the range of motion in the hips and the lower spine. Now
since tightness in these areas can be a contributory factor in the incidence of falls in the elderly,
we begin to appreciate its value in maintaining good quality of life. The American College
of Sports Medicine recommends stretching to promote enhanced flexibility as an essential
preventive measure. Regular stretching also has been found to significantly reduce low
back pain. As we age, there's a gradual slowing of the cell function in muscles, tendons
and ligaments, and that leads to a buildup of collagen, the main component of connective
tissue becoming denser and somewhat resistant to lengthening. As these surround the joint
then, reduced mobility is the result to the extent that some of us lose as much as 50%
of our range of movement in some areas. The good news is, however, regular stretching can
help to maintain the elasticity of this connective tissue and so reduce the effects of this
particular ageing process. I asked Dr. Novella, if you can recover flexibility, even if you've
gone years without stretching, listen to what he had to say.
Other things that can also happen that commonly happen with age is the loss of flexibility
and balance, but these things are not inevitable. They are not as much of an inevitable consequence
of just the ageing process as is the issues with muscle and bone physiology. Flexibility
can be completely maintained by doing stretching exercises. There are specific diseases that
may limit that, for example, arthritis. If you have inflammatory arthritis, you're not
going to be able to undo the effects of that with simple stretching, but stretching exercises
will deal with the otherwise inevitable loss of flexibility that just happened as a natural
consequence of ageing.
So unless you have a serious injury, say a stroke or broken limb that requires therapy,
it's really a matter of persistent stretching to build up your flexibility. Now, in general,
females tend to have better flexibility than males at most joints, and this can be attributed
to small differences in the joint structures and the associated connective tissues. The
effect of age on flexibility, however, is considerably greater than gender. In addition
to the three fundamental determinants of flexibility, age and sex, there are three other less influential
items that are nonetheless worthy of consideration. Body temperature affects range of motion as
it's known to improve along with increasing heat, hence the reason for exercise always
beginning with a warm-up period. Contrary to common belief, rather than shortening your
muscles and making them stiffer, weight training exercises that work through your full range
of motion will improve your flexibility, but more about that later. During pregnancy, the
joints and ligaments in the lumbopelvic area, that's your lumbar, stomach, pelvis, hips
combined, are relaxed to allow for growth and movement of the fetus, plus to make delivery
a little easier. This change is due to the increased levels of the relaxing hormone that
drops to normal again after the birth, and so the connective tissues tighten up again.
Improving flexibility then requires a stretching program that aims to increase the range of
motion and that takes into account the previous factors regarding the joints. Careful consideration
should be given to designing a plan to ensure it's safe, appropriate and effective. If
it is, then research shows that regular stretching has been shown to produce the following positive
adaptations. Enhanced range of motion, that's a given. Reduced risk of injury and the degree
of injury if it occurs. Increased sports performance in terms of endurance and skill. Improved
posture leading to a reduced risk of low back malady. Positive impact on mental health through
providing a vehicle for physical relaxation. Now as we noted in a previous lecture, stretching
can be active brought about by contracting the opposing muscle group to move the limb
to a position where the target muscle is lengthened, or it can be passive whereby the limb is moved
by a partner or yourself or a prop using say a towel. However, stretching techniques are
divided into three main categories, namely ballistic, static and PNF and these are defined
as follows. Blistic stretching involves swinging or bouncing a limb into a position beyond
the normal joint range and so lengthening the associated muscles. It's a common technique
for elite sports people, especially gymnasts and martial artists, but it's not recommended
for the public at large as it's difficult to execute safely. Static stretching on the
other hand is the most common method of practice, requiring a gentle movement toward the end
position that slowly lengthens the muscle and then we hold at that point, there's a
little bit of mild tension for somewhere between 15 and 30 seconds. Let's have a look at that.
So let's look at the static stretch in action. So our aim here is to try to lengthen the
muscle slowly and we're going to do this with the hamstring. I'm going to use for the next
few examples the hamstring muscle group. So what camera is going to do for us is show
us this static stretch. So we're going to go with just one leg first of all because
I want you to be aware that you could definitely have difference from one side to the other.
This could be due to past injury issues, all sorts of reasons why you might have a difference.
So I'd like you to separate do one leg each side. Now the other foot you can have it tucked
to the side. You can rest the leg out. You can rest the foot flat and have the knee up.
You could go to the hurdle position. It really doesn't matter whichever position is comfortable
for you. More importantly is this front leg. So we're going to sit up nice and tall. We're
then going to begin to hinge from the hip rather than round the spine and we'll start
to feel that stretch, that lengthening through the hamstring at the back of the thigh. You're
going to find your comfortable position and hold it there. Try to keep the breathing relaxed.
Now this is what will happen. Amazing thing is after around six to eight seconds somewhere
there you'll start to get something called collagen creep. What will happen there is
that the connected tissues will start to align themselves and it'll start to give you a little
bit more stretch. So if you take a deep breath you'll find that in that position you'll be
able to go a little bit further. And again we're going to the point of mild tension.
You're trying to get to that point where we feel the stretch. It's not painful but we
can feel that mild tension as the muscle stretches. And a good tip here if you ease yourself
out of that position for me please. And we'll swap over legs. A good tip here is to use
imagery. So try to actually picture the muscle lengthening as you do it. So set yourself
up and remember we said switching from side to side. Try to analyse if there's any difference
from one side to the other. That deep breath first we lower ourselves down to the point
of mild tension and hold it there. Now we're looking out for that collagen creep then taking
a deep breath and easing a little further into it because I know that it will stretch
that little bit further when you hold that position. Now to get our developmental stretches
we're looking really for at least 15 seconds. Probably around about 30 seconds is a much
better way to do that. So that's how your static stretch works. Let me show you a few
other positions you can use this technique in.
As you can see these are fairly easy to execute and we'll be doing these at the end of each
of our workouts later. PNF or Proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation Stretching Techniques
were originally devised as a therapy for patients suffering muscle related diseases and work
by using the body's nervous system to encourage extended lengthening of the muscles. It uses
three key responses. The myotatic reflex also known as the stretch reflex, the Golgi tendon
organ reflex and the principle of reciprocal inhibition. So the myotatic reflex this is
an automatic contraction within the muscle and it's a response to a changing length being
detected by what are known as muscle spindles that lie within the muscle fibres. This is
a self-preserving response to the possibility that the muscle might be stretched too far
and could cause tearing of the fibres. This reflex is the reason ballistic stretching carries
a little bit of risk. The Golgi tendon organ reflex is the opposite of the above and that's
why it's also sometimes referred to as the inverse stretch reflex. This receptor is located
at the point where the muscle joins the tendon and it detects tension. If it detects very
high tension it interprets this as a possible threat to the muscle, again potentially causing
it to tear. So it forces the muscle to relax so removing the threat. The third neuromuscular
response reciprocal inhibition describes the process whereby because muscles work as
co-operating pairs one muscle has to relax to some degree if the other contracts. So for
example if I'm using my bicep to lift my arm my tricep has to relax. Now these sensory
responses are used in combination in a technique called contract relax agonist contract. So
strange title. Firstly the target muscle group is stretched slowly in a passive manner. This
avoids initiating the myotatic reflex. Then it's held in a position while a voluntary contraction
of the muscle is exerted for around six seconds without it moving and this will stimulate the
Golgi tendon organ reflex that relaxes the muscle. Now the opposite muscle group is contracted
strongly and by reciprocal inhibition the target muscle relaxes even more and so can
then be stretched to a much greater degree and this has been shown to be the best stretching
method to improve flexibility. Let's have a look at how it works. Let's now have a look
at that proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation PNF in action. So we're going to work again
as I said earlier with the hamstring muscle group and the important thing here is you
need to work with your partner. You need to communicate on this one because we've got
to very carefully get to that point where we feel the tension and you've got to know
where that is. We don't want to go too far with this. So I'm going to start with Cameron's
right leg. So we're going to take the leg up. First thing we're going to do is straighten
the leg out but we're not locking out at the knee. Okay. So I'm going to get into a position
where I can apply the pressure. What I'm going to do is start to take it forward. Let's keep
the hips down to a point where we feel a mild stretch in the hamstring in the back of
the thigh. So let me know when we get to that point. A little nod will do. Fabulous. So we've
got to that point now. We're getting that stretch, that mild tension through the back
of the thigh. I need to now hold that. Listen carefully. Hold that position. It can't move.
Now what Cameron's going to do is use the hamstring muscle to press against me. So really
press hard against me now with that leg. He's trying to force it back but I'm not letting
it move. I've got to work against this. What's happening here is we'll start to stimulate
because of that tension and relax. It's only about six seconds. The Golgi tendon organ
reflex. That'll make the muscle relax. Now if we use the front of the thigh, we can draw
that foot a little further back. Did you see how that's gone a little bit further? And
then I can get a hold of it and we can start the whole process again. So you can see how
we're increasing the flexibility here. So let's relax. I'll take that stretch until
we feel that point where we get that mild tension. Try not to stimulate the myotatic
reflex. Brilliant. We're going to hold it. Fix it. Same thing again. Let's push back
against me. I'm going to hold it. We've got that strong tension through the hamstring
muscle. I'm holding onto it. Six seconds and we'll relax it off. Use the front of the
thigh to draw the leg closer towards you. And then we'll ease off. And I think you'll
have seen there how we managed to increase the flexibility through the legs. So you
need to work together on this one. And of course you need to balance. Make sure you're
working both legs. That's your P and F stretching technique. Let me show you a few other positions
in which we can use the same technique.
A final technique is called active, isolated stretching suitable for just about anyone
whether elite athletes or couch potatoes. The body positions are comfortable and easily
manageable. Plus the stretches are gentle and relaxing. Unlike the other techniques
we've looked at, this is an active technique you perform with a partner. So it can be a
little bit more fun than the others. Now this technique uses the last of the sensory responses
we looked at earlier regarding the synchronization of paired muscles to allow for coordinated
movements. So we begin by contracting the muscles to move through a full range of functional
motion. This will result in the opposite muscles switching off and relaxing, allowing
a partner to assist the stretch by gently extending the range of motion. Now this assist
should only last for around two seconds and each stretch should only be performed 10 times.
Let's have a look at this one in action. So our final stretching technique is the active,
isolated stretch. And remember this works on the principle of reciprocal innovation.
So by using one muscle group, the other muscle group relaxes. So the way we're going to
work this is again, we'll look at it, how it applies to our hamstring muscle group at
the back of the thigh. So we're lying down comfortable position. Again be aware of your
neutral spine. What's going to happen here is Cameron's going to swing that right leg
for me please. It's under control. Now it is a slightly ballistic movement but it's controlled.
Now what's happening here is we're really switching on the front of the thigh, the hip
flexors to pull this leg up. While that's happening, then the hamstring muscle is having
to relax and stretch. That's our reciprocal innovation. Now what happens is if we get
too far and it gets to a point where hang on a minute, this is going to be too much
of a stretch. The hamstring muscle group will kick in and try and put a break on the movement.
But what I'm going to do is just before it gets to the end of the movement, before the
hamstrings have decided to put a break on, I'm going to add just a little bit of a push.
And it allows to go, as I think you'll see, just a few degrees further. So we're increasing
that dynamic flexibility, increasing that range of motion by using this principle of
reciprocal innovation. The strength on the front before the hamstring at the back has
time to switch off, I'm going to add just that little extra push. Now the important
thing is, it doesn't stop, it's a continuation of the movement. So you need to watch it a
couple of times first, be aware of how it works, and then just add that little extra
push at the end. Now we're looking for 10 repetitions of that exercise. That's the target
figure, it's a key figure. 10 repetitions of each exercise. Now here's a few other ways
you can use that technique.
As with any form of exercise, you should follow a plan. But this is where flexibility becomes
the black sheep of the exercise physiology community, as unlike cardio, fitness, strength,
etc. there are no universally agreed upon programs. Rest assured, however, applying a smidgen
of common sense and committing yourself to regular stretching will bear fruit in the
shape of increased range of motion. As a guideline then, I'll offer you the following
advice. Try to stretch regularly, daily, if possible. We hold those static stretches
at the point of mild tension for 15 seconds to maintain flexibility, but nearer to 30
seconds to improve it. Ensure you're warm before stretching, either after some cardio
exercise or a good time is when you're fresh out of a warm bath. Be aware of your posture,
ensure you're in a comfortable position to stretch that allows you to focus on the target
muscle. Perform stretches that target the joints in which you feel particularly stiff
or that replicate movements you need for your chosen sport. It's a good idea to use deep
breathing, gentle music and sometimes a little visualization to help your efforts by helping
the muscles to relax, but if at any time you feel a sharp or stabbing pain, release
the stretch immediately. Now, I'd like to go off with a slight tangent here and tackle
a few myths and misconceptions related to stretching that, unfortunately, are not just
held by members of the public, but some lesser qualified fitness professionals unfortunately
harbor a few of these uncertainties. So be warned, some of these may come as a slight
shock and could be almost contrary to what you may have previously heard or read. Firstly,
to answer the most basic question I'm often asked on this subject, flexibility is not
related to your shape as height, weight, arm span and leg length do not significantly
affect range of motion. Resistance or weight training, a topic we looked at earlier when
we discussed flexibility often causes confusion. It's easy to assume that weight training leads
to the stiffness we've seen in huge bodybuilders who can only seem to scratch their backs by
adopting the technique made famous by Baloo the Bear in Jungle Book, if you remember him
leaning against the rock. However, there's absolutely no link between muscle size and
immobility. In fact, because resistance training results in improvements in the elasticity
of the muscles and the tensile strength in the tendons and ligaments, it can increase
your range of motion over time, even without doing stretching. Having said that, resistance
training can improve flexibility. You might not be totally surprised to learn that this
is a reciprocal relationship. So yes, believe it or not, flexibility training can actually
improve your strength by increasing your flexibility. The muscles are able to operate over a greater
range of motion, so we recruit more muscle fibers and so we generate more force.
Another item that causes much misunderstanding is the place of stretching in warm-up, preparing
for exercise and sporting pursuits. Should we stretch beforehand or not? The clue here
to the purpose of a warm-up is in the title, as increased body temperature through movement
will stimulate the flow of synovial fluid into the joints that lubricate them.
Respiratory speed will increase to introduce more oxygen to generate fuel and the heart
rate will increase to transport nutrients to the working muscles. Most importantly, however,
as temperature increases, so does the speed of nerve impulses and it is this that is the
key to reducing the risk of injury. So let me give you an example. Imagine you are walking
down a road. It is an uneven surface. You may have experienced this where you get a
little twist of the ankle on something uneven and automatically without you thinking it
corrects itself. Now what has actually happened there is as we have begun to roll over here,
those Golgi tendon organs have detected hang on a minute. There is a lot of tension going
on here. There is a message that gets sent on what is called a neural arc that comes
up here through to the spinal cord, comes back down and this message goes hang on a
minute I am going too far here. There is going to be some injury unless something happens.
The message that comes back down is we need to contract this muscle quickly and get ourselves
back in that position before something goes wrong. So this is what happens and all of
that happens in that split second without us having to consciously correct ourselves.
Now the beauty of this is the faster that message transfers, then the less risk there
is of injury. Now the beauty of the nerve fibres is they are encased in something called
the myelin sheath. The myelin sheath is purely there it serves one purpose to insulate the
nerve fibres to keep them warm because guess what? The warmer you are the faster those
messages will transfer. So clearly then in order to reduce this risk of injury I need
those muscle messages to transfer really really quickly. So the key to reducing the risk of
injury has nothing at all to do with whether I have spent time and I have never yet seen
anybody do this before they exercise, stretching what is called the perineal muscle on the
outside of the ankle and lower leg. You wouldn't do it. So warm up is absolutely vital. Stretching
I am afraid won't make any difference in that example. And there are actually now a number
of studies that confirm that not only does pre-exercise stretching not reduce the risk
of injury, there is even a school of thought suggesting that it increases the risk of injury
by rendering the joints less stable. So the warm up then should focus on mobility and
increasing temperature. Stretching to develop flexibility is best left until the end of
the session when you warm. Our final controversy concerns the much heralded value of stretching
in preventing muscle soreness experienced the day following exercise. You may well have
heard the advice or you must stretch after your workout or you will feel stiff tomorrow.
Well muscle soreness is actually the sum of several factors including microtrauma to the
muscle fibres basically. It is inflammation within the cells and irritation of the nerve
endings due to the additional enzyme activity. Now since stretching cannot possibly impact
upon these processes that lead to that then it can't affect muscle soreness. So if you
exercise it intensely today you have got to expect muscle soreness tomorrow and then
embrace it because it is a sign that you have worked hard enough to set in motion the adaptive
responses that will lead to positive change. Please note however a cool down will help
to remove waste products the lactic acid we talked about in our energy systems lecture.
And in turn reduce the inflammation to some degree. It also of course helps for your heart
rate and respiration to slow down gradually instead of abruptly. Remember we talked about
this as well. So your workout should finish with a cool down and stretching can be part
of that cool down but it is not the fact that you are stretching that makes the difference
just the fact that you are doing something active to gradually bring you back to homeostasis
rather than stopping dead in your tracks. So now you know that flexibility is a key
player in maintaining a good quality of life into your later years and you are armed with
an array of stretching techniques you can employ to not just retain but actually improve
your mobility. When it comes to flexibility you can do it alone or with a friend you can
do it indoors or out you can do it in the morning or at night you can do it every day
or just every other day. But the important thing is to borrow a well known phrase from
one of the sportswear giants just do it.
