Throughout this series, we've looked at the body's amazing structure and the incredible
processes that take place within it, in all cases, discovering that regular exercise can
bring positive changes leading to improvements in health status.
We've seen there's evidence to suggest that we can reduce our risk of suffering from heart
disease, diabetes, osteoporosis, and certain cancers and also control weight management
simply by committing to being active.
The flip side of this coin, however, is that a sedentary lifestyle can have a quite significant
negative impact on one's health, with recent research stacking up to highlight just how
dangerous inactivity can be to our future well-being.
If you take into account that due to the technological age in which we now live, most
of us will be sedentary for around 70% of the day, be that driving the kids to school,
working at a computer, eating at the dinner table, or simply flaking out on the couch
in front of the television.
We should perhaps all take a moment to consider whether we spend too much time on our back
sides and if there's a possibility that we're at risk of succumbing to sitting disease.
Now don't be fooled, this term isn't simply marketing speak.
Consider the following statistics.
According to the American Institute for Cancer Research, around 100,000 new cases of breast
and colon cancer each year are linked to sedentary lifestyles.
A study at the University of South Carolina showed that people who were inactive for more
than 23 hours per week had a 64% greater risk of death from heart disease when compared
to a control group who were sedentary for less than 11 hours per week.
It's estimated that up to 100,000 people die each year from blood clots and sitting
in one position for too long is the key factor.
We've known the dangers of sitting for a long time now.
These were discovered back in the late 50s when we realised that many who were employed
in manual labour roles were less likely to suffer coronary artery disease than those
whose jobs were not physically active.
This was supported by the relatively large Canadian fitness survey in 2009 published
in the medicine and science in sports and exercise that looked at more than 7,000 men
and nearly 10,000 women over a considerable 12-year period.
The study participants ranged in age from 18 to 90 years so it was an unusually broad
study.
The research concluded that there is a significant link between time spent seated and mortality.
More importantly, the study revealed that being active doesn't balance out the negative
effects of being seated too much of the time so even if you achieve the recommended minimum
target of 30 minutes five times per week, spending too many of your waking hours parked
on your backside is not good for you.
This doesn't negate the fact of course that you still need to be active but you do need
to break up bouts of sitting.
At this point you may be wondering just how does sitting down have such a bad effect on
health?
Well, let's take a look at the physiological implications of being sedentary.
A 2008 study published in current cardiovascular risk reports showed that if we don't stand,
electrical activity within the muscles effectively ceases leading to a drop of up to 90% in the
levels of lipoprotein lipase which is an enzyme that draws fat out of the bloodstream for
use as fuel as it clearly won't be required.
This then leads to a higher concentration of blood fats that are known to increase the
risk of cardiovascular malaise.
In addition, sitting appears to lead to around a 20% reduction in high density lipoprotein
known as the good cholesterol for its positive effect on the circulatory system so again
increasing the risk of suffering from cardiovascular disease.
Unsurprisingly, sitting probably only requires contractions of the small muscles in the hands
and forearms, and these will use up little amounts of energy when compared to the big
muscles in the legs, in the buttocks, in the lower back.
As a result, your metabolism plummets so calories are not being consumed but absorbed, a fact
that will more than likely manifest itself in the waist area.
The story gets worse as remaining sedentary for more than 24 hours, for example when on
bedrest due to a serious debilitating injury or illness, impairs the ability of our insulin
to uptake glucose.
Now this in turn raises the risk of diabetes as found in a study at the Pennington Biomedical
Research Centre.
It's also worth noting, blood circulation is to a certain degree dependent upon movement.
Yes, the heart's a pump, it's key in getting the oxygen rich blood around to all the extremities
within the body, but venous return is assisted by the squeezing effect of the muscles on
the veins when they contract.
So when the legs are not moving, the leg muscles are not contracting and the risk of
blood pooling in the lower limbs is increased, potentially leading to a number of health
related issues such as deep vein thrombosis which is a clot in the leg or groin and feeling
light headed when standing.
Of more concern however is the impact on the lymphatic system as it's solely reliant upon
the massage effect of the muscles due to movement.
What this tells us then is that sitting like any more accepted illnesses has an associated
pathology.
And this is the reason why, even if you hit the gym straight after work, an eight hour
day spent sat at your desk is going to take its toll in time.
Unfortunately, whether you're carrying a little excess baggage and totally out of shape or
even a finely honed Olympic athlete, too much sitting can be deleterious to your health.
Dr. Tony Yancey, co-director of the Kaiser Permanente Centre for Health Equity at the
University of California Los Angeles, has conducted considerable research into this
topic and sums up the situation excellently in the following quote.
We just aren't really structured to be sitting for such long periods of time and when we
do that our body just kind of goes into shut down.
There's a fountain of youth, it's probably physical activity, so the problem isn't whether
it's a good idea, the problem is how to get people to do more of it.
This really should come as no surprise for in this course we've learned that the human
body adapts specifically to the demands that are placed upon it.
For example, in our look at the skeleton we discovered that loading the bones through
resistance training stimulates growth at a cellular level and so bone density increases
leading to a reduction in the risk of osteoporosis.
So it follows then that converse will also be true, thus sitting is in effect training
your body to do nothing and leads to physiological adaptations that reduce your functionality.
Since the hazards of too much sitting can affect us even when we're active, what we need is
a blueprint to reduce sedentary behaviour.
Obviously, this involves taking stock of our daily routine and attempting to find opportunities
to reduce the time spent seated, particularly long uninterrupted bouts.
Now, this doesn't necessarily mean heading for the gym and a full hour long workout but
engaging in what's referred to as non-exercise activity thermogenesis or NEET for short.
This label was originated by Dr James Levine of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota
who in 2005 published results of his detailed analysis of metabolism.
Dr Levine was trying to uncover why it is that two people can eat an identical diet
but one might gain weight while the other doesn't. He tracked not only food consumption
but also activity and I mean every activity. He used motion tracking underwear to detect
even the smallest movements enabling him to notice that those people who don't gain weight
move more. Amazingly, those who didn't put on weight during the study were also the same
people who without even thinking about it felt an urge to be active, to take the stairs
for instance rather than the elevator. He found that the weight gainers sat for two hours longer
each day on average than those who didn't put on pounds. The great news is in the NEET world
little things add up to big changes. Unfortunately we can't just all give up our jobs and then
take up a physical vocation so what's required is some creative thinking to introduce more
movement to your daily routine and so reduce the amount of time you spend sitting. As an example
did you know there already exists a first grade classroom with no chairs where children are
encouraged to crawl and climb whilst performing basic literacy and numeracy drills. In addition
treadmill desks are not the stuff of science fiction movies but can actually be found in
some more health-conscious offices. Since sitting disease affects us at the desk at work in front
of the television or computer at home on flights and behind the wheel of our cars here's a four
pronged defense strategy that can serve as a critical dose of preventive medicine. Firstly
at work where likelihood of being stationed at the desk is the issue. Take your breaks by walking
to the water fountain as well as the exercise you're getting. H2O has got known benefits to health
also. When you need to powder your nose walk to the furthest away toilet in the building.
Stand whenever you're taking a phone call. Earn your coffee break by walking up and down the
stairs a few times immediately beforehand. Can you schedule five-minute activity periods
for both morning and afternoon as if it were a meeting in your diary you could just simply
take a walk. You can still tone your abdominals even if you can't leave your chair by sitting upright
with your shoulders drawn back. Take hold of the front edge of the chair with both hands for support
and now slowly lift your knees towards your chest. If you're downloading big files use the
time to get out of your seat and do a few squats. Have a stretch whenever you're talking to colleagues.
If you're photocopying try rear leg lifts and can you hold mobile meetings discussing work matters
while you stroll around the building or better still outside so you get the boost of fresh air
and vitamin D from the natural light. Even if you can't leave your desk a few seated stretches
will still bring benefits so try to repeat the following moves a few times during the day
holding each static position for around 15 seconds. In fact you can do some of these with me right now.
Firstly let's work through the neck so take the head, drop the ear down to the shoulder
and then take the opposite hand out to the side and press it away. You'll feel that stretch come
down through the neck and into the shoulder. Remember you need to hold these stretches for
about 15 seconds but we're going to move through them to give you a good range lift the head back
up. This time we're going to twist the head, twist to the side releasing through the neck on the
opposite side. You'll need to work on both sides and again remember holding each stretch at the
end position to ease the tension and back to the center. This time we're going to lift the hands
up in front of the chest interlock the fingers and you're going to keep the elbows bent but reach
the arms forwards sort of really rounding the shoulders dropping the chin down and we're trying
to stretch the shoulder blades apart here really getting into the upper back into the rhomboids
into the trapezius really stretching through the muscles in the upper back.
We'll ease out of that and we'll balance it by taking the hands around behind. You'll need to
tip forward of the chair slightly here. Hands are in the lower back and now we squeeze the shoulder
blades together bring the elbows towards each other and you'll feel that stretch through the
chest and through the front of the shoulders. Again move into the position hold your end position
feel the tension release the muscles begin to stretch and we'll ease back. We're going to take
one arm across the chest take the hand above the elbow and squeeze it in and here we're
getting a stretch into that shoulder. Remember there's a lot of tension held in the shoulders
the neck the upper back if we're working at a desk so this is an ideal stretch and ease that
off and one more final for the triceps you're going to lift the hand up drop the hand behind
the head in between the shoulder blades the other hand on the elbow and gently press down so the
fingertips are sliding down between the shoulder blades and that's a little stretch with the triceps
at the back of the arm and ease that off. Remember you've got to do both sides and hold those stretches
for 15 seconds. At home the major concern is sitting down in the evening to watch television
so could we try these tactics stand up or march on the spot during the commercial breaks when
you're watching. Purchase a piece of home cardio equipment so you can cycle walk or step while
watching your favorite DVD. Do a few tricep dips off the end of the couch or chair while you're
waiting for your favorite program to begin. Stand on one leg and keep your balance while the
theme tune plays at the start and the end of the show or if you're waiting for a particular show
switch to the music channel and dance along with whatever's playing for a few minutes.
You could try a fitness ball maybe one in the office and one at home so instead of sitting on
a chair to watch television you can sit on a fitness ball and gently bounce. If you're reading
not watching television put your book down stand up and walk on the spot for two minutes after
reading every six pages. Keep a resistance band in the kitchen drawer so you can pump rubber
while the dinner's cooking. But what about traveling? The dangers of flying were highlighted
by the World Health Organization in suggesting that sitting on a plane for more than four hours can
double the chance of you developing a blood clot. In fact it's estimated that five percent of all
air travelers suffer clots although some of us may not even know it as they become reabsorbed
within the circulatory system. For those people who are already suffering circulation problems and
the elderly the risk of clotting and so the possibility of deep vein thrombosis also called
DVT is increased. If a clot breaks away from the wall of the vein and travels within the
bloodstream it may cause a blockage or pulmonary embolism and possibly even lead to a heart attack.
If you fly regularly then it's important not to simply ignore leg pain or assume it's just cramp.
The good news is that if caught early enough and treated with a blood thinning agent such as
warfarin, clots can be relieved before becoming a problem. But here are a few tips you can deploy
on your next flight to help you reduce the risk of DVT. Every hour take a few minutes to circle
your ankles, to flex and point your feet, to lift and lower your heels and lift and lower your thighs.
Stretch the calves by placing the toes on the footrest and then pressing the heels down to the
floor lengthening the back of the lower leg. Get up, walk the length of the aisles at regular
intervals and dehydration is thought to be a contributory factor so drink plenty of water
and try to avoid diuretics such as alcohol and coffee. The following exercises won't help reduce
the risk of DVT directly as they don't affect the lower limbs but remembering the neat principle
we talked about earlier they'll certainly be of benefit to our health. We can start with a simple
bicep curl just bending the elbows lifting the arms up to the shoulder and back down just lightly
clench the fists and just about five repetitions of each exercise will keep the upper body mobile.
There you go.
And hold that there. Bring them up to chest level, take the elbows out to the side and push the
hands forwards in front of the chest. Careful not to lock out your arms, getting that range of
movement through the shoulder. Good challenge for the core strength here as well, keep your
abdominals pulled in tight. We're going to change that slightly, take them out to the side, lift
the hands up, squeeze the elbows together in the center, the elbows together, a little bit of work
for the pectorals but again working that mobility through the shoulders and a chance to work on
your core strength keeping your abdominals in tight so you're sitting up away from the back of the
seat and hold them when they're in the center. Now we're going to press up to the top and back
down with that little twist. Fabulous. Keeping those shoulders moving, keeping the arms moving,
we're getting that extension through the elbows, we're getting a little bit of elevation through
the shoulder girdle and bring them back down, rest them on the top of your thighs and then the
head we're just going to go from side to side a little tilt and across to the other side with a
tilt and across. We're going to do a little half circle now that goes from the side, the front,
round to the other side but then come straight back, don't go back, don't tilt the head backwards,
tilt the head backwards, can squeeze the blood vessels at the back of the neck
or so the nerves so we don't tilt backwards necessarily but we just roll from side to side.
Now whenever you think about it if you can run through these exercises it'll keep your upper
body mobile. Probably the most restrictive of situations when we're seated and have to remain
so is when we're driving. Now clearly there are no stretches or exercises that can be safely
performed when your vehicle is moving but just because your car comes to a stop doesn't mean
your journey to a healthier you also has to stall. Next time you're stuck in a jam try the following
exercises. To exercise the chest put the hands on the wheel at the numbers three and nine imagine
you're working with a clock. Now we're doing isometric exercises here. You may remember from
our electoral muscles that involves contracting the muscles but no movement. So what we do here
is keeping the elbow slightly soft, squeeze the hands in towards each other. What we're doing here
is working the pectoral muscles in the chest, squeezing the hands closer together, holding
that contraction for about five seconds and then we ease off. Now that's something you'll repeat
we're going to do it just once here but you'll need to repeat that three times for each exercise.
To work the upper back we're going to lift the hands up now to the one and 11
and the arms are nearly straight again and this time we're going to press down. So the feeling
is pressing down and we're working into the latissimus dorsi, the back of the armpit,
large muscle in the upper back as we start to press down. Again holding that contraction for
around five seconds and then easing off. We're taking the hands back to three and nine for a
little work on the shoulders. What we're doing here is trying to open out so grab a hold of the
wheel and now as if you're pulling it apart the elbows are slightly lifted as if you're pulling
it open just mean you're not going to be strong enough to pull the steering wheel apart. Again
around five seconds feeling that work in the shoulders holding that contraction before we
release. We're going to work into the biceps and triceps now and for these exercises you need to
move yourself forward slightly on your seat so that you're towards the front of the seat now.
We're going to put the hands underneath the wheel at five and seven and now the aim is to lift
upwards as if you're lifting your palms upwards starting to work into the biceps on the front
of the arm. Hold that contraction the stronger the contraction the better. Try not to hold your
breath on these isometric exercises and release that off. Remember you're going to repeat each
exercise around three times. Take the hands up to the top to the one and eleven again.
This time the elbows drop in and now we're pressing down with the palms so now this is
slightly different than the upper back where the arm was long we're now working through a bent elbow
trying to straighten the arm out working into the triceps that problem area at the back of the arm
and we'll ease that off. We can relax the hands now what we're going to do is a little bit of
work for the gluteals for the hamstrings at the back of the thighs and the way we do that is
simply pressing into your heels and trying to lift your back side as if you're lifting it just
slightly off the seat you won't be able to leave the seat but that squat position really pressing
the heels down into the floor will enable you to get some work for the glutes and into the hamstrings
and then finally we lift up the heels onto the balls of the feet as high as we can and then
press the balls of the feet down into the floor really push down with the balls of the feet
working into the calves
and ease the heels down and a good idea to finish rest the hands on top of the thighs
and just take a few deep breaths.
Of course as a passenger you're not bound to only move when the car doesn't
so try some of the stretching and mobilizing exercises proposed earlier for when you're at
your workstation or sitting on a plane in addition you can make good use of the time by relieving
tension and stress with a self massage. Here's a seated manipulation routine for you to try right
now while you're watching this and then to take away and using the office on the plane and in the
passenger seat. Let's start on the right side use your right hand and find the trapezius muscle
which is just below the base of your skull tilt your head towards the left shoulder
while you press deep into the muscle with the right hand slowly drag the fingers down and out
towards the right shoulder and repeat this movement about five times and switch over to the other side
from the base of the skull press into the muscle and drag down. Pressure on with the fingertips
to massage the shoulders place your left hand on your right shoulder
and with your right hand cut the bottom of the left elbow this will support it and keep
it stable as you massage. Keep the fingers of your left hand together and press them deep into the
shoulder muscle and now gently rock the fingers into the muscle forwards and backwards for a few
seconds. So rather than squeeze and release keep the squeeze on but rock forwards and backwards
and then just change the position slightly so we get a different portion of the muscle squeeze
it and rock forwards and backwards. Keep changing the position so that we cover the entire muscle
really getting into the deltoid
and we can change sides so reach to the shoulder cut the elbow squeeze and rock forwards and back
and moving on to the upper back particularly the latissimus dorsi we're going to lift the
left hand up put it behind the head elbow will be pointing up towards the ceiling reach your right
hand across your chest reaching into the back of the armpit into the latissimus dorsi now squeeze
the fingers together in the right hand and massage downwards keep squeezing and move down squeeze and
move down squeeze and move down all the way down to the hip and once you get there take it back up
and start again on the top squeeze squeeze squeeze and keep moving down and again we'll repeat this
five times done that we'll change sides only squeeze the fingers in and move down
around five repetitions as you target
now it's true to say that just about all of us whatever our vocations or hobbies can benefit
from loosening the lower back so to achieve this we've got a little tool we're going to use a tennis
ball for this exercise any kind of um ball that gives you a little bit of resistance it's not too
squidgy um so we're going to lie on your back you're going to bend the knees and you're going to put
the ball under your lower back now lie yourself down onto the floor and all we're going to do here
is gently using the hands and the feet allow yourself to rock side to side forwards and
backwards it's really quite random the movement's up to you just get that little roll about take
your time nice and slowly rolling forwards and backwards side to side just getting that little
massage effect all the way through the lower back and you can use as much or as little of
your body weights as you wish by putting a little more weight on the hands or the feet
varying that position and let's move on to the hamstrings now particularly important for
any of you who are runners tight hamstrings are a common problem so what we're going to do here is
lying on your back you're going to bring your right leg over the top of the left
fabulous we're going to place the hands on the thigh
and you're going to press the fingers into the middle of the hamstring thumbs by the knee
and as you press the fingers in you now start to drag the fingers back towards the hip
really pressing into that hamstring muscle all the time as we're doing it then take it back up and
start again you press the fingers into the back of the leg we drag the hands up the thigh apply
in the pressure as you go and still on the hamstring move on to the other side beautiful
pressing those fingers in and dragging down and switching back to the other side hamstring
again because this is a tight area so same position but this time what you're going to do
is dig the fingers in and you're going to rub side to side
and then move down slightly rub side to side and keep moving side to side with the hands
working up and down the thigh
there you go to the other side after a couple minutes
and to balance out we'll move on to the quadriceps now on to the front of the thigh so if you
sit yourself up for this one and the leg can be out in front so let's take the right leg first
of all what you're going to do is put one hand um on top near the hip and then put the other hand
on top and press down into the palm so that gives us that extra pressure now we begin to slide down
towards the knee slowly sliding down towards the knee keeping the pressure on you really need two
hands to do this and then come back up to the top and start again so make sure you've got plenty of
pressure into the muscle and gently move down from the top of the thigh towards the kneecap
and we change the angle slightly so we move a little bit to the outside a little bit closer
to the middle and that way we'll really get into all four of those quadriceps muscles obviously
being where the term quadricep comes from let's take the right leg first and bring it up you're
going to wrap the hands around below the knee digging the thumbs into the calf what we're
going to do then is begin to slide down keeping the pressure with the thumbs into the calf muscle
and down into the Achilles slide it down and then work your way back up literally pressing the thumb
in sliding down towards the Achilles and then sliding back up and then we'll swap over to the
other side we'll go back to the other side but this time digging the thumbs in what you're
going to do is press them into the middle and draw them apart work down press in draw them apart
like you're really needing that calf muscle a couple of minutes on each leg we're now going to take
one foot over the top of the other and simply get some rotation through the ankle and let's
keep alternating directions so one way circle back the other just really release that pressure
through the ankle and hold that there keep the foot there what we're going to do now is dig the
thumbs into the sole and then start to slide the length of the foot up to the end do that a
couple more times start from the heel really press in work right the way through the
longitudinal arch all the way up to the top and this time when you get there just start to spread
the toes apart pull them apart work your way through each pairing releasing that tension through
the feet and then when you've done that we'll swap over to the other side and finally into the
forearms last exercise so sitting comfortably what we're going to do is turn one hand up
let's take the thumb pressing in starting just above the elbow we'll start to circular massage
as we work our way down towards the wrist really dig the thumb in and then we'll come back up and
do it again really press in little circles one way down to the bottom again and then to get into
the front we're going to turn it over you're going to dig the thumb in and then just simply contract
and relax the muscle by clenching and opening the fist move it down press in and then you'll feel
the muscle move under the thumb then move it down a little lower and do it again all you need to do
is really press with the thumb and let that contraction of the muscle do the massage and
swapping over to the other side first of all the palms up a little pressing in with the thumb
circular movements working your way down and then when you turn it over dig the thumb in
and open and clench the fist move it down a little press it in
and relax your hands there and there's your total body self massage
now you don't need to be a genius to link long periods of sitting with poor posture and in our
look at the spine we established that poor posture is a crucial factor in back pain issues a big
problem with being seated is that it's too easy to switch off your core muscles and your alignment
suffers take a look around an office it won't take you too long to spot someone with a disengage
core manifesting itself by the way of rounded shoulders and a forward chin position one surprising
cause of this actually might be poor breathing technique in previous lectures we touched on
the concept of homeostasis which is the body's natural desire to return itself to optimum functioning
usually via subconscious actions when breathing is not effective the nervous system will attempt
to bring about changes that allow for more oxygen to be taken on board and then delivered to the
cells within the body as they need this life-giving fuel unfortunately this can initiate changes in
posture let's just remind ourselves of the basics of breathing mechanics we investigated these in
our lecture on this topic whilst a diaphragm plays a vital role in contracting to give more space
in the thoracic cavity so producing a pressure drop that leads to inhalation
its action is supported by the pectoralis minor and the sternocleidomastoid muscles
these effectively lift the rib cage if breathing is not adequate the nervous system will influence
posture to put these two muscles in a position that will allow them to better assist respiration
in other words putting them in a position where it's easier for them to lift the rib cage so
moving the shoulders and the chin forwards actually results in these two muscles having a
better line of pull rather than pulling slightly backwards they're now pulling directly upwards
and that helps to expand the rib cage and so create more space for air to enter the greatest concern
is that as these muscles work harder they also become stronger and stiffer so it's harder for
them to return to a more natural posture now I recommend that you have a look at lecture six
for some breathing exercises to to overcome this so now you know the dangers associated with long
seated periods and you're armed with a wide range of tactics you can deploy on a daily basis
whether at work home or on the journey between the two you can start to make changes today
that will improve your health for tomorrow it's now a proven fact that too much time on your
backside will literally shorten your life but just like the growing numbers of employees at both google
and facebook who have traded their traditional workstations for standing desks you don't have
to take it sitting down
