A few years ago, the Madrid fashion show hit the headlines for taking a stand on the issue
of stick-thin models by not permitting any girls with a body mass index of less than
18, i.e. below the healthy range, to take to the catwalk. This was seen as a major step
forward, not just for the sake of the model's health, but also for the legions of girls
across the world who see them as role models. Whilst the pressure to be thin and the trend
for size zero and the stigma occasionally attached to being overweight are unwelcome
attitudes held within certain populations' subsets. The truth is that a wealth of research
has proved that excess body fat does carry an increased health risk. So more importantly
for health rather than aesthetic reasons, weight management is an important issue and
particularly weight loss in light of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey that
calculated that 34% of American adults are overweight, 33% are obese and a further 6%
are extremely obese. The leading health policy journal, Health Affairs, estimated that medical
costs associated with obesity total an incredible $147 billion in 2008. The aim of this presentation
is to analyse the role of exercise as a tool to achieve weight loss, helping you to understand
how and why it works. Over the next 30 minutes, I'll equip you with the vital knowledge to
ensure you win at losing. Firstly, since the word obese appears so regularly mainstream
press and on television and even in everyday conversation, it seems pertinent to start with
a definition. Body mass index or BMI is calculated as you'll weight in kilograms divided by
the square of your height in metres. For example, a person who is 5'9", tall, weighing
125 pounds, will have a BMI of 18.5. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
suggested a BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 is a healthy range, with 25 to 29.9 being overweight and
more than 30 being classed as obese. Be aware, however, this is merely a guideline that correlates
the amount of body fat in the general population and athletes or heavily muscled individuals
will score falsely high on this scale. So why is it that the percentage of overweight
is growing, literally in all senses? It actually comes down to a very simple mathematical equation.
The sum of the calories in minus the sum of the calories out. If more calories are taken
on board in the form of food than are used up through activity and metabolism, the result
will be weight gain. Let's consider a specific example taken from an article by Doug McGuff.
An hour of jogging will burn only about 150 calories above your metabolic rate, but it
actually only takes 20 seconds to eat 150 calories of cookies. Fortunately, however,
dietary restriction and increased exercise will lead to a calorie deficit and so to weight
loss. Unfortunately, however, this technological age in which we now live has led to a predominantly
sedentary lifestyle for most of us and essential movement in everyday tasks has become somewhat
minimized. When this is combined with the incredibly easy access to calorie dense food
stuff such as fast food, then it's easy to understand how the equation we just mentioned
works against us, leading to weight problems. We've evolved as a species that was occasionally
threatened with famine and that required considerable physical effort to acquire food as a result
of which we developed an ability to take in and store food in the form of fat tissue.
Now we can see how readily available food and the removal of the necessity to hunt for
it have led to an expanding global waistband. One surprising effect on your body mass turns
out to be the amount you sleep. So I asked Professor Heller about this since sleep is
his primary area of research. So let's go to him and see what he had to say.
So there is a relationship between sleep and weight gain and the relationship is short
sleep tends to correlate with excess weight gain. A large epidemiological study was done
in which all sorts of characteristics of lifestyle were compared to body composition, percent
body fat. It was found that everything else being equal, individuals who fell into the
short sleep category, people not getting more than six hours of sleep a night, they tend
to have excess body mass. Whereas those individuals who were getting eight or more hours of sleep
a night, they were the individuals who had the lowest percent body fat. Now you might
ask why that might be so. Well one of the factors that perhaps comes into play is when
you eat. People who are short sleepers who are up late at night, they tend to snack late
at night, they tend to eat late at night, and in a different study it's been shown
that calories, everything else being equal, calories consumed after 8 p.m. have a greater
impact on body mass than calories consumed earlier in the day.
So when you eat and how much you sleep are factors then in being overweight. But those
are largely choices we can influence unless you work a late shift which is a high risk
category because you're off your natural circadian rhythm. Clearly there are other contributors
to being overweight, genetics often being cited. Now there's no doubt that heredity
plays a role in our physical makeup or rather it can explain disorders such as body beetle,
Prada, Willy and Cushing's syndromes. All of these can contribute to increased weight.
But it's widely accepted this cannot account for a significant portion of the obese hence
the previously mentioned factors having more impact than genetics.
Let's consider gender next. In general women are known to carry more body fat than men
but usually around their hips and thighs known as the gynoid or pear shape body. While men's
fat deposits tend to be around the tummy referred to as an android or apple shape.
Now please note these are just sweeping generalizations with much variance about these norms on both
sides. It is well documented, unfortunately for the men out there, that the increased
abdominal fat is likely to lead to a greater risk of cardiovascular disease.
So how do we store fat? We store fat in the body in the form of triglycerides. As the
name suggests this is made up of three fatty acid molecules found within specific fat cells
known as adipocytes. There's also a small amount residing within the muscle cells ready
to be used as fuel for exercise although most will come via the bloodstream.
The release of fat from storage to be used as fuel is regulated by two enzymes, hormone
sensitive lipase and lipoprotein lipase. The first of these is located in the fat cell
and acts to break apart the triglycerides so releasing the three fatty acids into the
bloodstream. This is influenced by the hormone epinephrine which increases in concentration
during cardio exercise and also the responsiveness of the hormone sensitive lipase increases
at this time. Now interestingly a training effect of regular exercise is this phenomenon
improves so as we get fitter the enzyme responds to lower levels of epinephrine and so more
readily breaks apart the triglyceride to be used as energy. Conversely the lipoprotein
lipase is found on the walls of the blood vessels and acts as a transporter mopping up triglycerides
in the blood and taking them to storage sites to be used as fuel later. Exercise especially
when combined with reduced calorie intake through sensible eating is the optimum approach
to sustained weight loss not only decreasing body fat but also enhancing cardiovascular
profile improving insulin sensitivity and lowering blood pressure. The good news is
surprisingly weight loss of only 5% has been shown to have a positive effect on cardiovascular
disease. Just 150 minutes of exercise per week typically leads to around a weight loss
of 2kg and 420 minutes per week results in a considerable drop of 5kg if combined with
a sensible calorie restriction. Even something as simple as low intensity walking can be
of benefit to the overweight as they are able to get their heart rate up to critical levels
and prompt the positive responses we talked of earlier. However obese persons have been
known to sometimes suffer pain in the lower limbs when walking so cycling, swimming, aqua
exercise, rowing are also strongly recommended. Losing weight through exercise can be somewhat
confusing as cardio machines in the gym recommend inbuilt fat burning programs at around 60-70%
of your maximum working heart rate which you will remember from earlier in the series we
calculate from taking your age from 220. Although this is a fairly low intensity it is probably
just a brisk walk for most of us. This is based on the premise that at lower intensities
the majority of the calories burned are from fat stores rather than carbohydrates that
stored in the muscles and the liver. It is indeed true that as the intensity increases
a lower proportion of the fuel will be provided by fat but the important factor to take into
consideration here is the total number of calories expended. So a vigorous workout may
burn a lesser percentage of calories from fat stores but the total amount could be greater
than working out for the same length of time at a lower intensity. So as your fitness level
starts to improve through regular activity your ability to achieve and maintain higher
intensities will also improve and therefore your capacity to burn fat during exercise will increase.
It is important to begin exercise gently particularly if you've not done it for a while but accelerated
results will come from increasing the intensity of exercise so you should try to do that as soon
as possible. Of course I strongly recommend that you consult your physician before embarking on a
new exercise regime particularly if you have any concerns about your current health status.
Now there's another common misconception in this area that fat burning during exercise only begins
after a set period usually quoted as being around 20 minutes although sometimes 30 minutes is this
magic threshold. Certainly fat metabolism is a slow starter with transport to and utilization
in the muscles requiring time to work effectively but after a while the switch takes place from
carbohydrate to fat for fuel. Interestingly this switch occurs sooner for fitter people again
supporting my previous statement that the fitter you are the more fat you will be able to burn
during exercise. Studies have shown there are a number of physiological adaptations as a result
of cardio exercise that help to shift body fat. Let's have a look at these. They include oxygen
supplies increasing with regular exercise helping to burn fat more efficiently and enhanced sensitivity
to epinephrine results in greater release of fat stores. The amount of fat that enters the muscle
to fuel movement can increase and the mitochondria where fat burning actually takes place in the
muscle cells they increase in number and size. So the combined result of these then supports the
earlier hypothesis that regular exercise helps us to become better at using up our fat stores.
An exercise for fat loss program will depend on two things. Now we've encountered these several
times in other presentations in this series namely frequency and duration. Since the aim is to burn
as many calories as possible ultimately exercising more often and for longer will help to tip that
energy balance equation in our favor that is towards a negative calorie deficit. Here are two
examples of how important these variables are when applied to two different exercise regimes.
Let's consider 30 minutes brisk walk three times per week that will result in a burn of 600 calories.
However 45 minutes brisk walk five times per week will result in a calorie burn of 1500 calories.
Now although the exact numbers will be dependent on people's specific body weight and walking technique
we can calculate from this that the first example it will take us approximately 13 weeks to burn off
one kilogram of body fat whereas the second approach cuts this down to only around five weeks.
When considering exercise for weight loss thought should be given to the influence of what exercise
physiologists refer to as exercise post-exercise oxygen consumption or epoch which is calorie
consumption immediately after exercise to cease it's the afterburn if you like and this is due
to the increased metabolic effect of your body removing waste products from the cells and then
refuelling. Clearly if this can be maximized it will lead to a boost in the calories burned even
though you could actually be relaxing back at home after your sweaty endeavors. It'll probably come
as no surprise to learn that epoch is dependent upon the intensity of the workout so the tougher
the workout then the greater the afterburn with 70 percent of your maximum working heart rate being
an absolute minimum so this allows us to now summarize exercise for weight loss as follows.
Fat can be burned at any exercise intensity and low intensity exercise is recommended for those
with a low fitness level as this is more likely to encourage you to stick at it. Whilst the percentage
of fat compared to carbohydrate being used as a fuel source varies with intensity the most important
figure is the total number of calories consumed. Frequency and duration need to be high enough
to have a significant impact on reducing body fat and remember that epoch contributes significantly
to calorie expenditure and is greater for higher intensity exercise sessions. Importantly
remember fat loss involves creating a negative energy balance and although exercise can make a
big difference to the calories used up clearly weight loss will only be achieved if we don't eat
too much so putting too much energy in. Whilst people will often equate weight loss exercise
to cardio options such as cycling running swimming it's fair to say that regular resistance
training results in a short-term boost in fat burning after exercise but a long-term increase
in muscle tissue which then has an associated rise in your resting metabolic rate. This implies then
that you'll burn even more calories just when you're sleeping. For this reason the best exercise
prescription is to combine intense cardio and resistance training mode since low calorie diets
lead to slowing the metabolism resistance training is actually vital as a tool to counter this
and so is highly valuable to help you maintain weight loss progress if you're combining exercise
and food restriction. To try to quantify the value of resistance training it's useful to know that
a kilogram of extra lean tissue will lead to an additional hundred calories being burned every
single day. If you consider that a resistance training program can reasonably be expected to add
three to five kilograms of muscle mass this equates to using up an extra three to five hundred
calories per day just in doing everyday activity. This could even add up think about this to a
considerable nine to fifteen kilograms of fat loss over a year. The important thing to remember
here is that you get out of exercise what you put in so resistance training like the cardio needs to
be intense and progressive. Weight should be selected to produce a momentary muscular fatigue at
around 12 to 15 repetitions and then increased once it becomes too easy. At this point I've
been discussed exercise in some detail I wish to address a myth you may well have encountered
regarding the suggestion that exercising in the morning on an empty stomach is a great way to
shed fat. Research at the University of Liouvin in Belgium confirmed this it will actually work
as fasting which is essentially what happens overnight as we sleep leads to an increased
adrenaline level and reduced insulin levels creating the environment that is more conducive
to the breakdown of fat for energy. The study revealed that those who exercise without eating
beforehand do burn significantly more fat than those who had a pre-workout snack however be warned
the fasters were not able to perform intense training as well as the counterparts who were
fueled up according to another study in the medicine science and sports exercise journal.
So before you set your alarm for an early morning jog before breakfast be aware that
not everybody's in agreement about this area and some experts would suggest that exercising with low
blood sugar could lead to you becoming dizzy coordinated it could even increase the risk of
injury it'll certainly feel somewhat uncomfortable exercising when you're feeling hungry and may
lead to you subconsciously eating more afterwards than you actually need so be aware.
Now we've established the impact of exercise upon weight loss let's consider a few specific
approaches that will produce results. High intensity interval training requires 10 sets
of four minutes at 95 percent of maximum working heart rate with two minutes rest in between
absolutely vital tool in your armory. A resistance training circuit performing perhaps 20 repetitions
at each of 12 weight training stations with little or no rest and the stations ideally
should alternate between upper and lower body for a good calorie burn. We could try sprint
interval training which involves full-on effort for 30 seconds followed by four minutes of light
exercise repeated six times. Another technique is fart leg training interspersing continuous
steady pace with quicker bursts of varying duration for example two four six minutes
in a sort of an unstructured format. Metabolic conditioning is the idea of working continuous
cardio at a moderate intensity of around 70 percent of your maximum working heart rate
for around 40 to 60 minutes and then step up interval training starting at an easy cardio pace
the speed increasing perhaps every four minutes by about 15 percent until you reach the set target
of between 20 to 60 minutes depending on your current fitness level. As we start to get a little
fit or another technique is near maximal training five sets of five minutes at 95 percent of your
maximum working heart rate followed by five minutes at just 50 percent. So there are a few
different formats there we can use to achieve our weight loss goals. Encouragingly both research
and anecdotal evidence suggest that most of us are capable of successfully losing weight
with the bigger challenge being to maintain our new weight. A study in 2009 revealed that regular
exercise can be linked to sustained weight after a reduction proposing that more is better and a
target of 40 minutes per day will prevent weight gain. Using a common sense approach
it's not too difficult to identify critical times for relapse enabling tactics to be developed to
avoid such. The triggers to regain can be divided into three distinct categories that can be
subdivided as follows let's think about lifestyle first of all. Taking part in sport especially
team games can be a great motivator to remaining regularly active so hanging up your cleats spikes
sneakers gloves or whatever can lead to a dramatic reduction in activity. Instead of ceasing sport
a sensible approach is to think about switching from one sport to a more gentle option. Believe it
or not marriage can be a problem particularly for men as it's commonly accompanied by a reduction in
energy levels and exercise levels and an increase in food intake. The key is to be conscious of
these two factors retaining your current commitment to activity and keeping a food diary to help avoid
more regular eating and increased portion sizes. Those who give up smoking may find that weight
increases as nicotine speeds up metabolic rate so withdrawing it causes a slowing. Regular exercise
and five to six small meals rather than two to three large meals each day are both tactics that
will help to give the metabolism a boost. It goes without saying the festive season is fraught with
danger in terms of the risk of putting back lost weight but it doesn't have to be. On nights out
alternate between an alcoholic and a soft drink at parties stand away from the buffet table to avoid
constantly grazing. Take the skin off your turkey steam the vegetables at Christmas lunch these are
all simple tactics that will allow you to get through yuletide without storing your saddlebags
with enough fuel to keep you going until Easter. After lifestyle let's look at stress.
Restrained eaters can sometimes worry less about their weight when under stress and then throw
caution to the wind regarding food intake so efforts should be made to try to adhere to regular
patterns. Bereavement can lead to comfort eating and a lack of motivation to exercise. At this
time it's important to remember that exercise brings an endorphin release that can lift your mood
so it's actually a great coping mechanism. Having mentioned marriage previously divorce now can be
associated with feelings of depression and a breaking routine that affects both eating and
activity patterns. There's a school of thought that suggests women cope better than men with this
either way commitment to maintaining routine is is vital here. So after lifestyle and stress
our third category is hormones. Changes linked to menopause are known to generally lead to a shift
in body composition so resistance training exercises as we mentioned earlier are particularly
useful at this time to both elevate your metabolism but also to help increase your bone mineral density
so reducing the risk of osteoporosis. Pregnancy will obviously lead to an increase in body weight
but it's important to try to restrict this to around 10 kilos. Specific exercise guidelines
can be found in our separate lecture in this series addressing both anti and postnatal periods.
Fat cells are known to multiply during growth spurts and are then retained for life early
puberty being one of these periods. It's important to remain active and avoid a diet that includes
too much junk food at this time. At the other end of the spectrum girls who crash diet risk
slowing their metabolic rate resulting in the same outcome. It's well documented that a recurring
problem is not only regaining lost weight after a concentrated effort but actually putting on more
than was lost and ending up heavier than before the campaign began. Those who successfully keep the
weight off are noted to exhibit a common number of characteristics supported by the national
weight control registry study of 784 people who had lost at least 60 pounds and then kept it off
for five years so what were these characteristics? Exercising for 250 minutes per week but remember
we can break that down to piecemeal fashion. Frequently stepping on the scales they never
skipped breakfast and they maintained a written record of their weight loss progress and a food
diary. No examination of weight loss issues would be complete without mention of cellulite so here's
a brief explanation of what it is why we get it and a summary of what we can do about it. Although
rarely seen in males it's estimated that 85 percent of females exhibit the dreaded dimple effect
somewhere on their body. Cellulite is a result of fat protruding from the subcutaneous layer
into the dermis or skin due to laxity in the connected tissue within the skin. Liposuction,
creams, injected products, massage and suction treatments produce varying results from some
anecdotal reports of amazing improvements down to sadly others declaring that they made the
appearance even worse. Newer treatments such as laser and low energy shockwave therapies have
produced some very encouraging results but the good news is that exercise there it is again can help
to tackle cellulite in two ways by helping to reduce the presence of body fat but also toning
the muscles a slack tone in the muscles around the hips and thighs particularly add to the
unwanted visual appearance associated with cellulite. So helping the nation to reclaim its
waste is not an easy task and requires the combined efforts of politicians defining public health
strategy the medical fraternity treating weight-related conditions and the fitness industry in providing
both a preventive and a reactive exercise prescription. Ultimately though a pandemic
such as obesity can be broken down to the decisions of individuals. I hope you now feel
confident that you have the requisite knowledge of exercise for weight loss to make the right choices
for you today, tomorrow and for the rest of your life.
