Hello everyone, in today's video, I'm going to be talking about regular expressions, and
I'm going to be going in depth covering everything you need to know about regular expressions.
This includes the simple stuff such as matchers, digit selectors, and so on, all the way up
to more advanced features such as capture groups, negative look ahead, positive look
ahead, and so on.
So let's get started now.
Welcome back to Web Dev Simplified.
My name is Kyle, and my job is to simplify the web for you, so you can start building
your dream project sooner.
So if that sounds interesting, make sure you subscribe to the channel for more videos just
like this one.
And now to get started, I'm on a website here which really helps with regular expressions.
I'm going to link it down in the description below so you can go to the same website,
but it's really useful because it highlights inside of the text you're searching for what
your regular expression actually matches, and it gives you details on every single thing
that the regular expression is doing.
It's great for practicing and testing out regular expressions, so I highly recommend
you go down to the link in the description and follow along on this site.
And now to get started, I first want to explain what regular expressions are, and essentially
a regular expression is a way to search through a string of text.
So we have this text in here, and at the top we have a regular expression.
And what that regular expression allows us to do is it allows us to search through that
text in order to do things such as validation or get certain pieces of the text we can do
advanced find and replace.
There's a ton of things that you can do with regular expression, but in general, all that
regular expression is doing is it allows you to search through text in a really advanced
way and even group those different searches together so you can do powerful things such
as find and replace with it.
So to get started, I kind of want to break down the format of a regular expression.
As you can see up here, we have our regular expression, and in the middle here we have
our text we're searching.
And a regular expression is almost always going to start with this opening slash here,
this forward slash, and it's going to end with a forward slash as well.
A lot of programming languages, when you define regular expressions, instead of defining them
in sort of string quotations, you define them inside of these forward slashes.
So everything between the forward slashes is going to be your regular expression.
Then also something that's a part of a regular expression is the part after the forward slash
here at the end.
These are the different flags.
And as you can see, we can access these flags up here.
And the main ones that you need to know about is global.
This allows you to match anywhere in the string.
For example, if we did at here, you can see that it matched all three of the different
ads.
That's because we have global, it allows it to do multiple matches.
But if we take global off, it's only going to match the first result that we find.
So essentially global is like match all, while without global is like match one.
Next we have case insensitive.
So for example, if I put the with a capital T H here, and then if I make this global,
you can see it's matching both of these, and that's because I have case insensitive
turned on.
If I turn that off, it's only going to match the the that is capitalized.
And if we change this to a lower case, it's only going to match the lower case one.
For the purposes of this tutorial, I'm just going to leave us on the global flag with
case sensitivity.
So that way, capitals actually make a difference.
And that's just because this is the most general configuration that you're going to
use when messing with regular expressions.
And to get started, as you can see, this works very much like a normal find.
If I type information into here, whatever I type is going to be searched for in the
string down here.
For example, at I can search for fat, and I'm just going to get the word fat, do ran,
and so on.
And it works just like normal find and replace, which is not really that powerful.
But where it does become powerful is when you can actually start adding in the regular
expression things.
And the very first one that I want to talk about is the idea of these different special
characters that allow you to do certain things.
So for example, we can search for the character E. And you can see we get every single E in
the side of our search.
But what if we wanted to search for a string of ease, so multiple ease in a row, we could
put E, and then we could put a plus.
And what this is saying is it's saying match E, but we want to match at least one.
This is one or more of the preceding token.
So we're saying match E or more than one E. So as you can see, we have this E being
matched, this E, but this is actually matching both of our ease because there's two ease
in a row.
And the plus is just saying match as many in a row as you can, but match at least one.
And then another character that we can do, for example, we can put an A in here, and
we can put a question mark.
And that's saying that this is optional.
So optionally, I want to get this a character.
So here we have EA.
So it's going to get the character E, as you can see in all of these.
And then if there's an A, it's also going to match that.
So this question mark says zero or one, I like to think of it as whatever is before
it is optional.
So in our case, our A is optional.
And wherever there is an A after an E, it's matching it, but in the case where there's
no A after the E, it's just completely ignoring it.
The next one that I want to talk about is going to be here, the star indicator and the
star indicator essentially says match zero or more.
So it's kind of like a combination of the question mark and the plus, it's saying that
it's optional, but you can match as many as possible in a row.
So when we can see this as if we do R E and then star, you can see it's matching anything
in here that is an R, and then it matches all of the ease that follow it.
If there are any, and if not, it just matches the R itself.
Another special character that's really important is the period character.
And the idea of the period character is that matches literally anything at all.
So as you can see here, we put the period and it's matching the F, the C and the E.
It doesn't matter.
It'll match anything except for a new line.
It won't match a new line.
So we have a new line right here.
And if, for example, we wanted to search for T and then we want to search for period and
we wanted to search for another period, you can see that it's not actually wrapping the
new line because period can't match a new line.
Also, you may notice that we want to search for a period.
For example, how do we find all of the periods?
We can use here the backslash and then the period.
And what the backslash allows us to do is just cancel out anything that comes after it.
It essentially escapes it.
So since we have the special character period after it, it's saying treat this as a normal
period and not as the special wildcard period that matches everything.
And as you can see, we're able to match any of our periods.
And if we wanted to say what's match any character that comes before, we could just put a period
and now we're matching any character that comes before a period as well as the period.
Another really important special character that we can actually use here is going to
be the slash W. And this is saying match any word character.
So this is going to be things like letters.
As you can see here, it's matching every single letter in our list.
Also, there's the slash S. This is going to match any form of white space that there is.
And the nice thing is these have negative versions.
So capital S is going to match anything that's not a white space.
Capital W matches anything that's not a character such as these letters here.
And what say we wanted to capture all of the words that are longer than four characters
long?
Well, we can't use the plus, we can't use the star, these don't actually work.
What we can do is inside of curly braces, we can put a minimum and a maximum number for
how large we want something.
So for example, let's say we wanted to get all the words that are over four characters,
we could say four, and this is going to get us any four digits in a row.
And if we put a comma, it's going to say get any four digits or more.
If you wanted to get four to five characters, we would say four to five, and it's going
to match any set of characters that are between four and five long.
And that right there is pretty much the majority of all of your counting selectors as well
as your special character selectors that you have to worry about.
But another thing that you can do is actually do character groupings.
So we can get all of the characters inside of a group.
So for example, let's say that we wanted to get any single word that ends in a T, and
we wanted to get a three letter word that ends in a T, and we wanted to get only the
words that start with either F or C, what we could do here is inside of square brackets,
we put any characters that we want to match.
And it's saying match any of the characters inside of here, for example, it's going to
match anything that starts with F or C, and ends with an AT.
But the really useful thing about these character sets is you can actually do ranges.
So we could, for example, do A to Z.
And this is going to be all of the characters between A and Z.
We could also do between capital A and capital Z.
And now we have all of the characters between A and Z that are lowercase, and all the characters
between A and Z that are uppercase that are going to be checked inside this regular expression.
We could do the same thing, for example, with zero to nine if we wanted to.
It's really useful because we can do these large ranges, which allow us to do these really
specific checks.
For example, we could do like A to F, and it's going to get anything between A and F,
we could do A to C, and we're just going to get cat now in that case.
Something else that's really useful is the ability to put things inside of a group.
And that's what we use parentheses for.
Anything inside of the parentheses are going to be their own group, and they only act upon
themselves.
So for example, we could search for T, or uppercase T, whoops, uppercase T.
And with this does this little pipe character here, is it saying match any of these.
So it's like a or resolve is saying either lowercase T, or uppercase T.
And then we want to match he afterwards.
So this allows us to match uppercase T or lowercase T, and it's going to allow us to
match it for the word the.
And the reason we need parentheses, because if we remove these parentheses, this character
here is going to check for either lowercase T, or the entire word the, because it's going
upon the thing on the left and the thing on the right.
But with the parentheses, we can actually break this up into its own group.
So now it's only acting upon the T and the uppercase T, instead of the full word the.
Also something that's really useful with these groups is we can actually do some things such
as our matches, where we could say we want to match, for example, two to three.
And it's going to say we want to match two to three of this character grouping here.
So you have our case T, or uppercase T.
And so we can actually see this in effect by doing if we want T, E, and R, you can see
it's going to match between two and three of these.
Let's just say we want to match between two and three of those.
And you can see it's matching over here, T, R, E, because it's in this group, there's
at least three of these, and then E, T, because there's two of them.
And then, for example, we could even put things after this.
For example, we want to match the period key.
And you can see it's giving us the E, E, T period at the end, because it's checking
between two and three of these characters up here at the beginning.
And then it's saying the actual period key is coming after it.
So with these capture groupings, what we can do is we can actually specifically say we
want to do special things only to those groupings.
So anything that we put after these groupings are going to affect the entire grouping and
not just a single character inside of that grouping as we were doing before.
Because, for example, if we remove all of this, we just change this to, for example,
E of two to three.
What this is doing is only acting upon this E. And if we put, for example, an R in here,
it's not acting upon this R at all.
This R is completely separate from the E. But if we were to put it inside of a group
like this, now what this is saying is any set of R E that is seen in a row two to three
times.
So if we put R E R E, you can say that's going to match it.
We put another one, it'll match it.
But of course, the fourth one will not.
Now another special character, which is really important to get used to is the carrot symbol,
which essentially says match the beginning of the line.
So for example, we put the T here, it's going to match the beginning of our statement.
But if we put a capital I and the carrot symbol, you can see that it's not working.
And that's because we're doing this as one whole chunk of text.
So this carrot is the very beginning of our entire chunk.
If we wanted to do it per each individual line, we would need to set the multi line
flag.
And now that's saying that this carrot symbol is the beginning of each and every line that
we have, instead of just the beginning of the actual statement as a whole, I'm going
to turn that back off just so that we know that this is going to be the very beginning
of our entire statement.
So for example, our T is going to match this T here.
And we could put, you know, for example, the, and it's going to match that whole word,
the, but only going to match the, the very beginning, even if we made it so that it
could be a lowercase T by doing this.
So it could be either an uppercase T or a lowercase T.
You can see it's still not matching.
But if we remove this, you can see now it matches both of those.
Another thing that you can do is the dollar sign symbol.
And what this is saying is match the end of our statement.
So for example, at the end, we have a period and you can see it's matching this period
here.
But of course, it's not matching the period at the end of street because we would need
to enable multi line.
So that way this works on the end of the line instead of the end of our entire statement.
But again, I'm going to turn that off just because I think it's easier to work with when
you use a whole statement instead of multi line, at least for our examples.
Now that is essentially 90% of all of the regular expression stuff that you're ever
going to use.
You're really only going to use these generic ish matches as well as capture groups in
order to make these complex selectors.
But something that you can use that really increases the ability of you using regular
expressions is look ahead and look behinds.
And to get started, I'm going to talk about a look behind first, and we're going to talk
about the positive look behind.
And the way that you use a positive look behind is you need to put it inside of a group.
And this group is going to start with a question mark, as well as the less than signed and
then the equal.
So this is saying that we want to look behind us.
That's what this less than sign is.
And then the equal is saying it's positive.
So it must match what's inside of here.
So for example, what if we want to get every single word that is followed by the word the,
we can come in here and we can say that we want to match either a T or an uppercase T
and we want to match H E and we can just say we want the very first character that's followed
by the word the.
So we'll just put a period here and you can see we're getting both of the spaces that
are followed by the forward not actually getting the word the inside of our selection.
As you can see, it's only the period.
And that's the value of these look ahead and look behinds is they allow you to look at
things that either happened before or after the thing you want to capture.
But it doesn't actually capture or select the thing that you're looking behind or looking
ahead for.
And that's super useful and I really like that about these so we can say that we want
something followed by the word the, but we don't need to select the word the.
Also there's the negative look behind.
And this is going to be replacing this equals with an exclamation point.
And this is saying that we want to get anything that doesn't have the word the before it.
So you can see it matches every single character, except for the two spaces that had the word
the before it.
And the negative look behind is pretty much identical to the look behind.
That's positive, except for it's just going to invert it.
So your results are going to be completely inverted from the results of the Nate or the
positive look behind.
Now we can move on to the look ahead and look ahead is very similar to look behind, but
we just remove the less than simple.
So let's come in here and we can do a look ahead.
That's positive first.
And we want to say that we want to get anything that has an AT after it.
So we want to get any character that's followed by AT.
And as you can see, we get F, C and E because these are both followed by the characters
A and T. And if we wanted to invert that, we just change this equals to an exclamation.
And as you can see, we're now getting everything that's not followed by AT.
So everything but the FC and the E.
Now that we understand all of the basics of regular expressions, let's actually look
into implementing a regular expression to check for a phone number.
This is a great example because it can be really simple.
But as you start to add different types of formatting to your phone number, it can get
really complex and allow you to build on your regular expression skills as you go.
So let's come in here, replace all this with just a random phone number.
We'll just say 1234567890.
So we have our area code of three digits and three more digits and then our last four digits.
This is going to be the easiest phone number to check for because all we need to do is
just check for nine characters in a row.
So we can just say slash D, which is going to be for digits.
This is any form of number digit and we can just say that we want to get nine of them
in a row.
I'm sorry, we need to make sure we get 10 of them in a row because this is a 10 digit
number and as you can see, that's matching that perfectly.
But obviously there's multiple different types of phone numbers that we can search for.
For example, we could have the phone number 1234567890 and we also need to be able to
account for that.
And now I'm going to enable multi-line here because now we can actually search each one
of these lines individually to make sure that they all still work.
So now instead of just being able to check for 10 characters in a row, we need to check
for groupings.
So the first thing we're going to have is a set of three characters in a row for our
digit.
And then we're going to have a dash, but we want to make sure that dash is optional.
So we put the question mark next, we're going to have another three digits in a row.
So we're just going to come in here, say the D, and we're going to have three more in a
row.
And again, an optional dash.
So we'll put dash with the question mark to say that it's optional.
And then lastly, we're going to do the same thing.
We want to have our digits and we want to have four of them this time instead of three.
And there you go.
We now have matched both of these different types of phone numbers.
Now obviously another way for someone to write this phone number would be 123 space 456
space 7890.
This is also common.
So we again need to account for that.
We can come in here and essentially put this inside of a character grouping and we can
just put our space inside of it.
So now we're saying any form of space between these, we could just do the same thing here.
We want to use space or dash.
And now you can see we've matched both of these, which is great.
Now before we get too carried away, let's say that the end result is that we want to
take any phone number that we're given and convert it to just 10 numbers in a row with
no spaces, no dashes, no parentheses.
What we're going to need to do is we need to capture all of our digits.
So we can again use capture groups for that.
If you remember when we put things inside of parentheses, it's actually going to capture
those.
So we can put all of our digit segments inside of parentheses here.
And now if we come down over into the details section, you can see that it shows all of
our different matches.
And you can see that we have matches of 123456789, as well as the different groups.
And if we select here, you can see it's the exact same thing.
It's matching 1234567890.
And again, same thing right here, when we click on these different results, it's showing
what it's matching for each one of those.
So we know that we're matching those correct groups, and we can come into replace, for
example.
And what we can do is we can say that we want to take group number one.
So dollar sign one, dollar sign two and dollar sign three, that's saying take group one,
group two and group three and just put them one after another.
And this is what happens when you don't name your groups, but you can actually name your
groups by putting a question mark, as well as the less than and greater than symbol.
And then inside of here, you put your name.
So for example, we can call this area code, then we can come and look inside of our details
section.
And you can see our area code is set to 123.
We can also name these other groups if we really wanted to, but it doesn't really matter
naming them is more for convenience of use when you're actually going for find and replace
and doing other complex things like that.
Now let's go on and look at another example where we have 123, and then it's going to
be followed by 456, and then a hyphen and 7890.
So now we need to account for parentheses around the area code, which again are going
to be optional.
So we can come in here, put a parentheses, and we need to make sure that we do the backslash
before because this is a special character.
So we have optionally one parentheses opening at the beginning.
And then here, we're going to have optionally one closing parentheses just like this.
And now you can see that it's working.
And if we look down here, our area code 123, we got 456 and then 7890.
Now one other thing to account for is if you have international numbers, you're going
to have, for example, a plus one at the beginning of the number.
So we can have plus one 1234567890.
This is another valid number that we need to make sure we account for.
So what we can do is we want to check specifically for the characters of plus and one.
And again, plus is a special character, so we need to make sure we escape it.
And now we're saying the character plus one at the beginning, as well as we can have an
optional space, or we can have here a hyphen just like that.
And we want to make sure that this is optional.
Now you will notice, down here at the bottom, our plus one also contains the space at the
end, and we don't want that space.
So we can put another grouping that wraps just around the plus one section.
And now we can have our grouping that's just the plus one, but we also have the grouping
for the plus one with the space.
So in order to tell regular expression to not actually check for something with the group,
we put question mark colon at the beginning of our grouping.
And this is going to be a non capturing group.
So now you can see that that plus one with the space is no longer being captured.
And now if we go into our place, we can come in here, we have four capturing groups now,
so we can make sure we capture group one, two, three and four.
And as you can see, it's printing out all of our numbers exactly like we want them.
And that's all there is to regular expressions.
If you enjoyed this video, make sure to check out my other videos linked over here and subscribe
to the channel for more videos just like this.
Thank you very much for watching and have a good day.
