What if there was an idea, a new theory of gravity that could bridge the gap between
our predictions and observations of the most mysterious substance in the universe,
dark energy?
Everything connects with gravity, everything lives in your spacetime.
Dark energy is a force that scientists believe is causing the expansion of the universe to
not only increase, but to do so at an accelerating rate.
But there are discrepancies between the predicted amounts of dark energy in the universe
and our theoretical calculations based on the properties of the fundamental particles
that we know and love.
We're trying to get to the bottom of this for years, almost 30 years without success.
That is, until today's guests, Professor Claudia Duran proposed a new theory of massive
gravity that could explain why the universe is accelerating and also solve the impossible
dark energy puzzle.
It's really in asking ourselves provocative questions just like you do that we make progress.
Join Claudia and me as we fall headfirst into the dark side of the universe to uncover
its most seemingly impossible mysteries and turn the impossible into the inevitable.
Let's go.
Claudia, how are you doing today?
Well, I'm great.
Thank you.
How are you, Brian?
I'm excellent now that I get a chance to talk to you.
We have a lot in common, but I'm going to start first with a rather provocative question.
If you'll indulge me, a lot of this book and a lot of your work corresponds to the desire to find
a solution to the so-called mass of the graviton.
I want to start by asking you, why should we care about finding the mass or attributing mass
to a particle whose existence we don't even know for sure about?
So that's many, many different reasons.
The first one, I would say, which is going to convince the few people, but is the truth,
is because we as human care about understanding nature at the most fundamental level, and so
we should really always dive deeper and deeper.
That's how we make progress.
Sometimes it's really in asking ourselves provocative questions just like you do that
we make progress and questions that may not have a specific outcome for tomorrow,
but it typically has shaped us, shaped the future of humanity.
That is really the real reason.
But then there's many other reasons I can tell you of why I went into that specific question.
First, let me just say that it's about understanding whether a fundamental particle,
which we may never detect per se, has a mass, but it has an implication also on gravitation
waves, which we do have, we have observed, and actually from the very first detection of
direct detection of gravitational waves here on Earth in 2015, the very one thing,
the first thing that they were able to do is put an upper limit on how massive the
graviton was because it has an effect on the propagation of gravitational waves.
So now that limit is still quite high as compared to what we ideally would like it to be,
for the reasons I'll explain.
But still, in principle, it has some real consequences that we can observe here on Earth
through gravitational waves and through many different tests of gravity,
tests of the universe, tests of why we're here, where we're going, our origin, and all of those
questions.
Why I am interested, why I spend my time looking at that as opposed to all sorts of other fundamental
questions, is because I think it has a potential to tackle the most challenging question of
fundamental physics, the biggest discrepancy of the whole history of science, which is
the cosmological constant problem.
Or in other words, why are we living in an universe that looks the way it does and is
not actually expanding at an accelerated rate, which is way faster by at least 56 orders of
magnitude, if not 120 orders of magnitude, as should be the case if the quantum fluctuations
from all the fields that we know exist, like the electrons and the Higgs and all of those fields,
all of those are the fundamental particles that made us so really exist.
We would expect them to lead to what we call an energy in the vacuum, an energy of nothingness
that fills the whole universe itself and should lead to a hugely faster accelerated
rate of expansion of the universe.
The discrepancy is simply the biggest discrepancy in the whole history of science.
And that is at the interface of the two pillars of modern theoretical physics,
modern science, which on one side is gravity, on the other side is field theory, quantum field
theory, putting the two together, which is really the foundation of the standard model
of particle physics as we know it today.
And so it's very much at the interface between the two of them that we have the biggest discrepancy
we can ever imagine.
And so it seems natural that the resolution is very much at the interface between the two
of them, thinking of gravity, thinking of gravity as well as a quantum field theory
and understanding what are the properties of gravity more fundamentally.
So recently, the DESI collaboration made an announcement that there seems to be evidence
for the variation of the cosmological constant from constant to perhaps a contestant-like
behavior.
Can you tell me how would that impact the statement you just made?
Would it affect the search or the motivation to look for a massive graviton?
So it is within the same framework that something has to be slightly different as compared to the
standard I'll call lambda CDM or vanilla model for the cosmological paradigm,
which we would just think until now everything seemed to fit beautifully with having called
dark matter and a simple cosmological constant.
So very natural in that evolution sense.
In a parameter sense, it's very simple in that sense, but actually in understanding how that
fits in in the bigger picture is that's where the real naturalist question is coming.
And so if there's any departure from this lambda CDM, it really opens up the opportunity
for there to be something else out there and any modification of gravity could feed into that,
any dynamical dark energy could feed into that.
And sometimes there's a little bit of a muchness on how much you consider
modified gravity and dark energy.
You get some models of modification of gravity can be recaptured in effectively looking for
cosmological purposes as a dynamical cosmological constant or dynamical,
shouldn't say cosmological constant, but dynamical dark energy.
So for instance, if you have a theory of massive gravity and you want to tackle the
cosmological constant problem with that, you would want to accept that the universe is filled
with vacuum energy as expected from particle physics, but this huge level of vacuum energy
doesn't lead to a huge accelerated rate of the universe today.
It did in the past, but then through the weakening of gravity due to the mass of the
graviton, through the evolution of the universe, you would have a relaxation of the effect
of this vacuum energy on the evolution of the universe.
So in some sense, it does look like a dynamical or cosmological constant and that seems paradoxical,
but the source would be constant in some sense.
It would be vacuum energy, it would be a cosmological constant,
but then its effect on gravity, its effect on the evolution of the universe would be
dynamical, it would be deleted, relaxed our way through the evolution of the universe.
We would expect in this type of departure from the standard Lambda CD and the standard
cosmological constant. So some of your work in this book, which we will now play my favorite
game about called Judging Books by Their Cover, is about a topic near and dear to my heart,
the cosmic microwave background and the subject of polarization. But before we get there, I want
us to indulge ourselves in this game that I call Judging Books by Their Cover.
So Claudia, please, if you would, take us through the beautiful artwork,
the title and the subtitle of this wonderful book.
Okay. So the title is The Beauty of Falling and the subtitle A Life in Pursuit of Gravity.
And I'm really happy to guess what I mean by all of those things, which is a lot.
But I'm very happy with The Cover, actually, because it's very symbolic of the story.
There is a real story in the book. And so on The Cover, you start seeing on the top
an astronaut, an astronaut floating in mid-air, experiencing some level of free falling and
some freedom, very much some freedom in that. And then in the middle, you see the same person,
I think, Ali, each falling now. You can imagine she's falling. She's falling on earth. She's
really embracing some level of free fall. There's probably some friction from the air because she's
falling on earth, but she's enjoying it. There's a beauty in the fall itself. The fall itself is
beautiful. Maybe what comes next is what was a bit more worrying. But luckily for her, the last
picture, the bottom is her diving in the sea and really enjoying this last part of the free fall
and seeing how this channel, how this falling has been channeling through a different perspective,
now enjoying playing with gravity as she dives in the ocean and enjoying this new environment.
The subtitle is as beautiful. And of course, a lot of these things on The Cover that this
character is experiencing are relevant to you. The first one being astronaut, which you have
attempted to be from the European Space Agency sign. The middle one is you flying, maybe doing a
dive, but there's an airplane in the back. You and I are both pilots. I don't know how much you
fly nowadays, but I have flown a diamond katana before. Yeah, amazing. I know that. I have a
picture of it there. I'm not going to tell the screen right now, but it's a love that happened.
It just wants to fly. It's amazing. It just pulls the nose up and it wants to fly. It's incredible.
And then there's a woman ends up underwater wearing a scuba diving suit. And that takes
me to my first question from my guest, from a not a guest, an audience member who is a very
special person to both of us. His name is Professor Greg Gabadadze, who is not only a friend and a
brilliant scientist and innovator, truly just one of my heroes in science. He's also an administrator
at NYU, a dean. I don't know what masochistic desire he had to do that. He's from Georgia,
not the state, but the country of Georgia. So, you know, they make tough, tough people. They're
brilliant and tough. But Greg asked me to ask you when I solicited a question. He said, thanks
for reaching out. Claudia wrote a wonderful book with a clear and modern perspective on physics
and also connected to remarkable personal experiences. And I have a fun question for
Claudia. I'd ask her if there might be any advantage to thinking about physics while
floating in the cosmos or underwater. And I want to get your answer to that, Gregory's question.
In both ways, I think, being a theoretical physicist and thinking about quite abstract
concepts, I think there is a beauty in doing that when you fly, when you dive, you float in the
cosmos in embracing this understanding of nature at a deeper level. There is a deep connection that
gets there. But also the other way around, of course, I would like to tell you that I'm an
astronaut and I'm doing experiences about gravity in the microgravity on free fall
and orbit around the earth. It hasn't happened. And I'm not doing that when I'm scuba diving.
I'm not doing some explicit state of the art test of gravity when I do that. But I do it with my
body. And I think there is, as you say, Gregory is a very top guy. And I'm not saying that we
should all be very tough, but there is some level in which learning to have this balance between
judging your instinct, judging your intuition in very challenging situations, but also seeing how
much you can judge intuition and how much you have to rely on your confidence to follow a pattern,
to follow the logic, to follow scientific rules in situations where actually your instinct
naively would tell you to do something which would be quite catastrophic. And you are kind of to
you know that, for instance, if you're flying and you're stalling, naturally, if you hadn't had any
training, the first thing you would try to do is pull the nose up because you say you're going down,
you're going to pull the nose up so that you pick up altitude. But actually that decreases the lift
and so the plane sinks much more and that can actually lead to an accident. So following too
much instinct in these situations can lead to catastrophic outcomes. So if you learn to put
yourself in uncomfortable situations and have this balance between knowing what to do, there's a
level of instinct that you learn after having practiced it for hundreds of times, but also
is very much based on scientific understanding. You understand what you have to do logically,
that makes complete sense, and then you train yourself to learn the process in that. With your
body, a situation where your life depends on it, then you can do that on the blackboard so much
easier. Hey there, while Dark Energy is one of the most mysterious concepts in the known universe,
another mystery I'm trying to solve is why only 50% of you out there are subscribed to my YouTube
channel or following the podcast on your favorite podcast app. Are you one of them? Please don't
be in the silent majority. Do me a favor, subscribe, follow, and leave a comment or review. It really
helps me out and I respond to every single one. And when you do it, it helps me get great guests
like Claudia, Dan Dennett, Sam Harris. It's all a numbers game, unfortunately, and we have to make
sure the algorithm respects the matter that matters that we discussed on the Into the Impossible
podcast. So before we get back to the episode, just take a second and hit that subscribe button,
leave a comment or a thumbs up. Anything will help out. Appreciate it. Now back to the episode.
And that brings me to my next question, which is related to this gentleman who
features very prominently in this book, Albert Einstein.
Oh, you do? Okay, we can have a dueling one. So I'm going to do something mean to, which looks cruel,
but actually was one of his most exciting breakthroughs. In fact, he called this the
happiest thought of his life, which was that if he was following, he would experience no
gravitational force. And that led to the Einstein Equivalence Principle. And I want to ask this as
a first detour into your life as a professor and say that nowadays we hear a lot about artificial
intelligence and machine learning and all sorts of things. I think they're very powerful. But as a
professor, I think about, well, how could these things aid us? How could they be better researchers?
Could such an entity, artificial made of silicon and glass and steel and whatever else,
could it experience the joy of falling? Could it experience this most exhilarating feeling of Albert
Einstein? And then if it could experience that viscerally with a body, or if it could not rather
experience because it doesn't have a body, how could it make a breakthrough equivalent to what
Einstein, the greatest scientist of the last 100 years, perhaps, how could it even be considered
to be intelligent if it can't even do what Einstein did? I mean, it's a high bar. But do you think
that physicists can be replaced or mimicked even by artificial intelligence?
I think there's no replacement. I think we've done so well at using things to our advantage. And
there's clear advantages to using national learning. It can speed up a lot of the things.
Now, when it comes to can it feel for us? That's a deep question. I can't do. Do I really feel
something or am I in a matrix and believe that I feel something? And how will I know the difference?
I don't know. I think related to your question is also how we model the world all around us.
If a computer is able to model the world, the universe and nature all around itself to
incredible precision, does it make it that this model is the reality or not? And there's a thin
line there sometimes. So your question makes me reminded of that. If a computer can reproduce all
the signs of what it means to feel something, does it make it feel it or not? You'd think not
because we are experiencing something deeper than that. But how can you tell? I don't know.
But I do think that there is a difference between spinning things up and reproducing,
relying on past understood patterns or past patterns that haven't necessarily been understood,
but have been identified and seeing them and being able to get some sense and logic and
organizing all of that, particularly when it comes to huge level of data, to speed up some
connection between some patterns and some model and some values that you want to take out of these
patterns or these data. There's a huge difference between doing that and actually coming up with a
breakthrough in itself, which requires a huge level of creativity. It's like all of a sudden
thinking you're going to paint the world, but not with pencils and paint, but using another dimension.
And it's something I can't even capture in words. And so if you haven't taught the machine
to think in that language, to use tools that will rely on the extra dimension, let me just
be crazy out there, how could it? I don't think you will out of the blue come up with things we
haven't ourselves yet invented with a completely new language. And so that level of creativity,
I think we will always have. And it's a little bit different. I should say that the response to
that, some people say that computers through machine learning, they can come up with new songs.
And so that shows some level of creativity. But those new songs are still within the same
remit of previous songs, still with music and notes, still within the same sense of that.
It will be quite different to have a sudden think of a new channel of communication, which is not
through sound, is not through light, is not even through gravitational waves. That would be something
yet completely different. And that's what we scientists are very good at, to think about
new ways to connect with the world. And in a 2020 paper published in PRD,
you described the speed of gravity. I always tell my students to their great horror,
the sun could disappear right now. And God forbid that happens, but we wouldn't know for eight minutes.
But is that really true? I mean, how do we know if that's actually true? So your paper,
the speed of gravity with Andrew Tolly at Imperial as well, makes a prediction that
the speed of gravity could differ from lowercase c. And I'm surprised. Why isn't this made a bigger
impact? Or are you even more famous than you are? You can imagine gravitational rain,
but it was where the speed of gravity does depend on the frequency, just like light
depends on the frequency. So not in the vacuum, not in empty space per se. For light, we can
understand. I can sort of conceive what empty space is, is the absence of interactions between light
and anything else. So we are used to the fact that light in space travels at the speed of light.
But if you shine light through water, for instance, then light will start interacting
slightly differently with the medium, with the water, with the water molecules,
depending on the frequency of light. And so you see that. And because of this interaction,
light doesn't travel at the speed of light in the vacuum in water, and the way it travels,
the speed at which it travels depends on its color. So we're all used to that phenomenon.
We all see rainbows, and that's the proof that light doesn't always travel at the speed of light.
So you can ask yourself the same question for gravity. And that's, you know, it's quite subtle
because now, what does it mean in empty space when actually everything connects with gravity?
Everything lives in your space time. And if a universe is filled with dark energy,
then is there such a thing as empty space? I don't know. And it could be that gravitational
waves do interact ever so slightly with anything living in that space time, including dark energy.
And if that were the case, then it would modify the speed of gravitational waves.
It would do so at very, very low frequencies. So if all of a sudden you were to take off the sun,
that would be kind of a high frequency, a high frequency thing. And so the propagation
of this information, well, you would expect it to take very close to eight minutes to reach to us
because at those frequencies, you would expect the speed of gravitational waves to be very,
very close to that of light. And another thing that would come concomitantly with such a phenomenon
would be additional polarization modes in addition to the so-called plus and cross modes that my
colleagues and I are trying to study in the cosmic microwave background.
Can you explain these types of new polarization states? There's a beautiful illustration in the
book about them, the so-called breathing one. That's very evocative. Can you explain what these
polarizations would do and why you manifest that you have to have new polarization states of gravity
if gravitational waves, or you call it glite, that will maybe catch on and supplement your salary
there. I hope so. I hope you get the trademark on that. But how would they manifest themselves?
How would a breathing mode manifest itself? And what would it look like in the power spectrum
of the CMB that my colleagues and I and the Simons Foundation have supported to the tune of over
$110 million so far? First of all, I think we will all sort of accept it that, for instance,
light itself comes in two polarizations and you put some very cool sunglasses and then you see
maybe one polarization and the other one gets filtered out. And we can ask the question already
for gravitational waves. Can you put some cool sunglasses for gravitational waves and only
you see one polarization or the other one? That would be a bit more challenging. But already,
yes, gravitational waves or what I like to call glite, because in some level it's quite similar
to light, comes already in two different flavors. And that's imposed by symmetry according to
Einstein's theory of general relativity. Now imagine that the gravitational waves
weren't traveling at the speed of light, very close to the speed of light, but not necessarily
weren't forced anymore to travel at the speed of light. Then you could, in principle, imagine some
sort of analog to sand waves, some longitudinal waves where you could have some gravitational
waves speeding up a little bit and slowing down a little bit. So these would be modes
which would not look like the standard gravitational waves, the cross and the plus,
which are transfers to the line of propagation of the gravitational waves.
They would actually be along the line of propagation of the gravitational waves.
So that mode, we typically don't like it, but that's a different story. It's just to illustrate
the fact that you open up a whole set of other possibilities once you allow yourself to sink
beyond the box, beyond not that I want to put Einstein's inner box, but beyond the theory of
Einstein's theory of general relativity. And so in addition to this longitudinal loads,
you also have some modes which are in between. So they are a little bit, they're halved through
the transverse direction and halved through the longitudinal direction. And also related to that,
you could have, you can now start imagining quite different things where rather than just have the
plus and the cross mode transfers to the propagation, you could have a breathing mode,
really just think about breathing. And if you think of some beads distributed along the circle,
as the mode, that mode goes through, they would sort of become, seem to suggest a bigger circle
and then come to a smaller circle and bigger circle and smaller circle. There's something quite
pacific about that. I like this picture, it makes me feel meditating as that mode goes through.
That mode is actually very important in any theory of gravity beyond Einstein's theory of
gravity, because that is typically expected to be the smoking gun signature for a theory beyond
Einstein's theory of general relativity. That mode, the real question is why isn't it there
in Einstein's theory of general relativity? You could expect it to be there in principle.
And it's not because of symmetry. Einstein's theory of general relativity was based on the
equivalence principle and on some other principles that nowadays we understand them as being
symmetry driven and that symmetry simply prevents this conformal breathing mode from appearing.
Now you can think if the graviton had a mass, you can always make that mass sufficiently small.
So that you don't see any departure. And that is true, that is true in principle. However,
because now there are additional polarization for gravitational waves, you can think about having
different ways to communicate through gravity. There's different channels of communication
through gravity. And that has a big impact in how we're testing gravity. As you say that would mean,
it could mean for instance that at the very beginning of the universe, you could have production
of not only primordial gravitational waves as the one you're thinking about,
which would lead to valorizations in the CMB. But you could also think of production of primordial
gravitational waves in this breathing mode. Now this breathing mode in itself, from a cosmological
perspective, it wouldn't be during inflation, it wouldn't necessarily look so dissimilar to the
inflaton itself or to the other field that are already present and whose effect has already been
seen and printed in the CMB through the temperature fluctuations. So actually, there are models out
there of massive gravity for the very beginning of the universe, where this additional polarization
of the gravitational waves do act potentially as a substitute for the inflaton. And for the
fluctuations in those, those primordial breathing mode polarizations would lead to the temperature
fluctuations that we do see in the in the cosmic microwave background, for instance.
So would there be a modification to the BB mode power spectrum, the autocorrelation, or would it
induce new forbidden correlations, EB correlations, would it change the shape of the autocorrelation?
Is there some way to detect it, you know, because these are the only, this is all you have, right?
You make the case in the, in the, in the book that beyond the, beyond the, you know, realm of the
galaxy or even clusters, there's no hope of discovering physics of gravity at the Planck scale,
other than inflation, if inflation did take place, we don't know that it did. Some of us hope that it
did, but we've had that, we've had that dream before. But the question is, are there new observable
signatures that we can use to detect the presence or absence of a massive graviton or and the
concomitant breathing modes that would also be induced in novel polarization states?
Yeah. So that's a great question. One of the things that would happen is if the, if the mass of
a graviton is a little bit too large, if you imagine you have a graviton being too massive,
then it would prevent the, prevent the production of primordial gravitational waves whose frequency
are comparable as the mass of the graviton during the, the period where they should have been produced.
So in effect, what you would expect in the power spectrum of primordial
polarization, or of primordial gravitational waves, let me say, of b-mode polarization,
you would expect a plateau. You wouldn't expect any production of primordial gravitational waves
at very low L because those would be forbidden by the, the fact that the, the graviton
prevents the production of primordial gravitational waves within that, those scales.
So seeing actually the production of primordial gravitational waves or CMB polarization, b-mode
spectrum at very low L, that would be assigned against massive gravity, against a massive
graviton, against massive polarizations during the period of concentration.
One thing that people don't talk about as much, I mean, people don't talk about this
massive gravitons very much either, but, but comparatively, even if you can imagine, even
less attention is paid to the existence of spin three halves particles. We have a spin zero
particles, we have abundance of those, we have a lot of spin one halves, thank God, or you and I
wouldn't be here talking, we have plenty of light, you know, with an L and no G in front of it,
we even have hopes of glite with spin, but the absent, you know, the, the so-called black sheep,
maybe the missing, you know, missing, missing term, missing spin statistic term,
it's been three halves. Why? What, what did nature do to so alienate one of the
most prominent types of fundamental intrinsic spin modes that could possibly exist?
Yeah, it's a good question. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I mean,
those particles, not at the fundamental level, but at composite level, they do, they do exist,
so we know they can't be represented to some level in nature, but having them as fundamental
particle, we know that then their interactions with other fields is, is very difficult and
their implementation within a theory of gravity is also very, very challenging. I know that for
spin two, and it's the same case for, for spin three half as well, the, the framework in which
you construct the, even the, the nonlinearities, the interactions for spin up to, up to one
is relatively straightforward, I would say, and the connection with gravity as well,
and it's relatively straightforward, but when you go beyond that, it becomes extremely complicated,
and Annie, you have to be very subtle in how you try to connect those modes with others,
how they communicate with others. You very easily open new channels of instabilities,
so it's not typically, you can just add some level of interactions, and you're okay with that.
As soon as you open up a smallest level of interaction, you need to reinvent the wheel,
if so says reinvent a whole framework to see how they embed into a deeper, a deeper one.
So that we see from the theoretical perspective how challenging it is.
And so maybe, maybe because of everything that comes along with it, it's much harder
for them to manifest themselves in nature. Hey there, dark matter is mysterious, but
ordinary matter can be had in the form of a meteorite. If you just do me the favor of joining
my free Monday Magic mailing list, where I send out the coolest, most interesting information
in all the known universe, I don't sell anything, nothing else to do, just share my passion with
the cosmos, and all my guests also subscribe to this newsletter, so you're a great company.
Go to BrianKeating.com slash list, and you'll be entered to win an actual piece of space dust,
a meteorite from the early solar system. And if you have a dot edu email address,
you automatically win. Go to BrianKeating.com slash list or BrianKeating.com slash edu,
if you have an edu email address. Now, let's get back to the dark side of the universe with
Claudia D'Aram. Very interesting. I think another question that my listeners and viewers might have
is this concept of extra dimensions, which plays a big role in your research. Is there any
difference between when you speak about extra dimensions and when string theorists or fundamental
particle physicists speak about it? They both require or mandate the existence of these things,
which are as yet undetected, as you say in the book. So what is it? Are these extra dimensions
related to the extra dimensions of string theory? And if not, what are they?
The way I think about them doesn't preclude them from coming from string theory,
but actually the concept of extra dimension is a very, very old one. And within the framework
of general relativity, the same modern framework as in which we understand them today, they were
already proposed by Kalutza and Klein very, very shortly after the proposal of general
relativity. They have very natural extension of general relativity. They have sort of taken
a comeback since string theory, because string theory needs them, was if you don't think of string
theory, you can ask yourself as to why we live in a world where there is three dimensional space
and one of time, you can ask yourself why is that the case, but you don't necessarily believe that
there needs to be an additional one, extra one. Whereas in string theory, there needs to be extra
one, there's no choice on the matter. And then they are typically expected to be confined around
themselves, compactified, very small, very, very small extra dimensions, or there could be some
larger ones. And there we would be confined on a membrane and a brain, deep brain in those extra
dimensions. But a lot of my research in the way I've been thinking about it and looking at implications
for gravity and for cosmology, that was very much some of those ideas were motivated by string
theory. I don't necessarily need to have string theory to think about them. But a lot of them
nowadays, they are motivated again for one for another. In themselves, actually very natural.
One of the questions, I think to me, one of the most fundamental questions there is why
why three dimension and you mentioned Robert Brunnenberger earlier, he's one that he's an
incredible physicist, but he's one of the physicists that has come up with the most
ideas on why it is that we're experiencing three dimensions. Even in string theory,
we understand there are extra dimensions, but precisely what is the mechanism that led to us
living in a universe that experiences three dimensions is something quite challenging. And
it's not natural at all in string theory. It's very hard to make that work. There's no natural
process. He and collaborators of him, also, and Davis and with Dura have been people have been
exploring the idea of how dynamically you can have sort of a selection mechanism that either picks
out membranes in extra dimensions with which are three plus one dimensional. There's almost an
evolution selection mechanism where those are the ones we end up living in or some other types
of mechanisms in why the other dimension would be confined, compactified to be very small,
we only experience the ones we do. But even in both case scenarios assumes the existence of other
dimensions and that could have consequences on us. To see the consequences of that, typically,
you expect you have to go to very high energy scale to be able to probe those extra dimensions,
and that corresponds to going, again, back to the very early universe, again, to the type of
research that you're doing. And it is possible, and I would hope very much so, that it could be
imprints on the very early universe of those extra dimensions. And that could be imprints on the power
spectrum of the CMB and B mode polarization, possibly. That's for you to tell me, actually,
they can be in some other models of extra dimensions, they can be some effect, actually,
not at very high energy, but at very low energy, that things will look very similar to,
and will look four dimensional, three plus one, necessarily four dimensional, I mean,
three of space and one of time dimension for everyday life. But as you go to larger and
larger distances on the cosmological distances, then you're able to start probing the extra dimension.
And that's why the universe, the evolution of the universe nowadays seems kind of counterintuitive,
and that's because we're starting possibly to probe the extra dimension, the extra dimension of space.
So it's sort of a relic or a shadow of the higher dimensions that we perceive in the pre-dimension?
Yeah, there's a lot of models out there where our cosmological evolution,
what we live as a universe is really, as you say, reminiscent of our shadow, a consequence of our
motion through time, yes, but really through the extra dimensional space. We are traveling through
this extra dimensional space, and that has an effect on our universe as a whole, with just a
consequence of that. A question I have for you, perhaps to elucidate, and I've asked it to many
scientists, but I never really get an answer that I can try. And I've asked even Roger Penrose,
in his multiple occasions of being on the podcast. And then you hope I have an answer.
I hear what he says, but I don't know if I understand what he says, although that might be
due to my failure to have consciousness, according to him. But my question for you is, first, do we
need a quantum theory of gravity? I mean, the only two scenarios where quantum gravity seems to
pertain in any kind of important, impactful, relevant role is not in our daily lives, but are
at the singularities of black holes, and perhaps the origin of time, if indeed time had an origin,
and many people don't believe that it did, or it was a classical bounce, or different cosmological
models, past guests, Paul Steinhart, Anna Aegis, Neil Turrock, many others, don't believe in the
singular quantum gravity necessity. So why do we need a theory of quantum gravity? If these
only two realms that we know about are shielded by event horizons, what's the point? We'll never
be able to witness this anyway. So actually, I am working on some understanding how to make that
connection. So you probably want concretely to understand how to compute those things in situation
that we will likely never experience ourselves. That is true. But at the same time, we want to
understand why we live in the world we are living in. I think we all want to ask ourselves those
questions. It's all part of the origin. Why are we here? Why is life here? Why are universes here?
But even more fundamentally, why is representation of nature, representation of spacetime here,
and that the answer is, I think, seated in a theory, a more fundamental theory, a more fundamental
theory of something that unifies, again, not only the fundamental forces of nature, as we know them
with the weak and strong forces and electromagneticism, but also gravity and this unification
could have some consequences. What is our deep down origin in terms of what is the origin of
spacetime itself? I think we talked about that at the beginning already. Why are we pursuing
some such fundamental questions that we'll never be able to really experience the consequences of
that? History has told us that often we think that would be the case. We saw Einstein thought
that gravitational waves will never have any consequences to our life. No, no, no connections
to reality. We do use them now to communicate in some sense. Maybe communicate is a big word
because that incinerates a two-way communication, which is not the case so far, but we do communicate
with them with the universe. We use them as a new window, as a new way to see our universe,
see gravitational waves. That's an example where 100 years ago we thought there's never any use to
it, and yet we're here. They are real. We have detected them. The fact that I can't tell you
right now whether we'll ever be able to experience a situation where quantum gravity is needed to
predict what happens precisely doesn't mean that there wouldn't be one, but who is to answer that
if we don't know what it is, we'll never be able to even answer that. I think we need to explore
beyond what we know to be able to see how much more there is out there and make sense of all
of those things. Let me go back to that point because we do say, for instance, I'm not a strength
theorist, so I can say that. I'm not a strength theorist. Nobody's perfect, Claudia. Nobody's
perfect. I'm not a strength theorist. I'm quite agnostic on whatever is going on at very high
energy, and some of my colleagues would not talk to me anymore for saying that. By the way, I have
to interrupt you and pardon my interruption, but part of the mission of this podcast is to educate
young scientists and how to be a good scientist. I just want to highlight what Claudia just said,
that it's her job, and my job as an experimentalist, her job as a theorist, to be agnostic. I was
asked by the New York Times recently, what do I hope for? What do I really want to find with the
Simon's Observatory? I said, our job is not to prove things. My job is to prove people like you
wrong, and your job is to keep refining what you know about the universe so that eventually I can't
prove you wrong, but that won't prove you right. What Claudia just did is incredibly important,
right? That's right. It's never about proving someone right or wrong in some sense. It's more
about deepening our understanding of nature. That's where we're going. This is why the book
is called The Beauty of Falling, because I will fall every day. I will come up with things which
are wrong every day. I will fall, and that is important. This is the way we make progress.
Right. At the end, you say, in fact, past these pictures that that is part of the beauty, is that
not just that you fall, and that that can be awesome, but part of the journey is
how you get back up, and how you respond to these challenges. I think, again, just for my young
students and postdocs and young faculty and old faculty who might need to learn this lesson,
the concept of quantum gravity is a beautiful one, because we have this innate need to
quantize everything we see. It's done so well, but the question I have even goes, you talk about
pie in the sky, and it reminded me of this past guest, Elon Musk, who I did talk to on the podcast
tangentially. You can find it on the videos and audio, but he once said the plank length sets
this fundamental limit beyond which we don't even need to know the digits of pie. In other words,
there's some minimum radius circle, which would be the plank length. I responded to him, he didn't
write back, but that's sort of nonsensical. Nothing really happens at the plank length. Am
I wrong about that? It is a correspondence, a numerological coincidence, but nothing more,
or am I wrong? What we know is that there comes a point, it's not about a distance. It never was
about a distance in itself. It's about when the curvature, some measurable effect of the
curvature becomes big enough, and that is not so much about what distance you can measure, but
for instance, going within regions of space-time where you end up having, for instance, close to a
black hole or at the big bang, as you were mentioning, there will seem to suggest that the
curvature there becomes very large. So that a physical region where these things can happen,
but understanding how we transition from the semi-classical model of gravity through general
relativity, which is embedded in an effective quantum field theory, how we transition between
that and something which takes over when this effective quantum field theory breaks down,
I think it is important to make communication between the two, and a lot of the work I do at
the moment, which is a lot of massive gravity, is to understand what are the key ingredients
that we have to keep beyond our understanding of reality, beyond general activity. You don't
even think of those concepts anymore. You don't think of space and time anymore,
but you think of probabilities, and you think of the notion of causality is extremely important,
and it's embedded not so much into return to the future kind of cartoon line, but it's encoded
in deep statements in how we can think of probabilities, and how we can think of also
the notion of probabilities in a quantum sense, whether they respect some notion of
unitarity, where if you sum up the probabilities of a given outcome, whether they will sum up to one,
or whether they sum up to something imaginary or negative, which would make no sense.
And so these are very, very basic criteria that are satisfied by string theory, for instance,
and you like to ask yourself, without necessarily even relying on string theory, are those
concepts even correct? And is it okay for me to rely on them when all other notions of reality
have fallen apart? Is it okay for me to rely on those specific, just hang on onto them to see how
this very basic principle cascades that way down to something concrete at low energy,
and something which is consistent with what we observe? And we can actually make connections,
we can actually come, I can come up, I can give you a model today that seems completely
meaningful, I can come up with a model that can describe most of, or if not,
everything that I'd observed today. And then I know that if I were to go back up and make a
connection with how it will be realized at very, much more fundamentally, it will have to break
some of those assumptions. It will have to break some of this assumption of unitarity,
or causality, or some of the way I think about these much more basic amplitudes. And so I think
it is important in some sense to see what is it we're relying on at the end of the day? What are
we aiming for? And we know that the way we're going to end up describing things, nature, once we
no longer can rely on even the notion of space and time to describe them is going to be very
challenging. We're going to need to invent new tools, new way to thinking to represent them.
And I don't even know precisely what is the right question for me to ask to even be able to
express that. But I want to hang on on very basic principles. And I think it is a meaningful
question for me to ask myself, are those okay to rely on? Because if they're not, then I have to
give up even more than that. Yeah. And I guess the question I keep coming back to is what would
constitute a detection of a quantum nature of gravity? And how could we do it? In the case,
we have to be open to the prospect that the Simons Observatory and every other observatory
may fail to detect gravitational waves and primordial nature. But that doesn't mean we
couldn't rule out quantum gravity. And when I go back in another way, in addition to Robert
Brandenberger, in addition to being pilots, in addition to, I'm not interested in scuba diving,
but we were both at Case Western, where the very first Michelson interferometer was done.
And I understand from your book that, you know, Michelson got into a little bit of a
palaver, as you Brits might say, you're not British. But the point being, they used a
Michelson interferometer, and now we have these LIGO machines. And my friend Eric Weinstein,
you know, came up with a beautiful thought experiment that I want to run by you as we
wrap up. Imagine the double slit experiment. The double slit experiment is the most quantum of
quantum mechanical experiments in terms of manifesting truly irreproducible quantum behavior.
Eric asked the question to me, and I couldn't answer it, so I'll ask it to you. Hopefully,
you can answer it. But if you had a double slit experiment, you know, the electron goes through,
you know, these, you know, goes through both slits, the wave function goes through both
slits in some sense. But, but in a classical sense, could you not use the gravitational effects
of the electron, just as a thought experiment? And could you not probe the use the gravitational
waves produced by this electron as it flies through, you know, presumably one of the two slits,
at least in Einstein's conception. So could you use these interferometers, these Michelson
interferometers of LIGO, just as a thought experiment, to reveal which segment of the,
or which slit the electron went through, and therefore, you know, kind of simultaneously
be able to localize its position and momentum in a sense.
But from the gravitational waves produced by the electron itself?
Yeah, you use the gravitational waves to then measure the, the, which slit the electron went
through. Yeah. So you need to look at what is the magnitude of a gravitational wave the
the electron would produce. I'm not saying you could do it. Yeah, that was my thought too.
And that is very weak. That is going to be very, very weak in, in, in amplitude. And the issue
with that is that if you have a very weak gravitational wave that goes through, then in,
in the case of the interferometers here on earth, then they will move the position of the,
the mirrors, which will be below Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Now I am a theorist,
so I have no problem saying and applying for funding to say, let's build an
interferometer, which is of the size of the universe. Let's do that. But even if you get the
funding, you know, you write the proposal then. So let's do that. I'll talk to Greg. You help me
sweet talk Greg. Okay. I'm going to be blacklisted. The issue is if you think, if you think about
the gravitational wave produced by an electron in that process, it's, it's way too weak to being able
to, to detect its effect. So but there are some experiments out there where I think one, one,
one of the experiments you should try to think about is having electrons absorbing a gravitational
wave and a quantum of gravitational waves. So absorb a graviton. That's really what you
want to do to test the quantum nature of gravity in a way which would be very similar to that of
light. We know that electrons can absorb or emit unique quanta, discrete quanta of light
or photons. And as they do that as a change in energy level around the atoms. So you want to do
the same thing with gravitons. And in principle, that would happen. The probability would be very,
very small. But in principle, you can imagine that would happen. The issue is always
the reality of the world in which we live in. That's, it's just so sad because it's not the
process that is quite so, I mean, it is challenging in itself. It's not, it's not just that. It's the
fact that there's a lot of noise out there. There's a lot of other things that would that lead to
electrons changing energy levels, for instance. And so if you want to shield your whole experiment
from light and the trainers and all sorts of other cosmic rays that would have the same effect on
your electrons, you're in trouble, but that it's the reality of life in which we, which we live in.
If we were living in a much simpler universe where there was no, nothing other than electrons and,
and, and gravitons and there was no cosmic rays and even light, or then it may be, it may have
been easier to abstract yourself from any other noise and prove maybe the quantum nature of gravity.
Well, I think that would be a wonderful place to wrap up. There's so many interesting things we could
explore in this wonderful new book. We'll have to do it perhaps in person someday. The beauty of
Falling is a beautiful book, A Life in Pursuit of Gravity, and it's endorsed by some of the
past guests on the podcast, including Sarah Seeger and Sean Carroll, both, both of them give it their
most high encomium, as do I. Claudia de Rome, I hope you have a great deal of success with this
wonderful book. And I think your students are lucky to have you and your colleagues are lucky to have
you. And it's wonderful to have an iconoclastic thinker that, that does can, can, can, can operate
as you do in the mainstream. You can talk to string theorists. You can talk to
people that study loop quantum gravity or causal set theory. And you're not afraid to, to kind of
push back respectfully as, as I think is so refreshing. So this, this book is a wonderful
edition. It's incredibly readable. I listened to it. Princeton University sent me the audio copy as
well, which is not read by you, but, but is a delightful voice, whoever the, the narrator is. So
I cannot recommend this highly enough. Thank you. Thank you, Brian. It was so much fun to talk to you.
Thanks. Thanks. Hey there. I know if you watched all the way to the end, you're going to love this
interview with Lawrence Krauss, one of the progenitors of the notion of dark energy. And click
here for a playlist for the best episodes about cosmology and the origin of the universe. See
you next time on into the impossible.
