Let's do it, as you see us on the screen.
It's just going to be the center panel.
Yep.
All right.
Welcome to a special episode of the Impossible
Podcast, which is a series of great scholars
that I have had on the podcast both multiple times now
and green, Professor and colleague here at UC San Diego.
And my friend, Longtime, most popular.
I think that's a great connection.
I'm at the portal podcast.
And the physics who recently had a very, very popular episode
said that we called physics is fine.
And it was based on a Twitter thread
storm that came out at the end of December in which Dan
highlighted discoveries in physics
that had not been really rewarded with the accolade
of the Nobel Prize, yet, perhaps never,
but at least as of the moment, had not been rewarded
with that particular remuneration.
And there's been a lot of controversy, as I said,
around the description of physics as having stagnated.
Most forcefully or vocally by Sabina Hossenfelder, also
eight-time guest on the podcast, just behind Eric's record
set for this particular event.
But I wanted to have both gentlemen here together
to discuss the future of physics as they see it
and what's right with physics, what we could do with physics,
or what we could change or modify,
what opportunities there are, and sort of moderate that
from the perspective of a simple experimental cosmologist
and my perspective on things.
So we're going to talk about particle physics,
experiment theory.
We're going to talk about unification of forces
in fields, perhaps.
And we're going to have it, as I said, a nice clean fight.
We're going to go TOE to TOE.
You did it.
I did it.
I made that joke.
You didn't think I would.
So I think I'll start with Dan, just
to recapitulate from our previous episode that aired last week
and find it, and the channel archives called Physics is Fine.
What was the motivation for that particular tweet storm?
Yeah, so thanks for having me on.
It's nice to get a chance to talk to both of you.
So the motivation behind the thread
was to articulate some of the things
that I picked up on being an active researcher that I thought
were important events for me in understanding how the world works
and making progress in clearly observational topics
like cosmology, but also important theoretical ideas that
had a huge impact on how I see the world that I didn't think
were always well understood or appreciated by people,
like even other researchers outside of their own fields.
So it was just to kind of communicate
the value of what had been happening.
And one of the reasons for that is that as a researcher,
it's really important to know what am I aiming for,
like what would be a result that would really stand out
amongst the best results the past five years.
We'd all like to be Einstein, but just for me,
I just you can't always, you won't always achieve those,
but maybe having a hierarchy of results in your mind
is really important for just gauging where progress,
what counts as progress, what kind of progress is going on.
And Eric, you've been interacting,
you've been interacting and engaging with this said tweet
and also with our friend Sabina and Martin Bauer,
who generously provided a book called No Bell Dreams,
which is somewhere around here.
What was your reaction to this?
You had sort of a provocative comment
that we should just get past the point
that yes, there's been a lot of progress in condensed matter
physics and theoretical astrophysics,
experimental cosmology.
What are you most interested in doing
to move the conversation forward from your perspective?
Thanks for asking.
So I'd like to do this in the click-baity kind
of thumbnail sketches.
I was outraged, Dan, frankly, by this tweet storm.
Sorry, it's gonna get a little, a little, fantastic.
I'm bored by all the opening moves.
We have a suite of moves where somebody says
there's a crisis in fundamental physics
and then somebody mishears it and says,
you have no idea what's going on in material science.
It's never been a more exciting time.
You say, that's not what I said.
Well, who's to say what's fundamental?
Is cosmology fundamental?
So this is the sort of weird dance
that people get into at the beginning.
And I've said, I'd rather just say Roy Lopez's
spasky variation and get to the middle game
rather than wasting time on the intro.
So I think it would be appropriate,
given that I'm not a physicist, to seed a bunch of things,
first of all, being that I'm not a physicist.
I think that the issue is not about physics in the large.
It's really about the sort of core central issue,
which people are very squeamish about now,
because nobody wants to say that any field
is any more important than any other,
which is ridiculous.
There is a central core of fundamental physics,
which is the thing that scratches the itch we have.
When we're not physicists, we wanna know,
what is the universe?
Who am I?
Where, why am I here?
How does the world work?
What is this place made of?
And those questions have stagnated,
and I'm sort of somewhat arbitrarily,
but not that arbitrarily,
tying that to February 1st of 1973
with the publication of the Kobayashi-Moscowa paper,
enlarging the Kibibo angle to three generations.
And I believe there are eight particle theorists left
on Earth who have won a Nobel Prize.
Now that also causes a certain variation in the opening,
because somebody will say, well,
you seem to be very hung up on the Nobel Prize.
It's like, no.
Not more than me.
But the fact is that the Nobel Prize
is a somewhat conservative measure of progress.
And as a conservative measure of progress,
when you're down to your last eight people
who have proven that they are physicists
by being able to make contact with reality at that level,
50 years is a long time.
I think the longest recent drought of this kind
is between 1928 and 47 with the advent of QED by Dirac
as the first real quantum field theory
before the sort of primitive renormalization program
came in and cleared up the ability to compute.
So I absolutely celebrate Dan's tweet storm.
I think that it had lots of great papers,
many of which I knew nothing about.
So I educated myself and I got a chance
to look at Dan's work a bit.
But that said, one of the things I think
that tweet storm did,
and I think Dan acknowledged it as much,
is that it didn't clearly state the results
that would constitute unambiguous change
in fundamental physics.
That is, what is the field content of the world?
What stuff is it that's running around?
Are there new things that we haven't figured out?
What constitutes the new interactions
of the stuff that we have
and the stuff that may come to be?
And the other issue of unification
would be spaces.
So we currently have something called space time
and it's not clear whether there is a problem
with space time itself.
So I would say that Dan did a great service
talking about all the sorts of things
that are not in crisis.
And I wish to seed instantly
that it is not that physics is in crisis,
which is the thing that everybody can understand easily,
but it is the core central issue of what physics can be.
It's meant to be that it excites our imaginations
and our passions, answers philosophical questions
that is in a prolonged state of,
and I would say a necessary self-inflicted crisis.
Well, just before Dan,
you get the opportunity to address that.
So I recently, are you familiar with this essay
by David Foster Wallace called This Is Water?
You're drinking some vodka,
so hopefully you're familiar with it.
So it's a parable of these two fish that are young fish
and they're in the ocean, they're swimming around,
and all of a sudden an older fish comes by
and says, hey boys, how's the water?
He goes on his way.
And then the two fish look at each other,
one says the other one, what the hell is water?
Is that possible?
Let me ask Dan, are we obsessed with space time?
Are we in space time in the same way
that these fish are in water?
And are we rightfully to be maybe ashamed
or view it as something to be dispensed with altogether
as I think Einstein or Lorenz or both of them
or neither of them or Nimas have claimed?
What is space time?
Why is that sort of the pinnacle
and how can you see that getting under Eric's skin?
Yeah, I mean, for sure,
that's one of the great questions of science.
So we think that space time probably emerges from something
in a lot of examples we've studied like strength theory
where our ultimate hope for resolution
of the singularity at the beginning of time
is probably something non-geometric.
If we understand what's going on there,
it will not be in terms of geometry
at least of the kind of space time we experience.
I think the thing I would say is in response to you,
are we unnecessarily obsessed with it?
I do think that there are questions of this nature,
like what happened before the Big Bang?
And some of those questions we don't have the tools to answer.
We don't have data to help guide us.
And even if someone writes down a theory that works,
we may have no way to test it.
Someone can come up with another theory.
And so there is a lot of like,
we're not guaranteed that we're gonna be able to answer
all the questions that are deeply held questions
of humanity going back to eons.
But I do think that like,
so there are aspects of these questions.
I don't think we're guaranteed that we can make progress
on all the questions we'd like to.
And what happens at space time when it seems to be,
but the kind of thing we experience on our scale,
does it continue to exist down to these scales?
We'd love to be able to answer that question,
but I also don't think we necessarily are promised
that we'll ever have answers,
or at least in hundreds of years time scale.
And so I don't see that as the benchmark
at which all decisions of progress have to be made.
You know, I guess when I hear that,
I check it against things that I believe.
So one, when you say geometric,
it's not that it will be non-geometric,
it's that it won't be the specific geometry
and you sort of corrected that mid-flight.
So if Albert Einstein told us to embrace
semi-Romanian geometry,
it's not simply going to be a semi-Romanian manifold,
which is basically four degrees of freedom
together with one set of rulers and four rulers
for each degree of freedom and six protractors between them.
So you have 10 variables that get chosen by an equation.
And then that thing,
to the extent that I understand your point,
it's that there are these singularities.
One is at the beginning of time, if you will,
in the standard Friedman-Robertson-Walker model.
And the other one is at the base of a black hole,
which is the Schwarzschild singularity,
and one modern interpretation
is that the singularities result from crimes and sins
that we don't even know we've committed.
And so we're trying to figure out what to do as penance
so as to remove these singularities.
But if I listen to what you're saying very carefully,
I see something which I'm very alarmed by,
which is you're not suspicious,
either one of you, enough of the language,
before speaks to one dimension of time.
And only R1 has an ordering in the absence of other structure.
R2, R3, R4 don't have such a thing.
So when there is an arrow of time,
it makes good sense, ordinarily,
to say nothing of pardon, to speak of before.
But if the ultimate structure, as I believe,
has multiple dimensions of time,
you will find that the crutch of saying initial conditions
has to be replaced by something like boundary conditions.
And in such a situation,
one of the things that's really interesting to me
is that we have the Lagrangian, the equations,
the field content, which is the science.
But we also have this way of talking around it.
And the way in which we have of talking around it
carries a tremendous amount of weight.
And a lot of that, I think,
is grooving each generation to fail as its successors failed,
because what we're doing is we're putting
a tremendous amount of pressure saying,
if you don't learn to speak the way we do,
you will not be able to survive to adulthood
to have your own thesis students.
And therefore, you had better learn to talk as we do.
And I think that that's one of the things
that I'm very concerned about.
I don't believe that before
is as simple as we're making out to be.
So I guess I would push back on that.
I mean, I don't think it's, I mean,
we can use, it's helpful to use everyday language
and then add, okay, it could be different, right?
Like, it's helpful to start from the things we know are true.
And we can ask questions like,
could there be extra dimensions of time
or even just the evolution from is,
do we know that quantum mechanics
is the only possible way that the world could work?
There are lots of people,
and I include myself in them,
that are interested in pushing the boundaries.
But it also helps to start from a place of what we know.
Like, I think there are plenty of people
who throw away literally all the physics
and they go, well, I don't wanna be constrained
by the structures of physics.
And it really hurts their careers
because they can't,
they don't even understand basic physics
which stops them from being able to make meaningful progress.
Because if you can't,
if you can't explain what we already understand,
you can't extend the structure in new and interesting ways.
So with the example of multiple time directions,
like people do consider this like in,
you know, well-respected theoretical physics groups
for many different motivations,
either purely just as a tool to understand physics,
but in other cases, really,
because they're interested in like,
what would it mean and what are the implications?
But since we, like, all of our life experience
is still rooted in one time,
like I think it's still reasonable to say,
for sure, you have to recover that.
But at the same time, I don't think,
like, I think it's good to establish that like,
we have a language that works well
for describing a lot of the universe
and that we talk about how we break that,
those things in a controlled way.
So generalizations of say, like number of time dimensions
or say changes to the rules even,
so we're not even doing quantum mechanics,
like those things are really interesting directions,
but they're very constrained
because most of them don't even describe daily life
in any meaningful way.
Like most mutations in biology lead to things
getting far worse rather than better.
It's a rare mutation that works.
But what you've said is not actually true in science.
It's often the case that people make huge breakthroughs
because they don't understand the errors
of a previous generation.
So for example, you had the stray hydrogen atom
on the nucleotides that was in all the books
in the wrong place.
It happened that Watson and Crick were in an office
with Jerry Donahue who said, all the books are wrong.
And if you look in the double helix,
it's about a page and a half or something
before Jim Watson figures out the hydrogen bonds
that explain the Chargaff-Equimolar relations.
And you have similar things if you were,
in the 1940s, trying to study electromagnetism
and its effect on electrons,
you would almost certainly think
that was the electric and magnetic fields
that impacted an electron being passed around the solenoid.
And surprisingly enough, in the 50s,
we learned that there were classical consequences
of electromagnetism that we had really wrong
because we'd put all of our weight, if you will,
on the E and B fields of electromagnetism
and not on the electromagnetic four potential,
which in fact is something,
which is not a convenience product meant
to recover classical electromagnetism.
It in fact has weight, as was shown by Bohm and Aronov.
I mean, I don't disagree with that point of view.
I would just say that there's not,
I don't think there's a lack of contrarianism in the field.
And I don't think that that,
I don't think there's people feel
they're unable to take risks.
I think the problem is that like,
there's no, if you don't understand the starting point,
it's very difficult to take risks
that are in a productive way, right?
So if I don't understand why we think the world,
how the world works in this room,
it's very difficult to think,
well, what are the limitations
of how I break the structures that I understand?
So I would say, people understanding,
trying to propose generalizations
in all kinds of directions,
almost all of them are doomed to fail from the start.
And I think many people were like,
well, that's people trying to put unnecessary constraints
on me, I'm a free thinker.
It's like, no, that's not people trying to put it.
That's reality putting constraints on you.
And I think that's, we have to separate,
there's definitely sociological challenges
for young people to do really creative things,
but there's also just reality
that presents a real challenge to being super creative.
I just have a completely different impression
of your field from outside, which is people come to me
and they say, I can't afford to work
on what I really wanna work on.
I don't believe many of the things
that I'm being fed with my mother's milk.
I can understand them,
but every time I deviate more than a certain amount
or in a way that is not thought well of by the community,
all conversations die off.
I'm cautioned that this is an extremely brave thing to do
in the sense of bravery is stupidity.
And I think that what you're saying is a hope and a wish,
which in a few cases,
I don't wanna say that it's 100% across the board,
but I do believe that in part,
we don't have this freedom in this field
and we don't have the freedom to continue
to get engagement from the community
because in general,
we get these mega programs that are cropping up.
And in the mega programs,
there are all sorts of assumptions
that have been layered on, which are not proven.
And I would love to apply this rule
to some of the major mega programs and say,
hey, you're in the wrong number of dimensions,
you've got the wrong signature,
you've got the wrong symmetries,
you've got the wrong field content.
And it becomes this thing where the person then says,
oh, no, no, no, it's a toy theory.
I'm in a small Euclidean number of dimensions
with SU2 is the symmetries of the universe.
And I'm super symmetric.
I'm doing all of this stuff,
which is not the physical world that we live in
so far as we understand it.
And the idea is that that person is saying,
I wish to suspend the normal rules of science
because I'm doing toy stuff in order to learn
about the structures that are going to elucidate
the actual one physical universe that we're in.
Now, when you do that, I understand that.
But what we're talking about is something
like scientific immunity.
And if you've ever met somebody with diplomatic immunity,
some of them have the feeling that they can park
wherever they want to and they don't have to pay fines
and that they're not subject to the laws of the land
that they inhabit.
And what I'm trying to say is,
you cannot have these mega programs
casually imposing the strictest expectations
on its competitors and then giving itself
a permanent free pass to go on for decades
and decades about nothing.
Well, just to push back with loving respect.
Sorry, I have two actual physicists against one non-physicist.
I like my own.
I know, but you're an honorary physicist.
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry to tell you, you're an honorary physicist.
So, you're taking basically the opposite point
if I'm wrong, correct me,
but of this guy up here, not Weinstein, but Einstein,
who never thought any of his predictions
would be verifiable and yet they proved
to be very, very useful approximations, toy models.
Look at the Schwartzschild.
I mean, we already mentioned the Schwartzschild Singularity.
That was thought to be completely impractical,
never detectable.
Einstein subsequently also disavowed the detectability
of gravitational waves, gravitational lensing
and yet it was remarkably prescient
and that the toy model works in, you know,
basically 99.999% of all situations
where we could ever hope to apply it.
So, toy models are extremely powerful
and just to add on to that,
you and I were talking before Dan came in
about, you know, string theory in that very realm.
You know, sometimes it is useful to take a,
and again, I'm not speaking
as a simple experimental cosmologist, not a theorist,
but to take a toy model or take something
that we know works in certain situations
like the Klein-Gordon equation, which it doesn't apply,
unless I'm wrong to any real particles,
but it is useful to apply in a way
of generating other solutions.
Well, it sort of does with modifications.
With an idealized modification.
That's proving my point.
It's a toy model.
So what's wrong with toy models?
We get a lot of mileage.
Nothing is wrong with toy models.
You're saying that you're being excluded
or maybe not part of the physics program
unless you engage in something that...
I don't think that, this is just uncomfortable
because it's like, let me begin by saying,
string theory can't hurt anyone, right?
There's, string theory is a set of ideas.
It's a constellation of hypotheses
and it's a place to play.
There's nothing wrong with string theory
nor loop quantum gravity.
The problem is with, and I don't want to put it all
on string theories.
The problem is quantum gravity sociology,
which has blown a physics-shaped hole
in fundamental physics and replaced it
with a set of double standards
in which I want to know, what are the rules?
If the rules are, we all get to play,
then hot, hot diggity dog, let's all play.
And if the rules are, we should be very careful
that things agree with experiment
in any attempt to talk about something
as, that is violated, you know,
like as soon as Dirac finds that A times B
is not equal to B times A
when he tries to take the square root
of your Klein-Gordon equation, you know,
it's a short period of time before he says,
well, maybe A and B aren't numbers, they're matrices.
And then it's like, okay, so you did something
that was wrong, that didn't make any sense.
And then it did make sense later.
The problem that I have is that we have one set of players
that is functioning in some sense
as both the referees and a team.
So imagine that you're playing in the NFL
and you've got, the footlocker sends a team.
So all their employees are dressed
in vertical black and white stripes.
And they take the field, they're not particularly talented,
but the one thing that they have is-
It could be worse than on Sunday's supermodel final call.
What they do is that they start saying, you know,
off sides, why do you guys get to do this?
You're not, you're playing on the field,
you're not in a position to do that.
The problem is the cancerous sociology
of quantum field theory,
because this field is given excuses that the rest are not,
and it imposes the most strict attempts to impose
like scientific falsifiability.
And to tell people that you're out, you're out, you're out.
Well, 70 years later, after Bryce Dewitt
enters an anti-gravity competition with his famous essay,
we're still wrestling with a product that doesn't ship,
which is imposing standards on other fields.
And it's really important to blow that up in our lifetime
so that we can all move forward together.
So I actually celebrate what you're saying
about toy models.
I just wanna make sure that we don't have
scientific immunity for quantum gravity.
Well, I just wanna point out that Bryce Dewitt's book
on anti-gravity is so engaging
that you just can't put it down.
Dan, I wanna ask you, are we having a discussion
about sociology, or are we gonna talk about
the actual ideas behind these issues?
Because when you and I spoke, I said,
when you guys get to, I don't know what you guys do
over there in theory, but the bottom line,
someone's gotta keep an eye on you.
You know, we don't pick a person,
we don't pick a field when we wanna hire a young professor.
We want to hire you.
I was part, you know, the milieu,
I didn't actually, I wasn't on the committee,
but it was part of that milieu.
So I didn't say, oh, I really want someone who,
you know, has worked on string theory causes.
No, it's sort of a target of opportunity in some cases.
We were stealing you away from another university.
But the point is, is the sociology inside
the host organism, or is it something that is perceived
as being, afflicting it from outside, from an outside.
So I'm gonna agree with Eric in some ways,
and disagree in others, but let me, let me, let me,
let's start with more,
Must you agree?
I'll start where we agree, which is like,
so the problem when a field gets too big
is that it doesn't have to refer outside, right?
And that's, I think, what you're getting at,
which is like, we make our own rules,
we play by our own rules, and I never have to make contact
with, not just with nature, but the rest of the world, right?
I'm big enough, and you know, we can go to conferences
with a thousand people, and never talk to anyone
who's spoken a different language,
or thought about another problem.
So I think, I'm saying that because what I really see
is makes the difference most of the time
between the areas where the toy model makes progress,
where the people working on the toy model
really are meaningfully moving the field forward,
is their ability to both what they're working on
connects to other fields, but they're also able
to understand what other fields need from them,
and how their toy models are addressing that, right?
So for someone working on, let's say,
quantum field theory in two dimensions,
like, you could do it in such a way that's like,
why are these people wasting all their time?
But then there are other people that are going,
that were working on quantum field theory in two dimensions
who were like, condensed matter physicists,
and they were like, you know, no, we're working on this
because these are solvable models of phase transitions
that I can make in materia,
and it's the ability to communicate outside of your area
that's really important for the health of the health field,
and to keep those toy models coming in contact with nature,
right?
If you're not interacting with the people
for whom your toy model is supposed to be making contact,
then it really is useless, right?
If you're not, I mean, maybe it'll be useful eventually
someone 100 years later.
I don't think it's useless.
But well, but I do think it's valuable to both parties,
the people who are more in touch with nature
and the people who are just trying to make progress
to communicate with each other in a productive way.
And where I'll agree with you is that,
and I'm not just gonna say string theory,
I think many fields reach a point
that they're so self-sustaining
that nobody in that field feels the need
to talk outside of the field.
I'm happy not to say string theory once
for the rest of this.
I wanna talk about quantum gravity as the problem,
which subsumes string theory,
and it doesn't point the finger at string theory
in particular.
But I would say, like again,
and I would say it's true even in areas
that are experimentally driven.
Like this phenomena of a field becoming big enough
that it does not have to refer to nature
or progress or anything.
And it's just, as long as we're making everyone
in our community happy
and we're all speaking the same language,
then we're all doing fine.
Are you a miserating other community?
Am I?
No, no, in these large programs,
I'm even somewhat understanding
if you guys wanna take some portion of the resources
and go off into a cloistered monastery
and talk to each other for 40 years,
as long as it's not too much, that's fine.
It's when you start telling other people
that they're stupid,
and when you just to say that,
I don't know why anyone else works on anything else,
that's dumb.
And then you start talking about the fact
that you play up all of your competitor fields' problems.
You don't own your own.
What you're talking about is sort of a scientific pathology
and our discomfort,
our discomfort in dealing with this phenomenon
causes us to do proxy arguments.
One proxy argument is quantum gravity.
The problem with it is it doesn't make contact
with experiment.
Come on, right?
Or it doesn't fit the scientific method.
Oh, you're gonna repeat the big bang
and just say you have large and give me a break, right?
Another one is beauty.
Sabina is very focused on beauty.
Well, she's doing that in a way to avoid
the head-on collision with what she's really trying to say.
I'm not trying to avoid the head-on collision.
What I'm trying to say is we cannot afford
for an imperial culture to be telling other cultures
that are trying to work on the same problems
that they cannot exist because you've got everything wrapped
up and literally we have a situation
in which your colleague, David E. Kaplan,
was recently featured in an interview
where he just let loose.
And I know David who did the film Particle Fever.
And what he was talking about was the feeling
that he was dumb and stupid and couldn't get something.
We used to have a game called Tag War in my neighborhood.
A new kid would come and we'd say, let's play Tag War.
And they would try to figure out the rules of Tag War.
More or less it was hazing and abuse.
And after about two and a half, three weeks
where we changed the rules over and over again
so that it find the person, I don't understand the rules.
It feels like there are no rules.
That's when they became part of the neighborhood
because it stood for the game without any rules.
That was what Tag War meant.
And my feeling about this is we have a Tag War problem
coming out of quantum gravity that is stalling the core field
that has to get addressed in the lifetime
of the people who are still there who created the problem
because good science requires that they go back
to their statements where there are a lot of people
who are no longer here.
People who began their careers in the 1980s.
How old were you during the anomaly cancellation, 1984?
Two years old.
There you go.
You have no idea what it was like.
And you can read about it, but the fact of the matter is
it was an absolutely brutal thing.
And Brian Greene and I had been having a back and forth
about this.
He got asked on Kurt Geimungal's program
about what are these issues that people keep talking about?
And he said, oh, well, we were very enthusiastic.
And I heard you say this thing about particle theorists
are like bosons.
They all line up and sort of find the same things interesting.
No.
North Koreans line up and find the same things interesting.
Iraqis under Saddam Hussein all voted the same way.
You have a problem which is why they're behaving like bosons
rather than fermions.
And why the fermions are being, evolutionary theory
has a concept called interference competition,
where if you have one animal that tries to keep another animal
from being able to get to the salt lick or the water
or the food, and then other animal that's being kept from that
dies off.
And that's how we've lost these people.
There are so many theories and interesting people
who are no longer with us because of this mad grab
for resources quoting something like white man's burden.
Manifest destinies.
It is our manifest destiny to change the problem.
We used to have a concept called unified field theory
or unification.
That went away.
And it got supplanted by something called quantum gravity.
And that became the thing that got rolled out
through Dennis Overby in the New York Times, repeated
in Science Magazine ad nauseam, until everyone
was brainwashed thinking, the problem of our time
is quantum gravity.
And it's not.
I mean, are you saying we need literal tribunals
to get Edward Whitton and Pulchinsk?
Well, we can't get Pulchinsk anymore.
But what is it?
What's really bothering you?
I understand that these are challenges.
It's frustrating to have a field that's
had, from one perspective, a lack of progress,
but entrenched because of the prestige
of the previous practitioners.
But again, I'd like to point this out.
In 1859, there was a very bright guy
by the name of James Clerk Maxwell, who worked very hard
and had a successful model of electromagnetic wave
propagation that, in the sense that it predicted
experimental observables.
But it was based on whirlpools and eddies
and all sorts of other things to substantiate
an ether-like material.
So he was right for the wrong reasons
or wrong for the right reason, Galileo, same thing.
He thought the tides were caused by the Earth's rotation.
They're really caused by the moon.
So in other words, why is it so important that we punish
Edward Whitton?
I mean, I would like to be.
It's not a question of punishment.
Maybe Edward Whitton has something
to say about this behavior.
And I would love to hear, Cumran and Brian Green
and Lenny Susskin, as well as Natty Cyberg and Eva Silverstein.
It would be great to have these people in a dialogue.
Natty Cyberg said something.
He said, string theorists are very arrogant.
If somebody comes up with something
that makes progress that isn't string theory,
we'll just say it's string theory.
And I'm like, no.
There's a concept called mustn't.
You don't get to do that stuff.
You're in the wrong field, if that's how you feel.
And I know, Natty, we have a cordial relationship.
You don't get to play that way.
You don't get to call people stupid unless you're
going to back it up, or it can come back at you.
I mean, I would be happy to talk to Lenny Susskin
and talk to him about all the people he's
insulted over the years, because he's so very open about it.
He's not hiding it.
Just say, you're an old man.
You're at the end of your career.
How to go?
What happened?
Did you make the progress that your friend Feynman made,
or Murray Gelman, or any of the people
that you knew from a previous era?
Am I feeling about this?
Pardon me?
That's a very high standard.
Let's talk about the A team, the Institute for Advanced Study.
At some point recently, had Robert Dycraft, a string
theorist as its director, Natty Cyberg, a string theorist,
Edward Whitten, Juan Maldesena, and then
Nima was sort of off a little bit in necessarily
quantum gravity.
That's an enormous investment in quantum gravity.
And the problem that I'm having with this
is Dan Friedan, a prominent quantum gravity researcher,
talked about this openly, said science only
works when we actually go back and look
at how we've behaved and confront our own failures.
This is the same thing with the bootstrap method.
I feel like what we're doing is we're
living the Jeffrey Chu nightmare all over again.
Do you feel like that's the challenge
that we're facing in the theoretical?
Well, I'd first like to just, I think
we can agree that there can be sociology problems.
But I would also say, as a young person,
I find the same level of saying that there's
been no progress in physics.
It's insulting to young people who are not part of this,
who feel like we're making real progress,
who see real progress happening, and to say,
but at the same time, if you're going back
to a much older generation, and you're saying,
and we're painting everyone who's come back
in the past 40 years as being complicit with this,
and we can't think for ourselves,
and we're being influenced by it,
and it doesn't make it easier for us to go off,
to just say we've made no progress.
Doesn't help it easier.
But that's a total mischaracter.
I mean, I've never said anything so simplistic
in my life.
What I've said is, when you try to say
that you're going to quantize gravity,
what you're talking about is quantizing geometry.
And what happened was the most romantic backfire possible
in the sciences is that you instead geometrized
the quantum, and the great legacy of these people
is that they figured out that quantum field theory
really has nothing to do with physics.
Physics, as we understand it, the physical world
is one input to the quantum field theory machine.
Quantum field theory is really about waves on waves.
And that happens in cowardism theorem
and algebraic topology.
It happens in conformal theory that has nothing to do
with the physical dimensions and realms.
What we found out was fascinating
because in fact, it backfired.
And there's nobody who would like to celebrate
all the good that Digraph and Natty and Ed and Company did
in this story, including the celebration of the toy models.
The problem that I'm having is that they reordered the field.
I mean, this is a book that I keep very close to me
because it's a conference that happened
at the exact moment before the anomaly cancellation.
And Murray Gelman gave a keynote address
at Shelter Island 2, the conference that was supposed
to recapitulate the 1947 conference
that got physics back on track.
So they're trying to get back the magic.
He says, as usual, solving the problems of one era
has shown up the critical questions of the next.
The very first ones that come to mind
looking at the standard theory of today.
He's talking about the standard model.
Why this particular structure for the families
and particular why flavor chiral
with left and right-handed particles
being treated differently?
Why three families?
That's a generalization of Robbie's famous question.
How many sets of Higgs bosons are there in the standard theory?
And why SU3 cross SU2 cross U1?
Why those symmetries?
Now, in all of those cases, those are classical questions.
And what you see and the reason that it's important
that your generation know its history
is that one of the things that happens in marketing
is that you have a product and you have to create a problem
so that your product fills that hole, right?
And this is what happens with the 76 trombones
in the Music Man, right?
You've got a problem in its pool and the solution is music.
And okay, what these people did to the field
was that they reordered our concept
of what our principal problems were
around the problems that they thought
they were most likely to solve.
And I don't need them to be in pain.
I don't want to see particularly vindictive.
But what I do want to see is tell me about all the people
whose careers were terminated during this.
Tell me what they were working on.
Should we have them back?
Should we have conferences devoted
to what if quantum gravity doesn't exist?
Shall we actually ask,
because what you talked about with heterodoxy
is that you're usually talking about orthodoxy plus epsilon.
I'm gonna go out in the limb and say sterile neutrino.
Well, that's not really very heterodox.
And then maybe you go a little bit,
I'm gonna say that there are multiple axions
to solve the strong CP problem
plus create cosmic birefring.
Whatever these things are,
they're not really what we're talking about
in terms of heterodoxy.
And it's very important to either impose these rules
on this group of people
or to relax the rules for other people
so that we can have truly different ideas
because I think that we will probably find
that over the last 50 years,
there were many ideas that will fall into the final theory
that were pushed aside into the dustbin by this group.
I mean, again, I wanna take it back
what I think is certainly not to invalidate
anything you've said, Eric,
but I think that that might be parochial to the extent
that it may involve certain members of the community
who aren't affiliated with these three-letter organizations
like IAS or MIT or whatever, NSA.
But I think what's more interesting,
and Dan is free to apply in any way he likes
and respond to you,
but the point I think is how many flowers
should be blooming right now?
I mean, you mentioned a couple of different alternatives,
a loop on gravity and other things.
At what point would you have to say
the portfolio should be fully diversified
and that we should actually devote
equal amounts of attention?
Oh, nobody's saying that, Brian.
Right, but now you're saying,
well, we should hold these people to account.
Well, first of all, correct me if I'm wrong,
but I don't think Edward Whitton's published something
on string theory in a decade.
I mean, the last thing I saw is that he wants us
to go visit a black hole
to see if there's a one microsecond time delay
at the end edge of 5AU or something like that.
I don't know to what extent he's still holding sway
over the field that you're in.
Eva is actually much, much younger.
What did Coomron say?
What did Coomron say?
He was on the podcast two years ago
and I confronted him as all podcasts are legal,
podcasters are legally obligated to do.
And I said, what about this claim
that there's been no experimentally falsifiable things
predicted by string theory?
He said, oh, no, no, you're wrong.
And you couldn't go back and see this episode.
But didn't you ask about what he wanted on his tombstone?
Oh, what he wanted on his tombstone?
Yeah, that and Michio Kaku, very similar answers.
The equations of string theory, right?
So, but let me just, one thing that he did say is,
well, no, it's not true.
String theory does predict the mass of the electron
shall be between 10 to the minus 35 plank masses
and 10 to the minus one plank masses.
And yeah, that sounds all funny.
We can laugh about it.
You know, in logarithmic space, it's not terrible.
I guess the point being, to what extent
we're something like loop quantum gravity,
which many people, including my friend Carla Revelli
has been on the podcast many times,
he has said that, yeah, there are challenges.
There are experimental falsifications
of some of the claims of loop quantum gravity,
in particular for propagation of velocity
versus electromagnetic frequency of distant quasars.
But the point I guess I'm trying to make is,
if you are the director of the IAS, you clean house,
is it really, I mean, would string theory have,
just yes or no, simply yes or no,
would string theory have a place
and then would loop quantum gravity have a place
and then would geometric unity have the primary position?
I don't think we need to worry about permanent positions.
I think that the key issue, I mean,
let me just say some things people won't associate with me.
In general, string theorist,
part of the quantum graph, I have to use string theory there
because they're smarter and that's uncomfortable.
But they're really, really smart
and they're really, really good at quantum field theory.
And I see that and I'm happy about that.
What's more, many of them are really good at geometry.
And it's incredibly impressive.
And I think that it does wonderful things for the field
to have progress going on in the gym on the treadmill
when you're not actually running a marathon.
So in a certain sense, in that particular sub-community,
people are in extremely good shape.
The generals have been playing war games for 50 years
because there were no war games to fight.
They have a distorted sense of what being a general
actually is because they haven't seen action.
But I would never want these people driven out of the field.
I don't know anyone I praise as much as Edward Whitten
for his contributions principally to geometry
and to the structure of quantum field theory,
although not the quantum field theory
that we seem to live with it.
So I don't think that that's really the argument
that I'm making.
And I think that part of the problem is that
this is a very clickbait thing about, you know,
string theory is BS versus no string theory,
the power and the glory of string theory.
It's of no interest to anyone.
What you said about loop quantum gravity
that was interesting.
I asked Lee Smolen about this, who's a friend.
He says, yeah, the original hope
for loop quantum gravity is not realized
without other ideas, this does not work.
It doesn't carry the day
and it doesn't behave as expected.
Now say what you want about Lee Smolen,
and I'll be honest, a lot of people
in that other community in quantum gravity
say incredibly negative things about Lee Smolen,
but he behaved properly.
There's no need for a tribunal
when a leader of the field says, you know what?
We were exuberant and they were exuberant.
We were optimistic, they were optimistic,
but they didn't go about with this manifest destiny nonsense
and they can reflect and say, you know what?
It doesn't work the way we thought
or we can't get fermions into the theory comfortably
or something like that.
And I really think that we have to understand the difference
that the ethics of loop quantum gravity
are much better than the ethics in its competitor.
Well, I think where I push back is just,
I think you're often identifying
understanding quantum field theory
with doing quantum gravity research.
For me, I would say the young people,
so you want the older veterans of the field
to say they were wrong, and that may never happen.
No, no, no, no, maybe they're not wrong.
I think if you talk-
I want them to face the issue.
But I think if you talk to the,
I think the response you're talking about,
which is like, do people see the challenges?
I think what a lot of younger people would say
the lessons that have been learned from string theory
is that we didn't understand quantum field theory well enough
to be ready to jump.
We've learned so many lessons about just quantum field theory
that we were kind of out over our skis thinking,
oh, we've got this quantum field theory thing solved.
We should be jumping to quantum gravity.
And we've learned so much about quantum field theory.
And quantum field theory is certainly relevant to,
data and real life and cosmology.
And as a matter of it, it covers everything.
It's the, to steal a headline from an article
on the CERN Courier, it's like the theory of theories, right?
It organizes not just like one theory,
but sort of how all theories fit together.
So what is the theory of theory?
So this was used as a title to an article
about effective field theory.
But it was just understood that a lot of what we've been
learning is, what is the space of theories
that are self consistent?
Like what are the rules?
And part of the, why was,
like one of the things we got out of string theory,
what like the string community was ADFCFT.
And what that told us is a lot of things
that we had been thinking were,
people had been thinking were problems
that were going to be solved by the string
were really phenomena that was living
in an everyday quantum field theory
that we hadn't fully understood.
And I would say my generation probably more,
like a lot of people who I think you might look at
and say, you know, based on their training,
like who their PhD advisors were,
you might say, well, that's a string theorist.
And I would say, I don't think they ever do string theory.
Like they do quantum field theory
and they know quantum field theory is relevant.
They've moved to that.
But I think some never did it.
Like literally at no point in their graduate career
at any point they have a, like so myself,
I did string theory when I was younger.
I would not characterize myself as a string theorist
or someone who ever uses string theory.
Nobody told me I had to do string theory.
You have characterized yourself as somebody
who finds it useful in what you do.
And so you are using string theory.
Because I learned, because the phrase what was useful
is that string theory was always characterized as,
you know, what is it?
What's the problem of quantum gravity we're trying to solve?
We're trying to solve problems about the fact
that the thing doesn't make sense at short distances.
And of course, all these things are supposed to make sense
at long distances
because they're good effective field theories.
We don't like, unless we're doing
all four short distance physics,
it has, you know, everything should just make sense
in some reasonable way.
And, but I learned what I was learning
about loop quantum gravity.
That's nowhere in sight, right?
Because there's so many lessons I didn't learn
that were just basic lessons about, you know,
how should theories be organized
that were never in the loop quantum gravity playbook,
at least when I was learning it.
And so, yeah, what I learned doing string theory was like,
I really learned effective field theory.
I learned, when is there a problem
that I actually have to worry about string theory too?
And what I mostly learned is that this is very small.
No, of course.
And you can do a lot of really, really exciting
and cool stuff that's, I would call fundamental
without ever talking about quantum gravity.
I've looked at your career
and to the best of my understanding,
your career is at the school with three basic legs.
One of which is cosmology,
where you're gonna get data from all the great new instruments
that we're putting towards the heavens.
Second thing is effective theory,
so that you're going to reduce everything to something
which, you know, at some particular scale
is very cleanly defined and you can work with it.
And then the other thing is some amount of particle theory
where you're gonna hope to use the cosmological
through the effective theory to elucidate the nature
of the fundamental fields as waves and collision.
So that's, I see your particular gambit.
And I'm 100% supportive of it.
You did refer to yourself as a young person.
You're over 40 if I'm not mistaken.
Unfortunately, yes.
Okay, so you're not a young person.
I think I just crossed the threshold
by academic standards.
No, no, no, but you know,
Derock's old thing about a physicist
the past 30th year, this is elongated in part
because of the fact that we deviated
from scientific norms.
We don't have 25 year olds and 30 year olds
who are running the field the way I think of as normal.
I think there are way too many people in the field
to be honest when you're asking what would you do?
And I feel that of those people,
they're not properly arrayed across first.
Well, they're not fermionic.
There are plenty of people who like
Brian Greenfield's no need to query Peter Wojt
who's putting forward a twister theory
based on the group SU4 and its inclusion of SU3 cross U1
as a subgroup in twister space
with a WIC continuation to SU2 cross SU2
where one of the two halves gives the weak force
and therefore it gives you an idea of the asymmetry.
You have to read your colleague's stuff
whether you like it or not to be a good colleague.
You don't have to read all of it,
but when you can't put in 45 minutes
and there was a piece of French
that was between 45 and minutes, I didn't say on air
and you say, I'm too busy
and then we catch you playing ping pong in the lounge
or you're going to drinking
or you're writing a blog about nothing in particular,
it's completely disingenuous.
Now, another example of this is Garrett Leasey.
Garrett Leasey is a snickering.
Garrett Leasey, you mean that thing
that dislodged this man?
Okay.
No, it doesn't work.
I don't think it works.
It's got tons of interesting good ideas in it.
And this condescension against individual research programs
where somebody has a really interesting idea
and I think both Peter White and Garrett are wrong
and it's not going to work,
but I'll be goddamn if I'm going to stand back and say,
because I think I can see why it's not going to work,
I'm going to pretend that you have no ideas
and I'm going to slag you behind your back as a colleague
and I'm going to dunk and drag on Twitter.
This is toxic behavior.
And so what I think is,
is that we have very few idiosyncratic programs
that are able to even share a stage.
There's no point of contact where,
I have an unusual bookmark in this book.
It's a dollar.
Yeah, it's a dollar.
This is a dollar signed by Sheldon Glashow
where I won it in a 20 minute discussion in his office
and it took him 27 years to,
27, I'm going to turn into an NFT and make bajillions.
It took him 27 years to acknowledge
that he'd lost the bet on whether G2 contained SU3.
I have no idea why that took 27 years.
I like Shelley, we have a good relationship,
but the fact is you can't have people saying,
oh, I'm late to pick up my kids,
that I have to go out to dinner or whatever
and never actually make eye contact
with the fact that they're not giving real answers.
And by the way, I would love to actually talk physics
rather than about physics,
but what I'm trying to say is that our meta problem
is that with all the money floating around,
nobody holds a conference saying,
the last 40 years, WTF,
with a bunch of different theories,
like does anybody else have an idea?
And I can assure you, I can go
on very large platforms and talk about very concrete ideas.
I can try to tell you why I believe
that there are three generations of matter,
why it's chiral, et cetera, et cetera.
And I promise you that the very weird behavior
is that people don't take it seriously
because what they're really trying to do
is not ask questions.
They're really trying to say,
how do I make this problem go away
so I can get back to the cargo cult science
that I've made a career around inside of a large community?
That's what's dangerous.
See, I don't agree with that.
I mean, I would say that a lot of people
aren't gonna engage with,
I mean, the idea that what we need to do
is find the right way to unify the forces,
I think is just, as you said, it's been unproductive.
And a lot of people don't mind that that's how they're,
like, you know, there are weird hints from nature, right?
Like cosmological constant is a weird hint from nature.
And like, we'd like to, we'd like that.
Is it unification or that unification wouldn't work?
But Daniel, if I ask you,
what is your best guess as to why there appear
to be three generations of matter?
Would you say you have a guess?
No, I wouldn't, I mean, I would say there are many people
who have worked hard on coming up with models.
I'll see, many seem plausible.
Like, it could be, like, I have no particular opinion.
And I don't think that we're gonna find the answer.
So if somebody came up to me
who could pass sort of a basic competency test
and said, I think I know why
there are three generations of matter.
I would find that fascinating.
Brian and I were on the phone,
we were talking about this issue.
And Brian said, well, what if I were to tell you
of something so exciting that it has seven sigma this,
that which is to me, would you race down to San Diego?
I said, sure.
And I think he wasn't prepared for that answer.
There is something about the excitement
of believing things, trying things
and caring about what your colleagues believe.
Do you have any high conviction beliefs
about the extension of the standard model?
So I do have my high conviction belief
is that anything that extends the standard model
will look like something that's effective field theory
at low energies.
So if I'm going to look for hints, experimental hints
that are gonna tell me which way the world actually works,
my strategy is gonna be,
write down everything I could imagine
that would look like a change
to the effective theory of the standard model
and go look for that.
And that is what most experimental programs are looking for.
But that avoids the question.
Do you personally have any high conviction beliefs
and I'll extend it?
Do you think we have anything wrong in the standard model,
not just in terms of the Lagrangian and its consequences,
but in terms of how we talk about it?
And do you have any high conviction beliefs
for what extends it and what is likely to be true?
That are really things like this, I believe,
can you say the phrase this, I believe.
I believe that the universe is Lorenz invariant
at short distances,
that whatever unifies the standard model
is not breaking Lorenz invariance.
That if you observed,
if we were to observe something cosmologically
or laboratory, that would break your conviction
or it would cause you to reveal excitingly new research.
You believe in relativity.
Yes, absolutely.
That is not very bold.
Okay, but by the way,
most things that are being proposed as extensions
to the standard model by definition are,
well, they might be wrong.
Most of them are wrong.
How do you know, Eric?
We haven't looked for action.
Well, because they can't all be correct.
They're not all compatible.
Some of them are mutually exclusive.
All I'm saying is this is to say
that the universe is manifestly Lorenz invariant
is an interesting claim that could be falsified.
And by falsification, I think that would excite you.
That wouldn't depress you.
That wouldn't ruin your day.
It would totally change how I think about it.
I love your puppy point.
Puppies are adorable.
Ice cream is delicious.
I understand.
Mom and apple pie are good things.
But there are, I mean, I think that's a case
where people have legitimately proposed ideas
that break learns and they're interesting ideas.
So, someone who had an idea that broke this principle
that was within the kind of traditional community
but really broke away from it was Peter Harava
with his non Lorenz invariant solutions to gravity,
his proposal.
And again, like, it was an interesting idea.
I didn't look at that and go,
I understood what he's doing.
We read those papers.
Everyone's like, that's interesting idea.
So you read the paper, you like.
But I also don't think it's the way the world works.
And I also.
That's not what I'm talking about.
Like if Zhao came out with something,
maybe you look at it and then you say,
okay, that's pretty wild.
I don't buy it, but I understand what he's doing.
But I think, again, the difference between Peter
who was definitely deviating away from the community
was not that they're like,
he's a card-carrying member of the community.
Is that he was able to communicate his idea
in a way that made sense to everyone.
And, but that, but I guess what I would say is like,
you're asking me to take a definitive position
about a theory we could never test.
No, no, no, I'm saying you're a theoretical physicist.
Yeah, absolutely.
You are, you know, and to be fair to you,
cause I'm not, there's no gotcha or a zinger here.
I see you as mostly a cosmologist
who is keeping the door open to particle theory
through the conduit of effective theory, right?
And that may not be fair
because I've only been studying stuff for days.
I understand.
I guess what I would say is that I,
no, effective field theory is life, right?
Like it's like, it's how the,
it's how everything we organize, it's just,
it's all we see, right?
I'm living here in this like, there's not like,
Newton's laws weren't wrong.
They're just an effective theory relevant to our.
If we were to talk about biology, right?
So we have the stratification.
We have cytology, the study of cells below.
Then we have histology, the study of tissues.
And we have physiology above that.
And we have the organization and anatomy.
And if you stayed down at the level and saying, you know,
it would be absolutely responsible for us to speculate
into different regimes because we understand
that we don't actually have information.
We've learned the lesson of Ken Wilson very well.
That would be pretty disappointing.
If you think about, for example, Wheel of Fortune,
there are these one letter solves
where somebody actually guesses the entire puzzle
from a single letter.
Look up a guy named Rufus, for example.
I understand.
Now, my claim is, is that the, the,
the dark side of the genius of Ken Wilson.
And by the way, Ken Wilson is a good example.
Like we just lost Jeff Becker, the guitarist.
He was every professional electric guitarist,
favorite guitarist, but he wasn't everybody's favorite
guitarist who didn't play guitar.
In a certain sense, Ken Wilson walks on water
within the competent community of physics researchers.
But there's a dark side also, just the way Jeff Becker
maybe put too much emphasis on the whammy bar
of pushing everything into this realm
where it's denuded of much of its meaning.
Like if I were to say to you that the Higgs field
shows up in effective theory
as a spin zero fundamental scalar,
but I don't think that that's its purpose.
I think that it actually belongs to the actual,
and the way in which it's disguised
so that it's spin appears different than its naive spin,
which is its function as a, as a part of a connection.
That's something in which effective theory
is not going to necessarily point to that
because effective theory tends to show you this picture
that is often denuded of higher level structures
because we're not too afraid to guess.
No, the idea is just that it,
you can have as wild a variation
of the difference of the origin of two theories as you like.
And if I limit my observations to some energy scale
that's set by colliders or whatever I can do,
that the only way that I can tell them apart
is by the parameters of the long distance.
No, now the parameters can be really useful hints.
So in the sixties, Weinberg guessed at asymptotic freedom,
which was that the idea that they're like,
the theory is really made up of quarks
and things that look like microscopic particles
just bouncing around, even though they live inside a proton.
He guessed at this because of the specific relationships
between certain of the couplings of nuclear physics
because we couldn't go and look inside of the proton
at that point in history.
So it's absolutely true that through this lens
you can discover exactly as you're seeing.
You can within this lens say,
there's a pattern here and I can use the tools
at my disposal to say the only way to get this pattern
points at some deeper structure.
So that's exactly what we do.
So for example, why proton decay experiments
were so exciting because even though
they're low energy experiment,
they would tell us about physics at very high energies
because we only know a few ways to create proton decay
or this is why people are really excited
to do treating masses because do treating masses hint
at something going on at extremely high energies
that will never ever be able to probe in the lab.
But if you don't kind of, on the other hand,
like if I write down a theory that only changes
the gears of how the universe works
on some scale that I can never observe,
my only hope is to see it through the pattern.
What's going on with this one?
You're mislearning the lesson of the baryon,
which is that the baryon isn't decoded
into the Lagrangian, the quarks are,
but that, I don't even know if we're talking about it,
say infrared slavery with physics conscience,
but the issue is that protons and neutrons
are not what is seen in the Lagrangian.
You have to actually unpack them,
unpack the fundamental constituents
to get the observable constituents.
Now that lesson when over learned,
which is what I'm concerned your community has done,
becomes inhibitory and everybody gets innervated
because nobody wants to be the fool
who didn't learn the lesson of effective theory
and renormalization.
And that's what's concerning me,
is that in general, we have a group of people
who are incredibly worried about their union card
and being respectable and when they're heterodox,
they're heterodox in the most mild and unhelpful way,
particularly if you have a metastable state
where small perturbations don't work out very well.
And so in all of these situations,
when I try to engage you in terms of,
if you wanna actually talk physics on a podcast,
we always talk around physics, we talk about physics,
but we don't actually say, well, what do you believe,
what do you know, what are the high conviction gets?
And I'll say something more.
I think you're an extremely good scientist.
I've read some of your stuff.
I don't aspire to be focused on good scientists
because I believe that we have a confusion
that great science is just good science turned up to 11.
And I think if you, I had this conversation with Jim Watson,
his basic point was we were not,
Watson Crick were not good scientists in Jim's view.
He said, Rosalind Franklin was,
and the reason she didn't get the double helix
was not because it was stolen,
which there are certainly issues,
but because she refused to spend a day decamped
into the idea that the Maltese cross
near X-ray crystallography represented a helix.
And so his point was our search space is tiny
because we're only looking for helical models
and her search space was enormous
because she correctly viewed that that particular pattern
was not sufficient to narrow it down.
But I mean, someone watching is just this passionate
but has some knowledge of you and in the field.
I mean, you've ruled out, just in words today
and not to mention previous discussions we've had,
alternative theories to anything but your own
personal conviction, which is that she,
so you've ruled out E8, you've ruled out Wolfram,
you've ruled out loop quantum gravity.
Not, I think ruled it out like they shall be taken
behind the woodshed.
No, bro.
Well, so how much time-
I think we should be invested in cellular automata.
I think we really need to study the large exceptionally groups
inside of the TITS-Fordens' Rural Structure.
The theories of everything.
I think that Peter Wojt's theory to begin with SU3,
which is the one part of the symmetries
that doesn't have another name because U1 is also spin two,
SO2 the circle, same thing with SU2 is the three sphere,
spin three, SU3 is unique in that it doesn't have
another name.
And so he begins with that and he sticks basically U3
inside of SU4.
And I think it's a great idea.
And I don't want to be mischaracterized.
I am the only person pushing forward GU.
I am also pushing forward when I was asked recently
by the Institute for Arts and Ideas.
They wanted to say, well, tell us now about GU
after you've done all this service to our field.
I was like, no, I don't want to do that.
I would rather tell you about my competitors
in idiosyncratic fermionic space.
It's you guys who don't do that.
So please don't put on me that I'm simply a proponent
that is always pushing my product
and selling from the stage, far from it.
I don't think it's selling from it,
but it's just from a pragmatic standpoint.
Daniel's got a limited amount of theoretical bandwidth.
My students do as well.
It's not that much, Brian.
Well, no, I agree with you.
I agree with you that to hear Sabine say,
well, she doesn't have time to look at your theory
and Garrett's theory and Wolfram's theory.
She doesn't want to get sucked in.
She doesn't want to, but that doesn't prove that it's right.
I mean, it's not evidence that they're correct.
No, but it leaves the wrong impression.
Right, and that's maybe not as collegial as it could be,
but there's a limited amount.
So the question is for working card carries,
you call them union members.
I mean, what is it about what you're doing
that is most exciting and most interesting to you
and the reason that keeps you getting up in the morning
and thinking about it in the middle of the night?
What questions or what contributions are so interesting
and promising along the, obviously promising
from the current research direction you're pursuing?
Okay, so I mean, what have I spent the past years working on
is trying to understand the sitter space.
Now, the sitter space seems to be the universe we live in.
It's also-
What do you mean by that?
As in the expansion of the universe right now.
It looks-
It's approximately-
It's approximately a sitter.
Okay, but there's a big difference.
Okay, yes, but at the level of approximation
that the universe we live in seems to be a sitter,
we did not understand how to calculate things in the sitter.
And there are people who claim that,
the sitter was fundamentally unstable
because of various things that they couldn't calculate.
And this proved that like,
it's impossible to have a positive causal constant
for this reason or the other.
And so what I wanna, like,
why do I use effective field theory?
Because many of the calculations that people were saying
proved that this were like,
they were instantly,
you could see the mistake in the calculation.
So as you say, like,
yes, effective field theory,
you can have your blinders on to what might be interesting,
but more often than not in my career.
100%.
It's like the way you say,
hey, that calculation have a mistake in it.
And like,
all the every time it's a mistake.
It's like getting rid of pseudo tensors.
It's a very good place to catch errors.
Absolutely.
So I don't, I am in no way saying like,
it's not interesting to think about things that,
yeah, I'd be the first person excited about a thing
that doesn't look like it lives in effective field theory.
Right?
And so that would be awesome.
And I have friends who, you know, explore, you know,
modifications to quantum mechanics.
And maybe that means
or things that look like they violate the rules.
Those are extremely exciting and interesting things
that a lot of the people do seriously consider.
But again, if you don't start from,
but if I have a theory that fits a set of rule,
it has to follow the structure.
More often than not, you just do calculations wrong.
Right?
And it's like, yeah,
you spend five years doing calculation
or in some cases in this interspace,
like it was 30 years where people calculated things
over and over again and literally learn nothing.
There's tons of calculations
and we learned no lessons from it.
And the part of the point of effective field theory
is that like it just organizes
what are interesting calculations,
what the answer should look like.
And if something violates effective field theory,
then at least you can go like,
like waiter was the step that violated the rules.
And if none of the steps violate the rules,
then you've got a problem.
And so what I would say for me,
like the, what's the ultimate goal
of understanding disorder space?
Like it is getting back to like,
what did the beginning of time look like?
What is the space,
what are the space of possible universes?
And like, is the multiverse a well-defined thing?
Does it even make sense?
Like these are questions that are enormous.
And, but we can't answer like,
there are people who want to jump to the like,
how do we define internal inflation
and make up rules for calculating?
And they make up this and they make up that.
And they say, well, in my toy model
with this rule and that rule, it does this.
It's like, we don't know enough to play those games.
And I guess that would be my point to you.
You're like, in response to your comment
about great scientists is that the challenge
is ultimately going to be like, you know,
there are moments in history that just call
for careful analysis of the laws we have.
Well, in the normalization a certain sense was that.
Absolutely.
And the same with like Lagrangian mechanics,
Hamiltonian mechanics.
Like there's a huge time between Newton
and changes the laws and the science
that happened there was super important.
The question is, what time is it?
Is the time for a conservative revolution?
Is the time for a wildlife revolution?
And I don't think it's responsible for anyone to say,
I know what time it is unless they have a very good reason
for saying that they know what time it is.
So I think that to your earlier point,
you want to let some conservative people hug the shore
and say, maybe we have a small error.
And you may also, I mean, the dressed and bare mass
of the electron is a perfect example
of what seemed to be a small error that cost two decades.
So at a certain level, that's completely legitimate.
And what I see you doing with effective field theory
is in some sense using it as a substitute for experiment,
which is how do we test whether our wild ideas
actually make a certain kind of sense?
And so I think it's very responsible
and part of the good science wrap that I'm sticking you with
is that you're trying to do something
where you can't repeat the Big Bang.
You can't run an experiment in the lab
where everything goes right.
And effective theory is a great way of sorting
some amount of wheat from some amount of chaff
provided that you always keep in mind
that it also carries certain sorts of distortions
that bias us against bold guesses
because many of our structures recur
at various different strata of the effective stratification.
I do not disagree with that at all.
And I completely agree that, you know,
even in our corner of cosmology,
like I would not characterize myself as a stringer,
but I have found string theory useful
because sometimes even though I have not found anything
that cannot be expressed as effective field theory,
like it does push us in a weird direction.
There's like that idea came out of left field
and suitably reinterpreted.
It was a really cool thing to look for.
This is what Nima said to me about Ravita Schwinger fields
in the Bella Swanseger problem, as he said,
that it's very tricky to couple Ravita Schwinger
to external or to internal degrees of freedom
without having superluminal problems.
String theory showed us a way to do that.
And so whether or not you're a string advocate
or not a string advocate,
you at least wanna help yourself to the bounty
that came from this theory,
which is one of the reasons why I'm absolutely not
for ending support for string theory.
But the part of the problem is that this space
is so polluted by stupidity
that world's smartest people acting like jackasses
is that we're not having this conversation fresh and new.
We're having this conversation after not even wrong.
After, you know, and part of the problem is,
is that the field became not even Pauly.
Pauly was a dick and he was famously a dick.
He was a witty dick.
He was a very high, you know, very high standards.
I don't know, you know, Switzerland,
they're very precise over there.
But the fact of the matter is,
is that he's a terrible person for most people to emulate
because it's basically put down physics.
And so, you know, what I really believe is
you're trying to do good science, you're a new generation.
I don't want you meshed in some of these battles,
but I also don't want you on the field of battle,
sort of muddling the stuff and saying,
well, there are actually a lot of interesting things.
We have certain things that we need to get to
in order to make sure that as this generation before me
exits the stage, they leave the situation
like the cat in the hat.
They've made a complete mess of things.
And it's important that they straighten things up
before mom gets home.
Yeah, but I guess I would, I would,
I don't disagree.
There are a lot of things that need to be cleaned up
to make it, you know, but I think that it comes
in many forms.
And the problem is that the problem is that it's like,
you can say, oh, it'd be good if, you know,
people came and fix it.
It is like a handful of people who whose opinions,
like just saying things carry anyway.
Most people, it's the accumulation of a life
of work in the community that eventually move the field.
So like an example is like scattering amplitudes.
Like, you know, there's an like incredibly great
physicists who spent their entire lives working on it.
And the way that they, like their results became part
of the rest of the community because of the sheer weight
of what they had been doing.
It was not because it was like they get a compelling talk
or because like people, you know, but it was like really
that it was just like, eventually they just solve
so many problems that people were like,
and look at the great, like this double copy problem
is really exciting.
Absolutely.
And the amplitude, right.
But again, what I would say is like,
but that's where I see that like, I don't,
like your point of view is like the field is gonna change
when these people have to exit the stage and like,
and I think to be honest, like I think a lot of people
younger than already see these problems.
And it's just that like, they're like the way,
they're not, they don't have Edwitton's name.
They don't have one's name, but they see what you're
talking about and the way that that's gonna manifest
itself is that in 20 years you're gonna look back
and say, that's what the field is.
Many of these people don't know the hypercharge
or the weak ice to spin on the fundamental fields.
And I hate to say this this way, but I've dealt
with people who are quite a bit younger than I am,
who are working in this area of fundamental physics.
And I start to talk to them about the field content
of the standard model.
And it's astounding what they say.
They say things like, oh yeah, I remember this
in graduate school.
What the FD mean?
You're talking about the fundamental constituents
of nature and you can't remember the charge
on the strange cork.
You can't remember whether it's, you know, upper deck.
There is some problem in which people have actually
departed physics.
I think, I think, I know exactly what you're saying.
And I know there are phenomenal like that.
So a version of that, which I think is a fair criticism.
I don't know the names, but I've heard the story
that someone was up for a PhD at their PhD defense
and they were asked, what is the wavelength of visible light?
And the person said, one meter.
And the examiner said, do I look blurry to you?
And like, that's the kind of like, you should have
real world intuition about like, in that case,
it's very obvious.
I mean, I would say like, I can't,
I don't memorize the periodic table.
I mean, the periodic table is obviously important.
No, no, no, it's not the, it's 15 or 16 entries
in a column vector.
But again, like you're asking like, could I,
if you woke me up in the middle of the night,
could I reproduce every single term in the standard model?
Like, you know, like, I don't know that I could.
I could get most, I could get most of it.
I could get most of it, but it doesn't matter to me
in my, in my particular research.
Wait a second, I want to understand.
You're not carrying around a copy
of the representation theory of SU3 cross SU2 cross U1
and 15 or 16 dimensional complex space.
I'm carrying in a particle data book.
Look, not a spark quiz, there's no spark quiz because.
I know exactly where to look it up when I'm writing.
I know what most of the terms are,
but if you had to get me like, what is the exact?
For the same reason that memorizing a poem is important
because you can always look it up,
but you're not going to be able to have it.
If it's not cached close to the prefrontal cortex,
you're not going to be able to make use of it in real time.
It's essential.
And I'm not talking, by the way,
about understanding all the hadronic resonances
or anything like that.
What I'm trying to say is the sense of,
oh yeah, that's that stuff I learned in graduate school.
Is it?
I think to answer for Dan, that he doesn't need it.
What Feynman said would apply.
I mean, Feynman would disagree with you and say,
what I can't derive, I don't understand.
He didn't say, what I can't memorize, I don't understand.
That's not a question of that.
It's a question of, for example,
let's forget the exact, you know,
weak hypercharges summits.
You can write down the pseudocode
of the standard model of logic.
Absolutely, for sure.
So that's, first of all,
I'm talking about people who can't do that.
Oh, I understand what you mean.
And I do agree that there's a problem,
but at the same time, like, I think there's the like,
should we do the standard,
should like, just as an intellectual endeavor,
should we remember, should we pass down
the things that we've learned,
we should definitely make sure
the standard model is not put out.
I'm saying that the younger people that we're discussing,
the consequence of not having this reconciliation,
by the way, of understanding what quantum gravity
did to this field, is that we have a number of people
who are not intact in their research careers,
who are not in a position,
if the answer came screaming across their field of view,
they wouldn't necessarily recognize.
But I would say there's similarly a problem,
it has nothing to do with quantum gravity,
which was that the response to all of this
is that particle physics has become de-forced
from experiment.
And the problem is that particle theorists
don't know what it's going to experiment.
And that has pushed to the point
that most young people that I talk to
who are particle phenomenologists,
now there are people who previously
would have known the standard model had a written down.
Their feeling now is that like, for them to get a job,
and again, is this actually true
or just so what they perceive?
It's probably some of both,
but they feel they have to have an experiment
with their name on it,
because otherwise people will say,
well, they're not in touch with the real world.
So let's get,
we need to get you guys more money.
That would be fantastic.
No, that's what we,
what I always say,
what we need to do is to give my detractors,
my people who are not critics,
but actually assholes,
more money,
because what you're seeing is the dynamics
of hunger game mentality inside of physics.
And as a result of this,
we're not able to behave constructively,
we're not able to behave collegially,
when we separate ourselves
so that certain people on stage never encounter critic.
I was at Seifu in 2011, I believe,
where Joe Pulczynski and Eva Silverstein
were talking about string theory in one of the rooms.
And I went in and I listened to Joe's version
of the history of string theory and I raised my hand.
I said, they're like seven or eight things
that you just said that are not true.
And I went through them and Joe too is credit.
I said, yep, yep, that's fair.
Yeah, that's true.
That happened the way you said it, not the way I said it.
And I watched Eva go white, right?
She was just like, he's gonna have to speak.
And she had had previously prepared slides
that duplicated many of the same claims.
One of which, for example, is that it wasn't
that we never thought about higher dimensional brains.
It was called string theory
because there were actual arguments
that those higher dimensional brains were guaranteed
not to be part of the theory.
And so once you actually go through the reconciliation
where you say, let's talk about the eight times we were wrong.
We said that there were finite number of theories,
then there turned out to be a continuum
where those things were extreme.
I can go on and on and on.
In all of those situations, by not forcing people to say,
yeah, we were wrong.
And Joe Pulczynski is a really good example.
I was pleased to see him on your list,
not for string theoretic issues or quantum gravity,
but because of the effective theory.
And he was a good enough scientist to say,
you know what, you got me, you're right.
He also said to me something, which, you know,
I want to be in the world.
He said, you, Eric, talk a lot about quantum gravity
and string theory.
And sometimes I don't think string theory exists.
I said, what?
He said, sometimes I just think we're running subroutines
for Ed.
And I thought that that was a profound moment
that in general, one of the things that happened,
which you may or may not know or feel or understand,
is that when you would come up with a new idea,
in a previous generation, everyone would look around
and say, well, what does Ed say?
And it had to do with the fact that people felt
that Ed was channeling the cosmos,
like Jimi Hendrix played the guitar differently
than everybody else.
And so it was like, well, what would Jimmy say?
What would Jimmy do?
What would Jesus do?
And you can't do that.
You have to actually say, well, here's my opinion.
I may be wrong, but the fact is we have to go back
and say, why do we have this fictitious history
of the last 40 years?
And let's also celebrate all the great stuff
as per your thread and also my arguments
about the fact that we actually put quantum field theory
on a more solid basis.
It's highly geometric.
And I believe that the geometrization of quantum field
theory and its divorce from physics
is one of the great intellectual achievements of our time.
And it deserves to be celebrated.
It's just like wrong way, Kerrigan.
You think that you're going to end up as Lindbergh,
but you end up going the wrong direction.
All right, well, this has been the end of round one
of this thriller in San Diego.
I want to thank both of you guys.
And hopefully we can do a round two,
but actually I'm more interested in doing something,
not on camera with you guys and just going through
some really fun physics.
I learned so much from you, both of you guys.
And I think Dan is really a role model
for many young physicists.
I said it in the previous podcast,
never have I been so glad to be a goner,
to be a thief, to steal your life from other universities.
Cause I think you really do exemplify
what a theorist or what a physicist should be.
Not a theorist, an experiment.
You're interested in both and you're curious.
And then that means so much to me.
And Eric, of course, is always so delightful
because you know, I used to say,
the way to put a physicist down and say,
well, he or she knows the history of the field really well.
But you put your money where your mouth is.
You're very devoted to it.
I don't think it's for personal attention.
I don't think it's for, you know,
the satisfaction of fighting the previous wars
as generals often do.
But I think it's for the sake of heaven
in the sense that we are trying to understand
a universe that we came into.
And we are like those fish
that don't really know what the water is.
And you guys helped clarify, for me,
simple experimental cosmology.
So now I want you guys to say one thing about Dan.
Yes, yes, sir, yes, please.
I also think that people often on the internet
would post these popcorn memes.
Oh, people are going to conflict.
And the reason that we don't get great fights on the internet
that are actually productive
and that help us learn about the subject
is because we don't have a sense of Queensborough rules.
And one of the things that I just think is terrific
about Dan, who I've never met before,
is that I had a high level of trust
that he was focused on the physics
and not on scoring points, dunking and dragging.
I think people don't remember what a critic is.
I believe that Dan has a certain sense of my critic
and I his.
But the point is not to blind him
or do small knuckle manipulations.
Iron chic jumping, turnbuckle.
The key point is if you want really good conflict,
you have to establish Queensborough rules
by people who are not going to go for the jug killer,
bite off an ear when they're in one of these things.
And it's been an absolute pleasure
to come down and have this conversation.
So touch gloves, Dan, anything else you wanna say?
I would say, I mean, I do, even that thread,
I would say part of the role of a critic
is not to be negative all the time.
I mean, the real value of the critic
is by being negative at times,
when they're positive, it gives real meaning.
And so I view that as a, nobody's being positive up there
and let me be positive out in the world.
And look forward to big things to come from Dan
and another episode with Eric coming out soon.
For now, Brian Keating joining you
from University of California, San Diego.
We're blessed to have brilliant colleagues
like Dan Green and friends of the show,
like Eric Wineside.
Stay tuned, more great episodes coming up.
Suzy Sheehy is coming out this week
and a special surprise guest coming next week.
So stay tuned for now, signing off.
