Alright, we are live on YouTube. Dr. Brian Keating, Dr. Eric Weinstein, how are you my
friend? I miss you very much.
And I use her. Good to be with you. Is it Cinco de Mayo?
Yes, Feliz Cinco de Mayo. It always comes on the 5th of May, every freaking year. It's
like clockwork.
No, I've decided to celebrate and be festive.
You've got five glasses of tequila like me?
No, I've got the Mexican hat potential on the bottom of my mug.
Well played, sir. Buenos dias to you, my friend. Well, we're going to get in right off the bat.
We're going to talk about the most exciting subjects in your universe. My audience has
missed you as much as I have. And we want to make sure that we kind of give the people
what they're interested in. And that today involves a whole host of issues. We're going
to talk about aliens and a possible new solution to the Fermi Paradox. We're going to talk
about your new and ever-evolving and a good way theories and feelings about cryptocurrencies,
inflation, and so forth. And then we're going to talk about some less controversial subjects
like abortion, Supreme Court leaks, and wherever the day takes it.
How exciting.
Yes, and I was pleased to see recently a man by the name of Musk has kind of taken a new
stance for which he's taking extreme attacks and hostility. And I wondered, Eric, you know,
if he might have a little bit of buyer's remorse right now. Do you feel like this prize, you
know, everyone's always the richest man in the world. That's true. He has five times this
amount. That's true. But, you know, if I, if I, you know, took away your family car, you
would feel it, you know, I would feel it. And so I feel like this is a tremendous amount
of money. And I want to take you back to we started pandemic podcasting together two years
ago, exactly. So, you know, congratulations on our anniversary. But in the in between, there
was this thing called Clubhouse. I don't know if you remember this thing called Clubhouse. And
that was the hottest ticket in the world. Everybody wanted it and get on it. I haven't
used it in months. I don't know about you. Like I said, I don't know, you might be on
there, but I'm not on there. Do you think he might be having buyer's remorse? He think
he might look back and say this was the clubhouse of 2022. Eventually, and I shouldn't have given
up a quarter of my network.
If there is buyer's remorse, my guess is that it hasn't set in yet. Because I believe that
there's a lot of low hanging fruit to improve Twitter. And, you know, Elon, I don't know
Elon at all. I know tons of people who know him. My impression of him from afar is very
confused. He does seem to be in many ways the world's most forward thinking person. At
least at the level of, you know, forward thinking, what can we what can we actually do? So I'm
pretty impressed with him intellectually as a public intellectual. Then, you know, then
there are layers. Then there's the idea that he has to be chaotic. So he is very Trump-like
in many ways in terms of how he uses Twitter and how he attempts not to be constrained.
Because there are going to be SEC rules and lots of lawyers and PR people telling you
can't say this, you can't do that. And he's decided that he wants to be free. And so there's
this paradox, sort of a laugh or curve, when you have no money and when you have lots of
money, you tend to be in a weird way less free than people with intermediate levels. And so in
a strange way, I sort of see him as a very rich person, choosing to put a lot of his wealth at
risk so that he can be free. And that too is very forward thinking. Now, what I know about
Twitter is that current Twitter has all sorts of obviously soluble problems in terms of you can
just fire a bunch of people and you can make rules about algorithmic transparency and the
like. And then when you get to the end of plucking all the low-hanging fruit, then you've got the
problem of the underlying technology allows any person to post something instantly. And you
know, what we've seen is we've seen first-person shooters looking like they come out of a video
game in the Christchurch Mosque Massacre that was, I think, streamed live on Facebook. So the
problem is us. It's not Twitter. It's not the technology. It's the technology hooked up. Lots
of people, many of whom have mental health issues, many of whom are incredibly chaotic, talking
to each other without common background, without an ability to, you know, to know who's going to
post what when. So in that world, I don't think there's a solution. So, you know, the great
danger is that he's bought something and he's got the first 17 fixes lined up. And I don't think
the problem is going to occur then. I think the problem is going to occur once you fixed all of
those things. What are you left with? And you know, one of the things he's signaled, Brian, is that
he believes that removing anonymity will be a large portion of the solution. And I do think it
will do a lot to solve the problems. But there's a hard core of people who are happy to be known,
who are incredibly abusive, and think it's funny. And then there's a very large market for abuse. And
I think people haven't really realized that abuse tends to be one of the most important products
that the internet knows how to distribute. And because you can't sign up for abuse, you can't
say, hey, I want to see who's abusing who today. I'm feeling like I should abuse somebody else. I'm
not feeling so good about myself. When you do that, you realize you can't be honest, that you're
really up for going to the Coliseum to see people get hurt. You're really starting to say, oh, no,
no, no. I'm here for the comedy. It's just comedy. It's just fun. It's just laughs. Or I think this
makes the world a better place. I'm calling people out who are ghoulish and horrible. Well, no,
you're really just up for abuse. And you don't have many ideas and your life is empty. And that's
what you're doing. Okay, that problem of all sorts of people selling this one product that has an
enormous audience for it is going to plague Twitter. So I think that there is buyer's remorse. But I
think Elon can go make more money. What he's trying to do is he's trying to say, we have to have some
property that isn't in control under the, how do I say this? You have to have some major property
that isn't under the control of whatever this wrong woke thing is. And, you know, you have Fox,
you have, I don't know, Newsmax, but these are not major, you know, even the blaze or the daily wire
or daily collar, any of these things, I think, they're not like MSNBC, New York Times, NPR, and the
fact that all of these sort of formally, formally, respectable properties gone completely insane,
haven't broken rank, buying one, and saying, hey, we're not going to change the logo, and we're not
going to change the mast, the mast head completely. But what we are going to do is we are going to
stop making it possible to be ridiculous in this coordinated assault on reality. Now, that's why
everybody on the, it's not the left, Brian, it's like the, it's some sort of a partnership between
the establishment left and their revolutionary army that they deploy to try to undo everything that
gets in the, in the path of what I would call the rent seeking elite who are in control of the
Democratic Party. That, that thing, he's taking that on. And I think you have to look at it. He's
not taking it on necessarily from being a conservative. He's taking it on from saying, I
can't live under these people one second longer.
Yeah. And, you know, I think, looking back at, you know, the history of these platforms, I mean, we
see Facebook kind of falling out of favor. And we saw the massive contributions in the previous
election, election by Zuckerberg, which didn't curry him any favor with the people that obviously he
was advocating for. So I wonder, you know, in this, and I wonder if you saw any of the interviews
that Zuckerberg's been on this, you know, kind of world tour lately on Lex's show and on another
podcast, Tim Ferriss. And no one's really asking him, you know, these really tough questions. So I
wonder, you know, is it, is it really true that we look to these, we look to these people as if
they're so lucky to have the resources to buy this? It seems to me like a nightmare hellscape to
wake up in the morning and have a New York Times hit piece like Elon faces today with his South
African childhood brought into play as if he had choices to where he was born.
Geez.
I just, why don't you just call everything white supremacist? You know, just just get it over
with everybody's a Nazi. Everybody's always why they just waste our time because the New York
Times used to be an important newspaper and, and still capable of doing things. We all have to
have a discussion framed by them. And my feeling is, okay, let's just take some random person, you
know, let's take just give me a generic Republican.
Marco Rubio.
Okay, Marco Rubio. Is there any truth to the fact that he was connected to the Cuban Cuban mafia?
Okay, now we're going to discuss Marco Rubio being connected to the Cuban mafia for no reason other
than the fact that somebody was able to put that question in a sentence at the top of an article.
So my feeling is we can also, why does Marco Rubio seemingly target America's children? Oh, is he
targeting America's children? Like we just changed from the Cuban mafia to some different story.
I think we've got to just stop, start with the idea of shut up. Like, you know, if you don't have
much hush,
that's where I feel like, you know, this, this takeover of Twitter, he took over something, which is
built by people that had an ideological bent against him and have a very clear perspective on what
they want to promote and what they don't want to promote and, and highlight versus not. And I feel
like, again, I feel like it's like a booby prize. I do feel like at some point, even I or you, you
know, would wake up and just say, you know, like, there's so much richness in the world. Like, who
cares to have these battles with people that only get points, the more polarized that they speak, the
more they try to punch up and take down Eric Weinstein, I get, I get like those Dungeons, remember
the Dungeons and Dragons, you know, hit points. If I take Eric's car, you know, I get your hit
points. Well, you've got 690,000 people that fall. Oh, I've only got two. Who gives a fricking
crap? You know, I mean, all these people do remarkably well and without it. And I feel like he's
catering to this tribe of maybe 100,000 semi woke, you know, if you want to call it that,
journalists, people in the Beltway and the corridor in the Northeast and then the West Coast. And why
do you want to spend so much of your money? I mean, again, it's a fifth Brian, Brian, I don't know
what you're asking about. The key issue is we've got to buy one of these things. There has to be a
university that's actually a university, a news service that's actually a news service, a place, a
public square that's a public square. Like, we've lost everything, essentially. And then there's
these false equivalent. Oh, no, no, no, Fox. It's like, look, Fox, I still treat as right wing
propaganda. The major issue is that left leaning properties went insane, as opposed to merely
biased. And, you know, like, there's one of these things with, Hey, remember, we told you that
Ivermectin was horse dewormer that you shouldn't take it? Well, it turns out that if we lose Roe
V. Wade, a horse ulcer medication can be used to induce off label of spontaneous abortions in
humans. So just go to your vet, you're covered. And I'm thinking, Okay, I really appreciate that.
What you're really doing is telling me that you have the right to contradict yourselves and the
rest of us are all hypocrites for simply trying to get through a day, but you have an absolute right
to say whatever you want, whenever you want. That it's a game. And I have to admit, I have caught
people chuckling, like, Hey, did you see what I just put out today? That'll bend their minds because
it contradicts what I said three weeks ago. You're just thinking, Okay, I get it. Everybody's
joyriding. Right. Yeah, right. You get those, I get those adrenaline bumps. And then speaking of
that, you know, this, this thing, I don't know if the deal is actually done or what it is. But in
obviously a lot of it was leaked ahead of time and so forth. And, and you have this like, it's
like the fifth estate now. So, so you have the fourth estate, which is media. And then there's
like this, this leakage class, you know, the people beyond the, beyond the curtain that will
leak the story that eventually does get pipeline directly into the mainstream veins of, of the
fourth estate of journalism. And what do you make of this? I mean, this people are celebrating as
heroes. This leak, you know, to the, to the, from the Supreme Court decision, which, as I
understand it, could put people's lives in danger, right? I don't want to be too specific. But this,
this, this thing has not set a law yet. And regardless of how you feel about it, and I can
hear opinions on both sides. Before I actually, before I get to that, Eric, about two years ago
on the portal, you did this wonderful kind of verbal essay, and everybody's asking when the
portal is going to come back. I hope it'll be soon. No questions asked about that today. But
you did a, you did a wonderful verbal essay in which you talked about the trouble with ambiguity.
And you talked about superpositions and how inharmonious they are for the human mind. And the
human mind hates ambiguity and loves resolution, even if the resolution's wrong. And you talked
about abortion, you talked about gun control. I wonder, could you recapitulate that discussion?
It was in the context of, you know, kind of a Schrodinger state of a baby being real versus
not. Have you changed your opinions? And can you first recap? Can you recount that, that,
that wonderful kind of analogy that you used? Well, yeah, of course, I should listen to the
portal and find out what I, what I said or thought. You know, my usual,
just bring your own words on you. You remember that Charles Barkley said he was, he was taken
out of context in his own autobiography. So we're not in that company. Well, you know, the famous
description of one of my favorite classical music pieces, St. Saint-San second piano concerto,
is that it begins with Bach and ends with often Bach. And conception, you know, it begins
when you're talking about terminating a pregnancy, it sort of begins with
spermicide and ends in infanticide. And anything that has that property of being on a continuum
that connects something incredibly trivial to something unthinkable, but naturally, you know,
through the intermediate value theorem, there's got to be some point where that thing becomes
a meaningful life. And the political expediency has said, we're going to turn this into an
intellectual football, right? And so one side is going to pretend that something is a baby,
the instant the sperm nudge is close to the egg. And somebody else is going to pretend that it's
just the mother's body four seconds before delivery. Okay, well, there's a black hole
that I don't want to get into, because what they're really saying is we know that we've
got to make this wrong statement in order to get where we need to go. And if you won't make the
wrong statement with us, you're Hitler. It's like, okay, so add Hitler to white supremacists.
It's just, look, Brian, this is all so dumb. It's so innervating. I mean, the real issue is we
should go back to reading Griswold, you know, before row, where we get the penumbra argument.
I think it's advanced by William O. Douglas in the Warren Court. And we should ask ourselves,
how sophisticated is that decision? And then, you know, the issue with row,
of course, is that for its time, there was no plan B. Back in that day, the world was a very
different place. You know, there are arguments in all different directions. I don't want to get
into any of that, because the issue, you know, suffice it to say, I behave pretty much as a
pro-choice person early on in the pregnancy. And I've, you know, protested in the streets
in order to make sure that women have safe legal access to disposing of their pregnancies early
on. And I'm pretty pro-baby's rights right before, you know, somebody's about to give birth. And
they can't go to anybody's party. Yeah, I mean, I remember my dad of a blessed memory. He used
to joke, you know, on my 33rd birthday, he said, I believe in abortion up until the 99th trimester.
And, you know, but now it's not a joke. I mean, you have people that are effectively saying,
you know, such things as, you know, a pregnant person, of course, we have to be respectful.
It's amazing how we went from we can't define what a woman is with regard to the Supreme Court.
The media stuff. I value your time and my time. And we can get into like, trans, what are they
thinking? Or do you know what someone's always been accused of next? And my feeling is, this is my
only time on this planet. And I have, you know, an esteemed physicist colleague, a worldly guy.
I don't want to talk about any of the ridiculously stupid stuff that everybody wants us to talk about.
All right. Well, thanks for joining the Into the Impossible podcast.
It's been a pleasure. And please like comment and subscribe.
Women get pregnant and give birth. And we should call some number of biological men, women, I think,
because there is a programming issue, but this has gotten out of hand. And I'm not going to sort
it out with you on this particular program. And we haven't lost our mind. And I'm not going to throw
biology out the window because, you know, Renee Richards is upset. We have to be compassionate
and deal with everybody in our society. We should be kind. And we can't lose our minds at the same
time. And we failed. And we failed to have these discussions. We failed to talk about the reality
of pregnancy. We won't sit down with Carnegie Stages and embryonic development and say,
when does the neural tube and the neural crest form? And what is the richness of neural activity
and all these kinds of things that matter to me? Instead, we're going to try to talk to each other.
Pro-life, no, pro-choice, no, pro-life. Let's let somebody else do it.
All right. Well, let's pivot to another existential crisis.
Well, no, no. I'm going to get to the leak.
All right. Yes. I want to talk about the leak. Okay. Let's go back to that. Yeah.
I think it's important. I just had a conversation with somebody I've known very long time as a
lawyer last night. And the lawyer said, you know, it's wrong to leak. And I probably would have
considered it. And I said, why? Oh, because I think it's so important that women have
access to reproductive rights that even the unthinkable should be done.
Okay. I appreciated the candor. I think that's insane. I mean, I think that what's really
becoming very clear is that very few of us trust democracy, trust the court, trust our scientists.
The level of loss of trust has led to a large number of us unwilling to carry the culture
of the United States that animates the Constitution and its other governing document.
I think this is something I don't know how to communicate. If you don't carry the culture
of the United States, which is that you're willing to believe in a fiction that nine
druids can discern the meaning of the Constitution and legal conflict, which is, I'm going to say it
right here. It's a fiction. But I agree to that fiction. I agree to the fiction that a majority
of the electoral college or one day maybe the electorate has the wisdom, the best wisdom available
to choose the president, blah, blah, blah. I think many of us have decided that they don't feel,
we don't feel like carrying the culture. And without the culture, it's a piece of parchment
with ink. There's nothing more. If you can't animate the document, if you're unwilling
to pretend to believe in the things that are necessary to keep the experiment running, because
it's like, no, with Merrick Garland, that's out the window. No, with Bork. It's ridiculous. No,
no, no, you don't understand. The activism on the Warren court destroyed the... Okay. Look,
I know all of the right-wing complaints about the left and the judiciary, and I know all of the
complaints in reverse. And there's two separate stories. And I'm like, I feel like I'm the middle
child. It's like, you idiots are going to lose us everything. Oh, you want to pack the court? Oh,
you want to do this? Okay. No fellow buster. Right. We're not going to survive this, you morons.
And, you know, my feeling about this is my desire to watch Joe Biden, Donald Trump,
all of these, these people are not going to be around for that long. My kids have a lot of
runtime left. I just worry that what we haven't realized is that a giant chunk of both parties
have gone revolutionary. They don't believe in the country.
How does that bode for the remainder of the union of these states then?
I think we don't realize what we're doing. You know, I have this memory of being on a school bus
when I was a little kid and figuring out that if I could get the kids to sway back and forth
in unison, we could actually have a large effect in aggregate. And we started swaying the bus,
and the bus was really like rocking at some incredible level, just from all of these kids
going back and forth. And once they figured out that this was real, they got more and more
enthusiastic. And it felt like we were pretty close to being in danger of actually getting the
bus to do something it wasn't supposed to do. Now, I feel like that's what we're doing,
is that we have this idea that the bus represents like adulthood. There's nothing you can do to
take down the United States of America. It's some super stable superpower. You can mouth off. It's
not true. We are now in danger of disassembling this beautiful experiment because we're bored.
And we're like mischievous, and we want to have fun. So maybe we'll riot the streets this summer.
Summer is coming up. There's always a good idea to have mostly peaceful gatherings, and we can
call each other names and bring some guns, and then we can discuss who shot whom.
I think you've got more kids than I can remember. You probably have the same
number as the last time we spoke, but I'm not even positive of that. No abortions.
In Maurice Sendix, where the wild things are, he says, let the wild rumpus start.
Yeah. I think that's the wild rumpus. Yeah, exactly. Since we talked last in late December,
we did record about a month ago. We may release that at some point. But we've had this existential
crisis looming in Eastern Europe. And I wonder if we can kind of think about that. That rumpus
governed by the same clan of people you just talked about with the addition of somebody who
brings the average age of the discussants down slightly closer to 70, the Vladimir Putin,
who I understand he's not well. I believe he is undergoing some surgery, so I don't know if
people are going to send thoughts and prayers to that particular individual. But now things are
getting serious. And I remember not too long ago, you advocated for something, and I was like,
he can't be serious. My God, he can't be serious. And that was for a demonstration event of the
awesomeness of the release of the binding energy between nucleons. And that was a call to
a demonstration of the fearful power of the wildest rumpus of all, which is nuclear or
thermonuclear weapons. And you advocated for a non-radioactive but still thermonuclear
detonation, so to speak, of the kind that we could witness, obviously not on catastrophic
scale. But I wonder what was, at first I was shocked. I thought, Eric's being a provocative
tour. What's the thinking behind that? What would that do for humanity to see such a thing?
You can see for yourself, we've lost our fear of the sun. We can create what the sun does on earth,
and we're not afraid of it anymore.
Look, I can't easily talk about Ukraine at the moment, because I am so isolated from the rest
of you all. If I start talking about this, it becomes very clear that we're distracting
ourselves with everything else. And so I understand that we've decided to distract ourselves, to not
take this seriously, to trifle with Armageddon, and to have fun with it. We've got a handsome Jewish
guy who loves his wife with one of the great lines of all time.
You know what the line is? I need ammunition, not a ride.
Right? And so it's like, oh my god, nobody's, nobody's ever done anything that masculine,
and I'm kind of excited. It's like, okay, so now we're going to have a planet that is
coked up on the testosterone, testosterone of Ukraine's head of state,
and we're going to trifle with Armageddon as if this is fun, or okay, or hey, let's redo the
early part of the 20th century before we had the nuclear weapon. And my assessment is that
it is more likely that you are all sane, and that I am insane because of the odds.
But I think it's the reverse. I think when I called for a return to above-ground nuclear testing,
I saw that the Cold War wasn't over. And I saw a world of people whose brains have been restructured
by their phone. Like, I'll just give you something from Miami. I was in Miami. Was it a wonderful
dinner? Very successful guy picked up the tab. But when the topic came up, he said, you know,
the thing about all-out nuclear war is I'm not really worried about all-out nuclear war. I'm
worried about re-establishing credibility in the markets afterwards. And I thought, got it.
But we're not, I'm not in the same conversation. So I think that to be blunt about it, I've gone
crazy. And I'm telling you how important above-ground nuclear testing with radiation,
you know, a lot of the radiation, the permanent radiation comes from the, I guess, the fission
reaction that is turned into the fusion reaction, thanks to the geometry of Teller and Ulam. And
I think that it is a question of self-preservation. I think you cannot have this many people completely.
I've gone crazy. I believe that we are trifling with Armageddon. And if we get onto this topic,
I will just sound like the most unbalanced person you've heard.
Well, I don't think so. And here's the reason why. If we look at the writings of our mutual friend,
David Kaiser, the Girmenschenhausen Professor at MIT of Science Technology Studies, a good friend,
truly a wonderful individual, he wrote a book about the quantum legacy, I think it's called.
And it's about kind of twin nuclei in your language, but more not the biological nuclei,
but sort of the contemporaneous development of nuclear weapons of space travel and of the
interest in aliens and events like Roswell and so forth, that that wasn't coincidental, that they
were all sort of synergistically related, and it wasn't purely serendipitous. And his claim,
I think is now being taken up as one of the possible explanations of Fermi's Paradox.
So I'm going to ask you first to define Fermi's Paradox, and then I'm going to read this paper,
which is behind a paywall, but I'm going to give value to my audience. So on this channel,
we do nothing if not give value. And this is going to be a website, which you will thank me for in
your dreams, and it gets you over paywalls. I will reveal that in just a minute. So stay
tuned for that. That's what we call foreshadowing in the business area. First of all, what is the
Fermi Paradox? Is it significant? Does it rise to the level of the Twin Paradox, of the Xenos
Paradox, or is it merely a stepping stone into a bigger series of questions? Fermi Paradox, please.
Well, I would rather hear it from an astrophysicist than...
Fine. There happens to be one right here. So Fermi did the calculation even back in the 50s of how
many stars there were, how likely it was to have life in other planets, sort of precursor to what's
called the Drake equation, and he came up with this estimate based on the very large number of stars
known in the Milky Way galaxy, even at that point, not taking into account galaxies outside of the
Milky Way. And he said the overwhelming odds are that there are other civilizations, other aliens,
and so he asked one of these questions after the calculations that he was famous for, the so-called
Fermi calculations. He said, where are they? If the odds are, there's tremendous numbers of these
civilizations of advanced extraterrestrial technology, capable species, not slime mold.
Oh, by the way, Eric, I wanted to ask this of my friends on Twitter, but I'm too scared to ask
it, so I'll ask it of you. If we found an embryo, like a human fetus, let's say it's a three-month
development gestation, and it's on the planet, you know, Procyon B, you know, Trappist 1,
what do you think the community of astronomers would do? I mean, would they say, ah, it's nothing,
you know, let's abort it? I mean, is that an interesting litmus test to you of how we would
react if we saw a fetus? Whatever age you want to say, 10 days, 20 days, it has a heartbeat,
it's just sitting there on some planet in some exosolar planet. Is that relevant to the conversation
of abortion at all? I don't even know. It's like a Boltzmann brain, but it's a Boltzmann fetus.
Boltzmann fetus. Okay. Whatever you're smoking, you've not sent me any of it. I did see an enormous
mushroom the other day on your channel, and this is an exciting new direction for middle-aged.
Never lick the mushroom. Never lick the mushroom. Okay. Look, we seem to be very afraid to believe,
and, you know, let me just get over the hump. I don't believe we're the only life in the universe.
I don't know how common or how rare it is. I don't know whether or not there are ways of
evading. I don't know whether Einstein's restrictions passed through to all successor theories to
relativity. You know, Einstein may have done something to Newton, but he didn't do everything
to Newton's conservation law, if you know properly understood. So we don't know what the source of
our apparent aloneness is, but apparent may be doing a fair amount of heavy lifting,
and what I've offered up is the Fermi Paradox that I know. The only Fermi Paradox that I know
is the one on North Sentinel Island in the Andaman chain, because the islanders are effectively
Indians, but they don't know that they're Indians. They may not even know that India exists or that
India claims North Sentinel Island or that it won't let anyone land there. And my other claim
is that I believe that a good chunk of humanity has stumbled into a very appealing wrong idea.
So first I want to talk about the appeal of the wrong idea. The wrong idea is the more we find
out, the more we realize how little we understand. There's something like really comforting about
this. And imagine that you apply this generally. The longer I'm in love, the more I realize how
little I understand about the human heart. Oh, that's beautiful. But then you apply it to real
things. The longer I study continental exploration, the more I realize that every new land mass
we find on Earth is just an indication of how many land masses we have yet to find.
That's like the dumbest thing you could possibly say, but it has the same basic feeling. Well,
I think we're almost at the end. I think we are afraid to say something which has always been
false in the past. Now, the thing is, we're almost at the end of the rules of physics.
When somebody says that, everyone says, yeah, Lord Kelvin said that they thought that that was true
when they had the proton and the electron. And then they found the neutron. Okay. Well,
yes. And it was always true that powered human flight was never going to happen because it had
never happened until it happened. And it was the same thing. You know, there's this land mass off
of Siberia that I think was discovered in the 20th century, which is the last major land mass to be
found. Nobody's worried about the idea that there are uncharted desert isles on Earth because we
have the satellite there. We're about at the end of physics, I think. Now, that could be wrong.
The easiest way for it to be wrong is that we would be at the end of this chapter,
but it would be a book with many chapters and you have to finish this chapter to know that there
are chapters to follow. Okay. What if for the moment, I take the contrarian position and say,
no, no, no, I think this is about to wrap up. And the really weird thing is that it's taken
from 1945 until the present for us to get close. That's a the blink of an eye in cosmic time.
But my belief is, is that if anything is monitoring us, and if I'm not wrong,
right before you have the full power of the laws of physics, you let off a nuke.
And then you go from fission to fusion. And so the concern that I have is, first of all,
that the Fermi paradox on North Sentinel Island is the same as the Fermi paradox we have here on
Earth, where we are in the North Sentinelese, and we're trying to guess that India exists.
So my question to you is, first of all, is there some sort of a thing that doesn't want us
contacted that is shielding us the way India shields North Sentinel Island? And is it the case
that whatever it is, is, you know, while we think, oh, well, geez, Sam Harris, my friend, said,
whoever is out there must be, you know, millions of years and more advanced. They would view us as
aphids, nonsense. There is probably a level of sophistication where it kind of taps out.
And, you know, you can build bigger and bigger computers, but you're not going to discover
more land masses on Earth, and I don't know that you're going to discover more laws of physics.
I'm concerned, quite honestly, that we've lost our fear of the cosmos, just the way we've lost
our fear of nukes. We've become relatively certain that nothing ever happens here, that we won't be
visited, that there's nothing else other than us. And I'm worried that what we did is we alerted
whatever is out there, hey, we're just about at the end, and we haven't worked out our stuff,
and we're going to be able to get off this rock if you are able to get off this rock.
I mean, to come visit this rock, rather. So if things can visit us, we can leave.
Now, it may be that all the planets are, you know, rushing away from each other
because of the expansion of the metric of space-like splices in the universe. But
if the next theory has the power to get us really far, really easily, and far might be,
in many dimensions, not all of them spatial, I would be very worried that whatever is watching us
knows how close we are.
So, I mean, we have to admit the mastodon in the room is that we have no evidence.
There's life elsewhere. I stole that from Sir Roger Penrose. And we hear this, Lee Cronin,
and my friend, Sarah Walker, they were just on Lex, and they're talking very, very specifically
about the traits and characteristics of these aliens, and what they're going to be like,
and how you can calculate exactly how much structure went into them, and how you could
detect them, and it's all very interesting, and it's rooted in sound, chemical, and physical
reasoning. But there's still this huge, you know, lacuna, which is that there's zero evidence. And
in fact, I want to try, I want to try something out on you, an argument that I have, which will
sound dirty, but it's not, and you know it's not. And it's called panspermia, panspermia, okay.
Now, it sounds dirty, but it involves the exchange of material between planets in our solar system
and other solar systems, perhaps. And you talked to Avi Loeb, our mutual friend,
not too long ago in Miami also, while he was down there with you. And he talked about the
almost, you know, definite admission by the U.S. government that an extraterrestrial meteorite
had landed from another solar system in the somewhere in the ocean on Earth. And that was
obtained. And I love Avi. I'm, you know, like you, you know, kind of helping him out on his
Project LAO. So we're both, you know, kind of Avi maximalists to use mixed metaphors. But Avi,
you know, claims this is there, and it's based on trajectory data, highly controversial people,
you know, can't reproduce it. But at any rate, if true, highlights the fact that materials,
such as this meteorite, I've given you several of these, and you tried to snort one once.
Anyway, these are meteorites. They come from Argentina. They're delivered by gravity and the
U.S. Postal Service. They're hard iron, silicon, and cobalt. They're highly magnetic. And they came,
and they smashed into Earth. Now, there are meteorites that I will never give to you,
because they cost as much as my first, you know, two cars put together. I have,
and it came from the planet Mars. So I have a chunk of Mars in my, in my lab. And that
chunk of Mars was proven by gas chromatography and other tools to originate from Mars. Okay.
Now, how did it get here? Same way. Blasted off of Mars by a Martian meteorite,
kicked around the solar system for a few million years, landed on Earth in Northwest Africa.
Now, the same process happens in reverse. Life carrying molecules could be embedded on rocks,
and, you know, a chunk of a whale gets kicked out into space, and then eventually lands on Mars,
right? But we have no evidence of that. We have no evidence of that happening
over billions of years. Now, this could, this could, this has been happening as long as life
has been on Earth, which Lee and others tell me is four billion years. So you have four billion
years of opportunity to have panspermic transfers of life that we know exist on Earth,
going to other parts of our solar system. And there's zero evidence, not, you know,
I'm not asking for terraformed, you know, plateaus on Venus, just saying there's no evidence. Now,
absence of evidence isn't proof of absence, but shouldn't, at some point, people start to take
the lack of, you know, any sort of data or what have you as troubling in a Bayesian sense, that
you can't put a prior that is so certain, close to 100% Lee tells me, that he believes aliens are
inevitable, and you sound like you believe it as well. So, I want to ask you, what level,
what would it take you to believe that aliens don't exist? Alien life, forget about intelligent,
just life. Anywhere in the universe? Anywhere else in the universe. What would, I mean, what would
I have to ask? What piece of evidence would you have to have to know that's impossible,
that, you know, it's impossible for life to be elsewhere than Earth?
Impossible? Vanishingly, vanishingly small. In other words, the people that say it's guaranteed,
like Avi and Lee, and maybe you, I don't know, say it's all but guaranteed, the Fermi, you know,
kind of suggestion, it's all but guaranteed. So, what series of piece of evidence would decrease
that to as close to zero as you could imagine? You can't rule it out, obviously. Oh, you're
going to hate this answer. We would get to the next level in physics. We would find out that it
does give us the ability to buzz the cosmos. We would send out an enormous number of probes,
and we would change our, we would tutor our Bayesian prior by exploring all of the
most Earth-like exoplanets we could find, which are now cheap to visit because of new discoveries
that were not available to us when we were stuck with Einstein's effective theory,
or quantum field theory. That is what it would take. Right now, I can't see almost anything.
Really? I mean, I can't get you beyond sea, but I can get you to see, I can get you the speed of
light, right? We can have a discussion about the simulation hypothesis and that we can have avatars
cruising about the universe. We don't see any evidence of that either, in contrast to my guest,
David Shalmer's claim. So, I mean, we could travel at the speed of light. Isn't that good enough?
Do we really have to go beyond the speed of light before you believe that they don't exist?
You know, Brent, I don't know how to think about this. There's a suite of problems that is different
than any problem we've ever solved in science. One of them would be the beginning, how did life
begin? That would be an example of the class of problems I want to talk about, or another one of
these would be, how do you get consciousness to evolve from the material world? Another of these
would be contact or the ability to prove where did the origin of the universe, what is the origin
of the universe? What is behind the surface of last scattering? Why do men and women take so much
such different times when going to the restroom? You know, there are various things.
What? There's something man is not meant to know, literally. Exactly. That's what I was trying to say
with the surface of last scattering. I believe that we haven't solved any of these problems ever.
The hardest things that we know how to do, look, the hardest thing that I know is quantum field
theory. Quantum field theory is unbelievably difficult to learn, and it has gotten harder
and easier. Now, I have the entire standard model in stylized form that animates.
This is the classical input that when quantized gives us our understanding of the world, and it's
incredibly simple. The idea that this fits on a mug, and you and I can go line by line symbol
by symbol and say what everything is. Grand drinkification. We have only solved problems
in the shallow end of science. We have never solved a problem outside of the shallow end of
science. When people start to talk about free will, I just think, wow, you've gone from wearing floaties
in the shallow end with your parents holding you up to wanting to surf shark infested waters
off the coast of Portugal with monster waves and sharp rocks. Who knows what? It's a totally
different level of science to figure out life's origin or consciousness or the beginning of the
universe. We haven't gotten to any of these yet. I think what we're very good at is we're very good
at extremely hard, simple problems. We're all interested in these questions, but my interest
isn't in the recreational version of these. I know that if you and I did nothing else other than
talk about free will for a year, we would get nowhere. The conversation would be recreation.
I think we could have many different possible conversations. None of them will get anywhere.
So I'm always curious as to why people say, I believe in free will. I don't. Okay, so you're
going to do that thing. We need to do things that might work. And the things that might work have to
do with like my friend Rima Khan is about to have her SETI meeting in San Francisco. We can listen
for things. We can try to work on the laws of physics. I cannot believe we are still focused on
rockets, but very rich people seem to like rockets. If they have any idea of the danger we're in here
on earth, I think it's a completely bizarre feature of wealth and brilliance that brilliant,
smart people choose rockets. Don't know why. We've got to do something. And we've never solved any
of these problems. And I don't think we're going to get to these problems by pretending. I mean,
I always want when somebody talks to me about what life will be like to bring up cephalopods.
But I look at a cuttlefish, and I look at how intelligent a cuttlefish is, maybe not as smart
as an octopus. But a cuttlefish is such an alien creature. It's so far away from us on the phylogenetic
tree that it proves that you can't really easily anticipate what smart looks like.
And it's probably the reason that the heptapods were used in that movie. What is it? Arrival?
Yeah. And I think that the next physical theory is going to blow our minds. I think we've sat so
long pretending to have our minds blown by entanglement and Schrodinger's cat and the fact
that you get thinner and heavier in relativity theory, whatever, terrible paradox. That's not
really the mind blowing stuff. What's about to come, I think, is going to rewrite our knowledge
of ourselves just the way DNA did. So pitch me, I'm Elon. I can take $44 billion and put it
towards Twitter. I can scrap it or even make it $43 billion. What do you tell him? What should he do?
What would you do? He knows. I mean, what would I do? I mean, he's a physics major. He was a UPenn.
I mean, more than physics major, he's evidenced, I think, continuing interest in physics.
But he has hijacked the conversation of getting off the planet, which should be a conversation
about many, many, many, many, many, many different experiments rather than the moon and Mars.
And getting off with physics to being a conversation about rockets. So anytime you talk about diversifying
existential risk to humans, someone will now say, oh, don't worry, bro, Elon's going to get us to Mars
with those awesome, awesome rockets. It's like, I don't understand this. So I can't pitch Elon.
So would you go, I mean, but again, to push back with respect, as you know, I always do. And I
cheerfully recognize that I may have a huge blind spots myself. But it seems to me as if you're
going back to 1491 and you're telling, you know, Queen Ismerella or whoever. Don't fund this guy,
Chris. Chris C. Don't. He's just, wait, wait, wait. That doesn't make sense. We should do rockets.
Okay. We shouldn't obsess about rockets. Right. Not rockets only in the portfolio. But again,
let me just finish my torture analogy because it took me like a half an hour to make it up in
the shower this morning. But, you know, you're telling her, we should really fund this guy,
you know, Yitzhak Newton, or, you know, get these laws that will actually take us to the moon.
You know, let's just skip ahead boats, forget about these barks and, and, and boats. Let's
galleons. Let's skip ahead. I don't know that that would actually get us where we want to go.
Right. Because you're saying, you know, this, your priors are going to be informed by the either,
and a no-go theorem that says we can't go beyond Einstein. In which case, what would you say,
there are no aliens? If we couldn't go beyond Einstein, yeah, we're trapped in the world.
There's no, so like, this is another problem, which is, is that Einstein hijacked the conversation
so that now every time we talk, it's like, no, dude, we have time dilation, we have worm holes.
It's like, we have alcubierre drives. Blinding them. Oh, no, I thought you were making a crypto
enthusiast with laser eyes. That's right. Einstein with laser eyes. I told you. Okay.
Don't you? Okay. So,
I don't think Elon shouldn't do rockets. I think rockets is a profitable business. And I think
getting people excited about the future has to do with going back to the last moment when we actually,
as a country, you know, we didn't want to say, let's develop ICBMs that are really efficient in
hitting Beijing and Moscow. We said, we choose to go to the moon.
And, okay. So, you know, true enough. So go to the moon. But stop with the terraforming in Mars,
the light of human civilization. I just, you have to actually want to save us from ourselves right
now and talk about it in order to realize how completely crazy Elon has made everyone who
listens to him. Because at the moment, if you had Einstein and you had Elon, people would be gravitating
to Elon. He's charismatic. He's nailed in a world which is not comfortable with masculine traits.
He's highly chaotic. He's very entertaining. And people have this idea like, yo, dude,
he's the richest man in the world, bro. And that's the currency of our time.
So my feeling about this is everyone, Elon reaches with the story of terraforming Mars
with rockets and all this kind of stuff, thinks that's the plan. And I just think it's completely
crazy to get everything right and then go rockets terraforming Mars right at the end and just like,
dude, I just read this entire, you know, war and peace length novel and then in the last page, you
just do something completely bizarre. I just don't get it. Maybe I'm dumb. Maybe I don't,
I don't understand. I don't think it's Ferdinand and Isabella. I think that they, you know, we needed
to fund universities that studied natural philosophy and mathematics and physics. And we needed to
explore the world because we didn't know what was here. And we should go to Mars and we should go to
the moon. And we should have, if somebody said that our rocket allocation is stupid, we should
take it to zero, I would be fighting tooth and nail to make sure that rockets are budgeted.
Okay. The emphasis on rockets is psychotic.
It's like you're looking at a portfolio of a very, very rich person that's only in one municipal
bond or something. And you're like, make this make sense.
Yeah, he is. But then, of course, he is, you know, more diversified neurologically than almost
anybody. I'm just saying that he doesn't have the right to hijack the rock that the
we need to spread out and diversify because we're going to get ourselves killed on one planet with
a shared atmosphere. It's completely unreasonable for him. It's wonderful. I mean, I just, I have a
very clear idea that he's one of the smartest, most forward thinking people, and he's got a
rocket company and he's talking in some sense his book. Right. And he knows, look, I don't know him,
but I almost, I almost feel like I can guarantee you he knows better.
And so, you know, I don't want to speculate on what his strategy is, but he knows better than to
bet everything on Mars terraforming and the moon with rockets. Right.
Now, pivoting maybe slightly away, we look at, you know, what what we could do, you pointed to one
thing in there, you mentioned universities and how important they were. Now in 1492, the university
system was only about 400 years old at that point. And and it's it's aged since then and starting in
1080 or so in Bologna. And very little has changed. And I wonder, you know, the best and the brightest,
so to speak, what they might be getting sucked up into this orbit of Elon, no pun intended,
or this this kind of thinking or many other things crypto. But at least people like Michael
Saylor, who I had on the show last year, is very gracious and forward thinking as well.
You know, he started Saylor Academy. And that's sort of a university that only is going to produce
STEM majors, not going to produce, you know, gender studies majors, and it's not going to produce
things that are not related to pure science, technology, engineering and math, because he
believes that we need, you know, a million PhDs in these fields in order for us to progress. And
actually, I think the limiting factor for Elon is going to be humans. It's not going to be robots.
It's not going to be capital. It's going to be having enough people. And so the fault that I have
for him is that I don't see any and I'm not saying, Oh, give, you know, yesterday, a billion,
$100 million was given to Stanford University for sustainability. I'm not even saying Elon,
you know, hook, you see up Steve up with with the Musk Institute will churn out your P it because
I don't think I can do it either. Is that is there fundamental limitation for us getting off the
planet in your language, or becoming interplanetary in his language or transcending the laws of physics
in your language getting off the planetary species and his life? Is it humans? And is it
solvable? Because I can't just nuclear it as good as I am. I can't just nuclear it out of the vacuum
kids. Well, but okay, so let's look at the very weird question of anybody with a halfway interesting
version of a theory beyond the standard model. And I don't mean
sorry, I'm going to be very careful about the phrase. We have large programs,
grand unification, supersymmetry, technicolor, super strings, etc.
These are the big programs. More or less, if you're not on a big program, I know of almost no one
inside the university system, who's got a truly interesting audacious idea for what to do next.
I could tell you that, you know, Peter Wojt, for example, has moved from being a curmudgeon
to actually saying this I believe, which is fascinating. I mean, imagine if Sabina Hossenfelder,
instead of complaining about the gobbledygook or the fact that people are actually, you know,
and she's quite accurate, I think, about this overselling things that don't work. But I really
love that Peter moved towards saying this is what I think may be generating all of this.
He's there in a nontraditional role inside of the math department of Columbia University. He's
writing books, he's writing papers, he's giving talks, but he's not a professor. Same thing with,
you know, David Deutch has a really weird situation at Oxford. Garrett Lisey has a very
weird situation wherever he is. Julian Barbour has a weird situation. Stephen Wolfram.
Inside the universities, we've turned it into the Hunger Games academically, and so everyone
is worried about survival and nobody's actually worried about physics because they're worried
about personal survival, they're not worried about general survival. I think what you have to look at
is that there is a reluctance. I mean, one of the things I say that doesn't win me a ton of
friends is that it appears that nobody actually has any money. And the reason that I say that is
that all sorts of, it feels to me like nobody, we have, there were Rockefellers. They built
Rockefeller University and the University of Chicago, one of our absolute jewels. You know,
Vanderbilt, there's a Vanderbilt University, Carnegie had money, there's a Carnegie,
Leyland Stanford, we don't want to invest anymore in this stuff. There's a general anti-science
thing partially, I think, fueled by the fact that when Anthony Fauci says, I am the science, trust
the science, we are revulsed, we recoil in war, maybe I should say it that way. And I think people
who have money are turning away from universities because those containers are seemingly very
susceptible to revolutionary nonsense. And so why would you build a container and then put great
stuff in it only to have it instantly corrupted by the associate dean of niceness goodness and
fluffy puppy dogs for pediatric oncology patients? You know, it's like, okay, we need to help kids
who are facing cancer, we need, I have a dog, I like good things, ice cream, blah, blah, blah, blah.
But the university is attesting to their own fundamental goodness at every turn and denouncing
everyone who disagrees with them as Genghis Khan Hitler or Lizzie Borden or whatever. It's not a
very appealing pitch to people with resources. So what I'm seeing is that more or less people
with incredible resources don't want to spend on things that are important. They've been tinged
with this kind of failure and greediness. And I think one of the things we need to do is if the
government is just going to renege on the endless frontier compact between the universities and
the federal government, I don't want to be in a intellectual property category where we can't
monetize what we discover. I just want to take you by your ankles and say, God damn it, you fooled us,
give us all our money back that we generated for you. We built the entire economy and you treat us
like we're your servants, you're making me sick to my stomach. For God's sakes, grow a pair and
recognize you've got the world's greatest deal and that these people basically have integrity and
you're turning their lives upside down into a horror where people don't want to go into their
offices and universities. When I was just touring universities on the East Coast, professors would
close their doors and in hushed tones, they would say, I can't really say this outside, but things
have gotten really crazy here. And I'm thinking, you're the owners of the university. No matter
what anyone tells you, you don't want to send your kid to a university that isn't run effectively by
its professors. Universities are not primarily about teaching. You should go to a college if
you're focused on teaching. Universities are about research. The research is done by professors
and by far the most important research is done in STEM. I mean, I think there's very important
research that's been done in folklore, ethnomusicology was something I considered going into.
There's plenty of things that can be researched that aren't STEM. But the most important things we
do is to better understand the world in which we live, gain power and wisdom to control it.
And if the humanities aren't going to be giving us wisdom, but are going to be giving us negative
wisdom, it's very important that anybody with hate in their heart who talks about anti-racism all
day long, which is just another name for racism, should not be informing people who might have to
make nuclear weapons or fuel air explosives or any one of the horrible things that we may need to
keep ourselves safe. It's very important to keep lunatics away from the stuff that actually works.
And I mean, I've always agreed with you in general terms, but I do feel like we have kind of an
opportunity that is only kind of full of latency when it's thought prospectively in the future.
In other words, the inventor of the laser, Charlie Towns or the inventor of GPS and
things like that or Einstein, these people died, you know, not wealthy people. And yet,
if they had attempted, and yet the creator of Ethernet, you know, the three-com, you know,
is currently a triple-
What terms, Brian?
Wealthy financially. So we can define wealth other ways, obviously.
But let's pause that just for one second. I'm going to disagree in very strong terms.
I went into academics in large measure for freedom.
And that's why people go into business for freedom.
I think that if you priced the freedom that somebody like Noam Chomsky enjoyed,
you know, probably had his pension taken care of, probably was made an institute professor at MIT,
could draw off on any topic. He had this giant army behind him that would stand up for his freedom
of expression and freedom of inquiry. The functional equivalent of Noam Chomsky's wealth was absolutely
enormous.
Oh, sure. I'm not debating that. And you can have, by the way, you can have both. Elon, you know,
dictates you can have both. You can have intellectual capital as well. But I'm thinking purely
for the translation ability of wealth to then be used to research purposes. So you made the argument
that we should have taxed, you know, semiconductor instructions or emails, all of which are invented
by physicists or appliances.
No, we shouldn't have done that. We should have kept our agreements. But if you're going to be a
prick about it, by all means, you're basically taking everything that was developed by people
that you've now treated as your servants, who you've actually legally hobbled. And my feeling
about this is that's completely unethical.
100%. All I'm saying is that the biggest lie in finance is that past performance isn't indicative
of future, you know, returns. I mean, look at, look at whatever, pick whatever pre.com company
you like. So all I'm saying is that given that academia and academicians like the ones that
you mentioned have been treated like garbage and that physicists have not been able to not
monetize for our selfish own internal purposes, which I believe we deserve. But I'm not going
to talk about that for the purpose of physics for the greater glory of physics. I claim we need
to start with an educational campaign now. In other words, we say the next project that's going
to be developed with quantum computing or before it's monetized, and we lose the rights to say,
hold on, I didn't sign off on this IP, we need to be smart. And I don't think there's any training
you know, certainly I'm guilty. I don't train my graduates since I'm blessed to have so many
brilliant kids. I never sit down. So if you ever get into a situation, I have two patents, by the
way. I never sit down and say like, if I'm ever in the situation where this thing could make,
you know, millions of like, here's what I should do in order to benefit. But I think we need something.
It's it should be in some way incorporated into our education. And I think the best way to do that
ironically is through the humanities show through history of physics as you know better than anybody.
Although I always say it's if you want to if you want to damn somebody with fake praise and as a
scientist, he's really knowledgeable about the history of physics, you know, it's like, it's
such a backhanded compliment. But you do in all honesty, and all seriousness, you do understand
it. Let me get back on that because that's kind of a dig. My feeling about this is you don't need
to know the history of physics if you want to do relatively workman like scientific research.
The only people who really need to understand the history of physics aren't most physicists. It's
the tiny number of people who are going to do things like break new ground. So it's really
important not to sell the history of physics to everybody, you can become a calculation monkey
and go to any calculation monkey school and do calculation monkey equations. That's fine.
The really hard thing is to try to figure out how did people break out of cognitive prisons?
And so, you know, some of the funniest things is when people have these insults,
like the one you just said, it's like, well, yeah, because you didn't understand what it was
about to begin with. Yeah, I agree. I guess all I'm saying is wouldn't it be great to have education
so that the next time we invent the internet, you know, hypertext protocols, that we can think
for a second now, how do we do this? How do we renegotiate the contract? That's what I want to
say. You're a very astute, you've picked up on the problem, but we can't go back and rectify the
past performance, but we can say, given the way that the history of the field is gone, you want to
invent the quantum, you know, Bose-Einstein condensate laser that will be used for God knows what,
before you do that, we should have an honest conversation about our crisper or whatever.
Well, where are the mega fortunes that are interested in this stuff? And my claim is,
you know, we both talked to Jim Simons. Jim knows how important this stuff is, and he's put a fair
amount of capital behind this. In my, you know, at some point, I had a conversation with him
about fixing education. And he said, I spent a fair amount of time on it. And the only thing
that actually seemed to make sense is to take terrible teachers and make them slightly less
terrible. And it was just, it was a heartbreaking thing. So I've seen people plow money into some
of these things and get very little back. The things that work can't be said very easily right
now because they're out of keeping with the ethos of our time. You meet people, how do you know
who's good? Because you talk to them. You find out whether they have 12 ideas before
they have a cup of coffee and three of them are good, you know, three good ideas. That's
astounding. It's hard to have good ideas. We basically know who's good. And we don't get to
dial their facial characteristics or look at their chromosomes or whatever. You know, good is good.
Famously, Ramanujan was, you know, sent a letter to Hardy and Hardy and Little would read it in
Cambridge and they said, well, either he's a humbug or a genius. And we guessed genius because
humbugs are relatively rare. Beautiful one. We know who's good. We know who to fund and we
know how to leave people alone and nobody wants to do it. Everybody wants to say, oh, it's all in
the ethos and the myth of the lone individual and, you know, this is so elitist, all this kind of
nonsense. Okay, well, I don't know how to tell you this, but you're just, you're wrong 12,000 ways
from Sunday. And you're going to destroy everything that we know how to do. Many of the people who
make real breakthroughs are very difficult to deal with. And if you don't want to deal with people
who are difficult to deal with, you can just sort of write off most progress. Yeah, I mean, I wouldn't
leave Feynman alone with my daughter or your daughter. But but he sure knew his way. That's
true because we don't want Feynman maced or kicked in the groin because he's a valuable human.
And our kids are skilled in the deadly arts of the groin attack from Krav Maga training that we
give them. And that is a mitzvah for all of you. Yes, exactly. So we're talking with Eric Weinstein,
proprietor of the portal podcast, among the other things. You can find Eric at Eric R Weinstein
at both Twitter and on Instagram. He has a website. It was about a year ago, we had a conversation
about geometric unity. And I want to talk about that. Because it's still it's still it haunts
my dreams. It's still something that's very delightful. And and it represents a sort of a
sort of, you know, candle in the darkness, a sort of hope, a scream in the void, thinking big things.
Obviously, it's not, you know, there are people that have, as you mentioned, Peter Boyd, Garrett
Leasy, there, there are a surf fight of other contender theories that have their own lacunae.
But where, where, where are you now with with geometric unity? Where is the project at this
point? Well, I'm talking to a lot more different physicists. And who have you met with most recently
that's most exciting for you, besides present company, obviously. Well, I mean, I don't want to
get into details, but I think probably one of the best conversations I had recently might have been
with Nima, Arkani Hamed. There's a local graduate student, I'm going to mention his name, because
he deserves it. And what is the name to watch Trevor Schopener at UCLA is an unbelievable
up and coming guy in things V burns group. But I've been, you know, talking with Avi about
astrophysics, discussed with Alan Gooth recently, some aspects of
how multiple generations are generated. Just a fairly colleagues in France.
I've been, I've been very lucky to have access to great people. And I think that one of the things
that's happened is that with supersymmetry, and with string theory, not being able to
find something that really shows us that they're on the right track.
People are slowly open to the idea of either shutting high energy, fundamental physics down,
and it's going to be up in arms about that. There's like a huge move to move towards
quantum computation. You say, why is that? It's like, oh, well, because computers have
been really important. And so the metaphor of the universe as a computer is really important.
Information, maybe we can rebase everything around information. It's something you can do, you can try.
But I think right at the moment, where we are is that
we realize that the Baby Boomer program has run its course. The Baby Boomer program was strings.
Almost all of the people in string theory came up. They viewed the world a particular way. They
changed the problems that we thought of as fundamental. Quantizing gravity became the
problem to work on, which I think was absolutely wrong. And what we find ourselves in is a world in
which the old thing that was crowding out everything else is in the process of dying,
and that is string fundamentalism. And one of the great things about talking to Nima
was, for me, that Nima is not captured by strings, but he's animated by strings,
which is exactly the right position to be in, which is that you're not 100% sure that strings
are the right direction to go. But you can say, look at all of the things that string theory
accomplishes inside of quantum field theory. It gives us paradigmatic ways in which we can elude
certain seemingly no-go theorems and the like, or it's taught us a lot. And I think that the toy
theories that really came along with the string guys, because the string guys are mostly guys,
not 100%, but too much, more or less used a lot of toy quantum field theories to explore some of
these ideas. That was a second program. That was very good, by the way, on their part for developing
quantum field theory as a discipline, but it's been a disaster for uncovering new physical
law and new physical explanations. So I do think that right at the moment, people would be open,
but there's no, we should be building accelerators. We should be getting people,
here's the crazy thing, Brian. I'm dancing around it and trying not to say it, but maybe I'll just
say it. We just had this W mass announcement. The W particle appears to be much heavier,
and by much, I don't mean like three times as heavy, but I mean by an appreciable amount,
heavier than we thought. And I watch everyone's explanations of this to the public,
and I haven't seen one that really sounds to me like what this thing actually is.
We settle on these, here's how we talk to the public about the W message. Well, what is the
W particle? It's more or less a part of a derivative from calculus. And what does a derivative want
to do? It wants to differentiate functions. Well, what functions does it have? Well, it can
differentiate something called a Higgs field. Now, if you look at this mug, for example, and I'm not
good at going around. Drinking and deriving. Drinking and deriving. That term right there,
which probably looks like d sub mu of phi norm squared. That term is where the W particle interacts
with the Higgs particle. So you're effectively using the W particle to differentiate a Higgs
particle just the way you use the photon to differentiate an electron. That process by which
the Higgs particle gives mass to a small number of pieces of a derivative, the W and Z particles.
It gives mass in some sense to itself. You've got this potential term here. You've got Yukawa terms
here where it's giving mass the same phi is occurring here. All of, sorry, not hold that up. So this
is where the W particle is getting mass. This is where the Higgs is getting mass from itself
through its interaction with the Mexican hat potential, the sombrero. The Yukawa term where the
fermions, the electrons and protons get mass. That whole system isn't explained to anybody in the
public, which is criminal. And then I've sort of been in this kind of self-examination phase,
which is, oh, Eric, you use so many big words. Why can't we understand you? I was like, well,
one thing is almost nobody's actually trying to tell you what's really going on.
And when I sit there and I say, okay, the W particle is part of a derivative,
all my colleagues know what I'm saying. But they're not venturing out there to say
something so simple. And I don't know why they're not doing it. So the public isn't animated.
Like, the fact is, this mug, if you had this mug in your house and you said,
more or less, everything other than gravity is on that mug,
somebody would want to know, one person in your family, like, well, how do I read it?
What does it mean? What are the different terms? Do they have names? Nobody is talking to the public
about what it is that we do. And that's how I get into trouble. I say, hey, I have an
explanation for why there are three generations of matter. I don't even know that's a problem.
So if you think about the sort of things that GU is doing different than, let's say, Garrett or
Peter White, one of the things I think that's exciting is that a good theory should probably
tell the standard model and general relativity what it got wrong. And I don't think anybody
inside of the academic system wants to do that. They want to extend only.
You know, and this is why, for example, everybody will add sterile neutrinos to the standard model,
because it's like, it's the least offensive thing that won't screw anything up.
So I've been thinking a lot about this, which is why do why do none of us talk to the public
in real terms? Why do we allow Feynman's dumbest statements to characterize
what seems to be the height of sophistication? If you can't explain it to your grandma, it means
you don't understand it. If I can't create the word world myself, then I'm useless. It's like,
okay, well, it's a lot of machismo, but it's not very smart. And in those
opportunities, none of us are really filling it in. We're not talking about what the W particle is.
We're not talking about why it's important. We're not talking about why this is so exciting.
I can hardly sleep. I don't even know that it's real. Maybe it may be wrong.
Well, we know things are real. We know calculus is real. And let's start with a,
you know, when I learned calculus, I had a self teach it to myself, because I actually wasn't
placed along a math track that would have taken me to take the APs. And I had to kind of self
motivate. And that came because of the love of astronomy that I wanted to find out, well,
how do we know these galaxies are moving away? How do we know Haley's comets orbit and all sorts
of things that were going on at the time when I was a, you know, preteen? And so I had to teach
it myself. But once I learned it, I kind of felt like I had, you know, gotten the cheat code, you
know, just I started to see things in a different way. And I went through the portal. And at that
moment, I felt a great gift had been given to me. And it was given by myself. But in the sense that
I was given these gifts from the great people that came before me, including my hero, Gale,
Gale, who I want to talk about, because I have exciting news about a wonderful project that
I've been blessed to work on the last couple of years now, and it's come to fruition. But I feel
like we're doing a disservice. That's why I say, I kind of joke in the past, but I'm getting more
and more serious. I feel the scientists like me, especially like me, who get paid by the public,
have a moral obligation to teach the most exciting and most delightful, delicious developments
to the public for free. And they should do that as part of their as part of their job, quote,
and they'll say, I'm not good at it. And to which I'll say, oh, yeah, I forgot, when you were born,
you knew quantum field theory. Oh, no, no, I had to learn that it was very hard. And it's very
sophisticated. Okay, so you spend time on things you think are valuable, right, my fellow professors.
And it doesn't make me popular around the faculty club. But I do believe that, you know, especially,
but in every professor, every scientist is supported by the public at some level or another.
So, you know, we have a we have a huge we have a branding problem, we talked about the marketing
problem. But we also have kind of a an education and a self obligation that scientists don't feel,
we feel like we can sit around be the be the equation monkeys that you were talking about
before. It's not true, Brian. I just, I mean, disagree with this. Here's the basic problem,
because I've gone through this now. Let's imagine you want to understand what the W
particle is in the Higgs particle and why this matters, right? So there's some safe thing that
everyone can say, and then you can try to actually be real, and then get attacked. So I don't like
being attacked. It's, I've got idiots who follow me around who call up my colleagues and try to
alienate everyone for me. And my feeling about these people is, once you understand what the
cost is, you understand why nobody does it. But here's a cord, okay? This cord represents a function.
The height of the cord is a function. And the W particle is in part a level.
And that level could be horizontal. Or we could use the level to define what is horizontal.
Right? And so if I pick this, we all know that the derivative is the rise over run above that level.
But if I say, you know what, I have fiat power, and I'm going to decide that not this, but this
is level, then the cord that is tangent at that point is actually constant, even though it appears
to be rising. Okay? Now, I didn't use any big words. You're watching the con Eric showing off
Eric is doing this. In the comments, people are saying, Eric, please read a book about this.
Well, some, most of them, but my point is a tiny number of people who are terrible and who just
don't want good things to happen, don't want us to try and fumble in front of the public.
And they don't want us to succeed because then we get large follower counts. And it's like, well,
why is that guy the most, you know, followed mathematician on Twitter? It's like, that should
be me. Okay, maybe it should be you. I'll tell you the one thing, if you really have enemies,
wish them fame, I promise you, they want it. You don't want it. It's a great deal.
What we need to do is to be more courageous about saying, look, you're not going to understand
quantum field theory, but here's some things you can break out. If you can keep up with the
Kardashian, you can, you can keep up with quarks, you can keep up with hadrons and leptons. There
aren't so many, there aren't so many hadrons and leptons that you can't learn them all in an afternoon.
Right? They're probably about as many fundamental particles as there are Kardashians.
And the idea that we don't talk about this, we don't traffic in it, we're not excited about this.
Think about 90 years ago, this is the 90th year anniversary of the neutron. We didn't
know that there were neutrons. So my aunt, who is in her late 90s, grew up before there were
neutrons. So when she was a very little girl, nobody knew what a neutron was. Almost immediately
after the discovery of neutrons, we get chain reactions. We get atomic weapons and atomic power.
That discovery within living memory made the world a completely different place.
And watch out for what comes next. As an adaptation of the old saying, you may not be
interested in physics, but boy is physics going to be interested in it. And the idea that you're
not part of the conversation, which is who are we, what is this place and can we go and look at
the night sky and dream responsibly without wormholes and without sci-fi of visiting. If that
doesn't animate you, I guarantee you, you probably can't find a Jimi Hendrix guitar solo that moves
you either. And that brings up the other chords that you're capable of bringing out and show your
guitar. We're going to get that at the very end. So people in the chat room are saying things that
Kim Kardashian actually has a nice set of bosons. That's kind of cool to know. But Eric, if actually
listeners and viewers, 800 people watching right now, if you'd like Eric to write a book about this,
give a thumbs up to this video, and we'll see if we can create the groundswell necessary
to do this labor of love, which is writing a book. And I've actually just produced my third
book, and I can't believe it, three books in four years. This one I didn't write. So this one I had
a ghost writer, literally, and the name of the ghost writer. Are we on the verge of a major
announcement, which I don't even know? You don't know it. It is a major announcement, at least in
my life. I've been putting it out on Twitter here and there. But now I want to come clean and really
announce it for all time. And that is 390 years ago. So 300 years before the neutron. A man by
the name of Galileo Galilei wrote a book that got him in a tiny bit of hot water. He was kind of the
Weinstein of his day, not afraid to be provocative in some ways, take liberties and take a license.
And he wrote a book called The Dialogue. And this book, it was in Italian, it was called The
Dialogue. And it was in contradistinction to his first book called The Ciderius Nuncius. Ciderius
Nuncius, as you all know, is Latin for starry messenger, and he was allowed to keep publishing
in Latin because nobody spoke Latin. And so it wasn't a threat to the Catholic Church.
But after he used the spyglass, as he called it, the perspective tube, the telescope,
he found that he could not really get over the overwhelming evidence that was presented to him,
and he wanted to share it for the world with the notion that the universe is not centered on the
earth, it's centered on the sun. And so he was advancing Copernicus theory and other earlier
theories as well. And he wrote this wonderful book. It's called The Dialogue. It's actually a
trial log between three characters, one of whom is modeled after Galileo himself. And he gave
this character the name Salviati, the salvation. And then the other one was modeled after the
Pope, Pope Urban, and his arguments. And he put his arguments in the name of a character named
Simplicio, the simpleton. I love this because it shows that even the most biggest geniuses in
academia can have huge fatal flaws in their impolitic behavior. And then there's a third
character who's an intelligent layperson. His name is Sagredo. So I got the most famous two Italians
that I know, Carlo Revelli and Fabiola Gianatti, who you love for her use of comic sans. And so
we at the Higgs-Boson announcement. So we should say that one of them is a famous theorist. It's
attached to Luke quantum gravity. The other one is a big shot physicist with the CERN experiment.
Yeah, the director of CERN, which is where the LHC is located and responsible for discovery of
the Higgs-Boson. So we and along with Jim Gates, who's another friend of yours, a professor at
the Ford Foundation, professor at Brown University, where I will be returning. And that's stay tuned
for a top secret announcement at the end of this month. I have great respect for him and I've
enjoyed meeting him, but we are not close. So the five or six of us put together a audio book,
the first ever audio book by Galileo. So it exists and you can get it wherever books or audio
bowl lies, including Amazon, Audible, Google Play, wherever you like. I'll put a link to it in the
show notes below. And it was really a labor of love. It took us a year to record it, edit it,
and our home studios are around the world in Italy. Carlo was in Italy and in Aix and Provence,
or however you pronounce that. And then my friend Lucio Picharillo is the third character.
We recorded it. And so much of what comes through in this wonderful book is just beyond
my comprehension as a physicist. And actually, Frank Wilczek, I should say,
narrated the Nobel Prize winner 2004 Nobel Prize winner for Asymptotic Freedom.
He narrated the dedication by Albert Einstein, the forward to the book by Galileo, in which
he calls this book by Galileo the most important book ever written.
Einstein called Galileo's book.
Yes, Einstein called the dialogue the most, not just science book, but really the most important
book that had really ever been written, fiction, nonfiction, however you like to say it, including
his own work. So it was incredibly gratifying to have these people come together and do it.
And of course, this book is Italian, and it was written originally in Italian,
and we had to have it translated. And so anyway, I started off doing it really kind of as a kind
of a lark. But then I decided that there could be some spin off opportunities, not really just for
me, but I think maybe for physics, and I want to get your impression on. So one thing about this
book, they're extremely expensive to get your hands on a original copy of the dialogue, 390-year-old
books are very rare, obviously. So I decided I have a collector friend who allowed me to scan
pictures from it, and we're making NFTs of it. And at first, I thought it was kind of silly,
kind of crazy, why would you make an NFT of a physical product or whatever. But the more I
thought about it, like, what if we could do use blockchain technology and science, not just for
preserving or maybe maybe we could make a DAO, one of these organizations, these entities to buy
these books before they get lost or stolen or whatever, a couple hundred thousand dollars to
get an original one. But what if we could either custodize it or if we could use it to generate
resources for physics. So I want to run that idea by you, not specifically with my Galileo project,
but that's just kind of my testing the water with NFTs, but you can find that on my website,
BrianKating.com. But for a fraction of an ether, but what do you think about NFTs and science?
What do you think about the prospects for using this blockchain technology?
By any means necessary is where I am at the moment. Malcolm X, I think, was correct that
we needed to, there's certain things that are just so important that I almost don't care how
they happen. My hope is that NFTs don't backfire on us because the right thing to do is to make
very serious people very rich in autonomy so that they never think about, you know, look,
making somebody a low eight-digit millionaire, double-digit millionaire,
is probably sufficient to give them an extremely nice life. And there are tons of those
who do far less for us than the people who do our molecular biology, chemistry,
mathematics, and physics. So I do think that it's important if we're going to abandon all of our
culture, we're going to leak everything, we're going to turn the universities into cesspools,
et cetera, et cetera. We've got to get a few money to the people who built everything for us,
in my opinion. What I don't want to see is I don't want to see it backfiring.
I don't want to see a claim, oh, well, you guys have your NFTs, so you're good now.
It's like, no. We're scrambling because you screwed us over and you're idiots,
and it's time for you to be ethical and smart. That's a very hard conversation to have.
If we have to dramatize it by NFTs, so be it. But my feeling is, what if the NFT thing goes
in different directions? If it goes through to the moon, then it's a great move. What if it goes
in the toilet? And now we've sort of staked our credibility on getting involved in something that
has a Ponzi scheme built into it. I'm not saying it is a Ponzi scheme. There is Ponzi in NFT,
just as there is Genius in NFT. I also want to point out that the concept of digital scarcity,
if you go back to the original blockchain white paper of Satoshi, it's very, very clear that
it's propagating something according to a conservation law, that you hand me your public key,
and I've got my private key, and I've got this token that I'm laying claim to. I can propagate
my token to you in this infinite chain of custody by virtue of the fact that something is conserved.
Now, of course, you had to create new tokens out of the vacuum. But my belief is, is that one of
the things is we should be talking about this in terms of digital conservation laws and digital
physics, and we should be active. And I also think that having been playing with the crypto
community a little bit, at first, they dismiss everybody because they think you come in from
outside and you don't care about anything. You just want to tell people things. But we do know
that there's a lot of homology between Bitcoin and gauge theory,
conservation principles. Conservation principles have to do with symmetry. I am sure that if you
and I got roaring drunk for two weeks with a whiteboard, we would come up with a symmetry principle
for Bitcoin using some version of a discretized nerder's theorem that took the conservation law
that allows us to propagate, you know, Satoshi's solution of the double spend problem
is probably worthy of some amazing science prize. It's just an ingenious idea. And it's hard to
understand what is the substrate of, is it the idea that the individual wallets, the public-private
key pairs, is it computers and nodes? Because the interesting thing is that it was engineered
so that nodes could go dark. And, you know, that's like taking a chunk of space time out of commission.
I think it's really important that physics get involved with NFTs, with conservation laws,
with digital physics, and actually contribute into the system to make it much more useful.
And while some in the crypto community will say, oh, they're just talking their book and
to a man with a hammer, everything looks like a nail, you know, to a man with a gauge theory,
everything looks like a conservation law. Just ignore those people. There are so many good people
in crypto who are interested in any interesting idea. We need to party with them. That's my thought.
So I want to ask you to look into your crystal ball, and maybe we'll do the the lightening
round as we like to do, Eric. Are we done with COVID? No. Explain.
My feeling about this is that probably COVID is much worse than we thought,
or that we understand, and that people who understood it were protecting us against something.
I don't know this to be true, but if I had to make a guess. The reason that China is so ferocious
about trying to stamp COVID out, is that I worry that they know something, that it's not a flu,
that it's a cumulative flu that destroys you, bout by bout. I don't know what this thing is,
and I think it's it's criminal that we're so far into this. And we have no idea why China is behaving
the way it's behaving, or why Fauci behaves the way he behaves, or Peter Dajik, or Ralph Barrick,
or any of these people. Somehow this COVID is taking place outside of science.
And it's, I'm worried that we don't understand what COVID is, and we don't know which wave is
going to is going to hurt and how bad it. I mean, no, I don't think so. I think that
we decided that we're done with it because Omicron was relatively mild. But what COVID becomes next,
I worry that certain people have much better understanding than you and I do, and that they
know why this is so dangerous. I'm worried that they the government lied twice for different reasons.
The first time I worry that they lied to protect what they were doing with
DITRA, the Defense Threat Reduction Agency. Why was it working with EcoHealth Alliance Wuhan Lab?
Why under kindly Dr. Fauci, who seems to have something to do with a weapons portfolio,
getting around a couple of treaties that we signed and ratified in the 70s. I have no idea.
But I think that that was a self-protective lying. And then I think that there may have been public
spirited lying saying if we could have told you what it is that we created in this cauldron,
we happen to have some inside information about this furan cleavage site and the potential to
attack T cells and the degradation and why this binds to so many different organs and can cross
the blood brain. I'm worried that they know that this is a much worse disease than it appears
and that we're going to find out over time why they were so draconian because it does look like
that they wildly overreacted, not to say that people didn't die, not to say that this wasn't
serious, but to shut down the world economy to the extent that they did clearly risked war
at some level. It wasn't that it was free. And so I'm very worried that we don't really understand
what COVID is and that Omicron seemed kind of relatively mild, but just wait something
that's going to be wave after wave. And we're going to learn over time what this thing really is.
Do you see the midterm elections coming off without a hitch? Do you think it'll be a nice,
smooth orderly? I don't want to say transition to power. I don't want to assume what direction
the elections are going to go. You think it's going to be a nice, smooth election of ever?
You're asking one of the middle children what to do about crazy mommy and crazy daddy and my
feeling is that dad should go off into his meth den and mom should move out of the house with
her various lovers and the same people who were left should try to get back to the United States
of America. I don't know how to do this. I view the Republican and Democratic parties as being
dead-enders. Again, it's the Thelma and Louise problem. Do you decide that Thelma is better than
Louise if Louise takes longer to hit the ground by a nanosecond? I don't know. I view, I'm so,
you know what I've become? I've become a tensionist. It's like you've got bloods and
crypts running your neighborhood and you don't want to go blood or crypt. You just want them to
fight each other enough so that the rest of you can go to work, go to school, and buy some groceries
without being terrorized. More upbeat note. Are we headed for an U.S. involvement on the ground
in the Ukraine? Next question. Are you excited about any recent discoveries in physics? We talked
about the W Boson mass discrepancy. By the way, it's not that the mass itself is so much higher.
It's that the precision is so with tension with the standard model. Not that you said that,
but there are people in the chatroom wondering, is it eight times too high, five sigma? No,
it's higher. The bounds on this thing are radically, radically tightened up. This is a new data,
this old data, new analysis. It should be taken with some degree of caution. But to that end,
people have been speculating about the role of fifth forces and all sorts of things ranging from
G-2 discrepancy, the magnetic moment of the muon, etc. There are a lot of tensions. I always say
physicists need a psychologist. I think we've got so much tension on our minds. Where do you think,
what's exciting you? If you were a young physicist or if you knew a young physicist
who's starting out, what would you advise her to do? What excites you most in physics?
A theorist? We should talk about an experimentalist and a theorist. I think we should talk about the
experimentalist first because I think one of the things that you've done is to emphasize that
constantly focusing on the lead singer. We're always talking about Mick Jagger and Keith Richards
holding it down and making the thing awesome. Let's talk evenly about them. What should a
young experimentalist do? My feeling about that is you should figure out where there might be money
and where there might be new tools. I would be thinking a lot about high precision experiments.
I would be thinking a lot about gravitational waves because that's still relatively new. I would
be thinking a great deal about which of these hints beyond the standard model physics
might be most promising. How would I go about the G-2 anomaly or the W anomaly or any of the
other anomalies? What are the tools? The interstitial thing, as you were saying, in some sense,
new analysis of old data is new data of a kind because we have to process the original raw
data. It's never pristinely coming from the universe itself directly. What am I super excited
about? I'm super excited about getting back to the big questions. We traded all of our big questions
for can you quantize gravity, which assumes that gravity wants to be quantized the way
everything else wanted to be quantized. I'm tired of talking about white supremacy, but quantum
supremacy, we can call it quantum maximalism. It's sort of like dealing with Bitcoin maximalists.
The people with the laser eyes are telling you quantize gravity rather than make the quantum
more geometric because gravity has always been geometric since Einstein. What I'm super excited
about in mass is looking at the different ways that mass can be generated inside of the models.
Let's come up with three separate ways that you can generate mass. One way is that you could have
more things to differentiate. If a piece of a derivative gains mass by differentiating something
like a Higgs field, maybe there are multiple Higgs fields and the more mass somehow comes out of a
richer Higgs sector. That's one of the things that might be interesting. There's a very funny
result from dimension three. It's peculiar to dimension three called topological mass that was
pioneered by Roman, Jacob and others. That says that if you have a Yang-Mills term, so forgive me,
if you have a term that looks like this at the top of the cup with the double F's,
and then you add another term that looks a little bit more like a matter equation. It's only got one
derivative rather than two, sort of like the Dirac equation. It's called the Churn-Simon's term.
In dimension three, that gives you a new way to generate mass that's not available elsewhere.
Then there's another way of generating mass, which is seemingly verboten, which is to put in a direct
mass term for something like the W particle. Rather than a soft mass term, which gains the
appearance of mass through an interaction. I'll stop using this mug. I believe that in GU there
are ways to generate mass directly rather than indirectly that don't violate gauge conservation.
There are three mass mechanism channels that I'm looking at in GU relative to the discovery of
the W particle. This is something that I was excited about before, but I don't know. What are
you supposed to say? If everything is working fine, it was an embarrassment that there were these
extra terms. It's there in the draft. You can see where the mass is generated, but I don't think
actually I put in the Yang-Millsian part to the draft because of having something to do with the
Higgs sector, which I'm very excited about. The prospect for generating mass in novel ways,
I think, I expect to be one of the most exciting things to be coming out.
Well, on that note, my friend, I want to wish everybody celebrating out there.
Wait, wait, there was a guitar question. Oh yeah, a guitar question. So you made a guitar question.
Is the guitar hero dead? It's an interesting puzzle. We just had this dinner where I was
invited by a guy named Pliny. Yeah, talk about this picture. This guy tattooed everywhere except
for maybe the whites of his eyes. You're talking about Tim Henson. Oh yeah. Tim Henson is,
I don't even know how to describe what kind of a wild guitarist he is, but look up Polyphia Goat
for the most famous thing that he did. I give the example. It's sort of like Havana Unana,
you know, but imagine that you had or like smooth. It's got this kind of a Latin
rhythm and feel of flow. But imagine that somebody was juggling a Faberge egg, a running chainsaw,
and a nuclear weapon. And like, it was just incredibly difficult to imagine the different
things that they had to do when they were catching each one of these things. Tim is mixing up all
sorts of ingenious, I just love this guy, ingenious ways of taking and deconstructing and
reconstructing. I want to emphasize reconstructing. Things that our brains and ears want to hear
and are used to hearing, but need to be made fresh and new. So I think that Tim is one of the most
exciting guitarists out there. But I want to just, I want to flog a bunch of names very quickly,
people who are exciting me. Pliny's exciting me. Rick Beato is doing amazing things on his channel.
We are being treated to Mike Dawes and Tommy Immanuel touring the country. Mike Isengur of
Incubus. John Mayer is one of the most unbelievable pedagogues out there. So he's not only playing
his heart out with the blues, with the level of people like Joe Bonamassa and other people in
that idiom guy named Kingfish and Eric Gales and Josh Smith. I'm just naming a bunch of people who,
if you're not, if you want to get excited again about guitar, listen to these people
as well as get excited about the gear. What's going on in gear? The folks at Positive Grid just
sent me a tiny amp that is effectively your charge. You know, it's a little cube, this big,
and I've got the world's greatest amplifier simulated inside of this tiny little thing.
What's going on at Neural DSP and their ability to simulate and capture instruments,
and then you can capture your own amplifier and digitize it.
So Doug Castro is doing amazing things. The people at High Vibe Acoustic Guitar are blowing my mind
by putting reverb echo inside a classical instrument effectively, or a wood instrument.
This is out of France. And what they're doing is turning our, they're blurring the line between
an electric and acoustic guitar. So you can have distortion on an acoustic guitar because
it takes the signal in and then it transforms it and then it uses the vibrating wood, which is where
we hear most of the sound. It's not from the strings, it's from the wood. That stuff is being
vibrated by these little, I forget, actuators or whatever they could call them. I think guitar is
incredibly exciting right now, and I think that what we're missing is we're missing spontaneity
and the blues and whatever it is that caused every show to be wildly different. We have too many
people practicing very, very carefully. And I'll just shout out Tosin Abasi and Misha Mansour,
and I'm going to have more to say about this. Got it. Well, Eric, can't thank you enough.
People are asking you to break out a guitar, but I didn't ask you to plan that out. So unless you
happen to have a little strat nearby, we'll have to do that next time. And people are asking us to
go deep into the mug. So I think what we should do next time is explore the mug in some detail. So
on this channel. I would love to do that. But I would like to get some video aids, and the two
of us get excited about letting people know here's the recipe for the universe so that maybe not
everybody becomes a quantum field theorist instantly. But this is the greatest show on earth.
There's nothing more interesting than this. And you shouldn't get frozen out of it just because
you didn't math didn't agree with you in high school. So that's what I have to say.
That's right. So we tied in guitar strings and string theory. So Eric, we do have facilities
for that. We have an enormous green screen glass whiteboard down here at UC San Diego,
where you're always welcome. You know where your office is and Japanese whiskey. We have Japanese
whiskey. We have Cuban cigars. We have giant mushrooms. And we have assorted accoutrements
to go along with that. I want to notify people next week, there's going to be a big press release
coming from the event horizon telescope, headed by my friend chef Doleman at Harvard Center for
Astrophysics. And they're making an announcement involving a black hole in the Milky Way Galaxy.
Now, I don't know about you, but I have a feeling it has to do with the ginormous six million solar
mass at the center of black hole, the black hole, the black hole unless they've discovered another
black hole. And that would be almost you don't know what this announcement is. Are you teasing us?
Do you actually know announcement of a press conference coming on Thursday next week, the 12th
of May? I have a video queued up. I've done an interview. I don't know. I have my very strong
suspicions. And so I will have a video out that day about the results on this channel. So I hope
people will subscribe. I do a lot of introductory kind of physics videos, but I do a lot of advanced
physics and take the experimentalist tack. As Eric said, I love to go deep dive. I love my
theorist friends. My best friends are theorists, including Eric and Stefan. Would you want your
daughter to marry one? I would allow one of them. But in the same token. Experimentalists need some
love, too. The unsung exterminators of all theories in the universe. So for now, and I wish you all
a fruitful Cinco de Mayo. We're going to go out drinking next time we're together, some tequila,
and we'll have to avoid the anomalous worms. So I want to wish everybody that and tune in next
time to the Into the Impossible podcast with your fearful host, Dr. Brian Keating, and his
friendly friend, Eric. You're looking wonderful. Can't wait to we're in person and all seriousness.
Miss you, buddy. Been too long. All right, brother. Best to everybody. And I'll talk to you soon. Bye.
Thanks, friend.
