Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.
A legendary figure in my life, in physics, in cosmology, in philosophy, in mathematics,
and that is Professor Lee Smolin joining us from the Perimeter Institute, our neighbor
to the north.
Lee Smolin, how are you today, my friend?
I'm very well, thank you, and thank you very much for the kind words and the invitation.
Lee, you've made fundamental contributions in many different aspects of cosmology, of physics,
philosophy, but what I first wanted to turn to is the influence that you had on me as a
younger physicist, as a beginning professor back in 2006, when you're really a pockle book called
The Trouble with Physics came out.
This book influenced me and a whole generation of physicists, both theoreticians and experimentalists
like myself, and there are very few books that in physics that are relevant 14, 15, 16,
four years, three years, two years after they're written, let alone 15 years after.
And in this book, which I reread, re-listened to recently in preparation for this interview,
I noted that you were talking about the stagnation in physics in the previous 25 years.
So if I add, I'm not as good at math as you are, but if I add 25 to 15, I get 40.
Wow, I just do.
Do you still stand by that, or do you still observe that same stagnation, to some extent,
in physics, at least in theoretical physics? Obviously, experimental physics is completely
different.
There are certainly areas which are doing very well. There are areas of quantum materials where
the theory is really interesting, and I love thinking about it.
I think it's still true that we have not made a fundamental discovery experimentally,
that we explained theoretically, or theoretically posited something
that was discovered experimentally.
And we still don't know the why questions about the standing model.
Why though? There are now something like 30 parameters, including now that the neutrino
has mass, including the masses and the mixing angles of the neutrino.
And we have no explanation for what the values of those dimensions are,
nor for the strength of the gravitational constant, nor for the dark energy or the cosmological
constant. And I went into physics to understand why the universe was the way it is.
And there's lots about that we can get into. The universe is not just some random set of
numbers out there. The universe is enormously structured and organized and self-organized,
and that seems to be at least partly due to those constants being in certain narrow windows,
where there are lots of chemical and nuclear reactions that can take place.
So I think I stand by that. We have ideas about quantum gravity, and we have more ideas than
we did 15 years ago. None of them have some of them make experimental predictions,
but none of those predictions have enough to help. There's always the default, as you would know,
we've looked for the rent symmetry breaking at the Planck scale and around the Planck scale,
using astrophysical experiments. And the evidence is that it's not there. And there's a number of
anomalies that we've looked for, and they're not there. So it's a very frustrating period.
When we look at alternatives to string theory, which has become and still remains a dominant
paradigm, I've had conversations with Carla Revelli, who's become a dear friend. And actually,
we are collaborating together. And he is another person, I thank you for putting me
in touch with many years ago. And we are collaborating on the first ever audio book
version of Galileo Galilei's dialogue on two chief world systems. Yeah, it's going to be amazing
with another Italian physicist, along with Jim Gates reading a foreword from Galileo,
Fabiola Gianate, and others. Stay tuned for more information about that. You can get more if you
subscribe to my newsletter at bryankeating.com. But I want to turn our attention to some surprising
developments that I had talking with a string theory proponent. And that was Michio Kaku,
who came on my podcast recently in promotion of his new book, The God Equation, which he claims,
you know, string theory is responsible for a series of successes, not stagnations, even even
such things like the G minus two anomaly and the LHC beauty experiment anomaly, that these
things are hints, tantalizing hints of the efficacy of string theory. And I pushed back, Lee, you
know, I'm only a simple experimentalist, I said, but I said, to my knowledge, and you, Lee, can
correct me if I'm wrong. Nobody looked at string theory and said, hmm, let's predict this correction
to the G minus two from string theory. And he pushed back on me and said, well, nobody did that
from loop quantum gravity, because loop quantum gravity is so simplistic, it doesn't even have
fermions in it. And I said, because I'm just a fool, I don't, I didn't know how to answer him,
you know, and then we say in Judaism know how to answer a heretic. So I didn't know how to
answer him. How would you have answered him, Michio Kaku, when he says loop quantum gravity,
which you are one of its foremost exponents, along with Abbas, Abe Ashdekar, and Carlo and
others. But Lee, how should I have answered him? I'm sorry, I let you down, but how should I have
answered him? No, the way to end there, first of all, loop quantum gravity is a method. It's not,
in my understanding, a theory. It's a method of studying systems whose forces are described by
gauge fields. And we can talk about what that means, like the standard model of general relativity.
And that method applied to general relativity yields some very interesting descriptions of what
the geometry of the world might be on very small scales. That is 10 to the minus 30 something of
a centimeter. That method can be applied to theories with fermions. And there are,
then, fermions behave like fermions. So there's no problem including fermions. There's no problem
coupling to gauge fields and coupling to the scalar and the fermions of the standard model.
There is a very interesting issue about chirality, which I know is an issue in cosmology and
astronomy that we've worked on a lot and thought about. So we have some issues about chirality,
which I'm happy to admit. My feeling, and I hope I can say this without sounding egotistical or
something. The people you mentioned, Abai and Carlo and I, are thought of often as the founders
of the quantum gravity, the inventors. But let's break, if it's interesting, let's break that down.
Abai brought into being an approach to general relativity based on seeing the
geometry of space and time like a gauge theory. And I can tell you what that means.
It means we care more about measuring how things like fingers or spins move around when you move
around space. That's called the connection. The connection tells things. And my first role,
I guess I had many, but my first role was that there was a whole bunch of beautiful ideas and
technology, theoretical technology, that had been developed about QCD, mainly by a Russian school,
Sasha Pavlikov, Gribov, McDowell. And there were also some Americans, principally, Ken Wilson.
And they had a beautiful picture in which, well, do you know, or do your listeners know, that if you
pass a magnetic field through a superconductor, it becomes discreet. There's a unit of magnetic
flux that that flux line will take on in this organization. And their hypothesis going,
well, it was also due to Holger Nielsen and a number of other people, was that in QCD, which is
sort of like a complicated version of electromagnetism with three photons, the electric field flux
would be quantized and discreet. And there was a picture of strings made out of that flux
holding forks together. And I basically stole that. I mean, it's legitimate. That's what we're
doing science. All that picture and technology and said, what if instead of QCD, I plug in the
bias theory about seeing gravity and connection here and use all those beautiful ideas and tools
that I probably call them Ken Wilson. And that was, that was, I got lucky, in some sense, because
where and when I went to graduate school, it was immersed in that those ideas and those
technologies. And I was the first to try to apply them to quantum gravity. And I had a picture in
my head of loops and areas being quantized and so forth. And that picture with a lot of input
from other people became quantum gravity. And particularly, Carlos brought a very important
picture of how to think of the quantum mechanics of all that. But now, but now it's, that was the
middle 80s, I want to count, that's a long time ago. I love quantum gravity. It's been a family.
It's been an adventure of friends. But it has problems too. And I'm happy to talk about them.
I'm not, I would not think of myself as a proponent in the sense of somebody who ignores
the issues. I think there are issues. And when I set up a research center, perimeter,
I used a philosophy, which is part of the book you want to talk about the trouble with physics,
which I gained from the philosopher Paul Farahman, which was to get good people from
diverse points of view, and don't privilege one point of view just because I have a legacy
with that theory, get good people who do you think of quantum gravity from several points of view,
and have it and have the conflict, which is what the trouble with physics was about.
Right. So there are people in the loop on gravity world who think that I abandoned them,
and there are people in the rest of the world who think that I'm a loop on gravity guy. And I'm neither.
I really love the way you say that. And, you know, when I think about things, I often wonder,
you know, are we, are we putting the gut before the toe or the toe before the gut? And by that,
I mean, you know, we don't have a good grand unified theory yet, in my opinion, or my understanding.
And yet people want to look for a theory of everything. First of all, I think a theory of
everything. And I think Michio does a disservice, to be honest, by saying that this one inch long
God equation will describe everything. It'll give you soup and nuts, and it'll give you aliens.
It'll give you avatars traveling at the speed of light cruising around the galaxy. It will give
be, you know, and it will win you a Nobel Prize that Einstein couldn't win. And you know how I
feel about the Nobel Prize is hagiographic, you know, kind of idol worship, onanistic idol worship.
Nevertheless, it's important to consider what is the importance of a theory of everything.
And I want to ask you, are we putting the toe before the gut? Should we, in your opinion,
spend more time thinking about how do we unify the theories that, you know, we have
very strong evidence to believe that are unified? I personally don't believe
that we should demand that gravity be unified with quantum mechanics. I hope we can get into that.
But what do you think? Should we focus first on guts before we get to toes?
Well, long before that, let's open up, can we open up to the whole universe?
Yeah. It seems to me there are two kinds of phenomena. They're loosely speaking, they're
phenomena. I mean, we believe you and I and most of our colleagues believe some version of the
laws are pretty stable and they're fundamental laws and we're trying to find out what they are
and they're pretty stable. I actually probably disagree with you or at least with most of our
colleagues. I think those laws are changeable and I think they do change and I think they have
change and I think that because that's the only way we're going to explain the question of why they
have the form that they have. So I'm on the lookout for principles by which the laws can change.
That is, I'm no longer hopeful that there's going to be some magic formula that's going to tell us
what the values of all those planets are. I think it evolved that way because there are consequences
for the natural world, for the physical world, which we can come to. Thinking about it that way,
you have to invoke functional explanation. A functional explanation is an explanation of
something where you use some consequence of what it does in the world. So there are
20 to the thousand different kinds of proteins, roughly. That's 20 different amino acids in
a thousand places. It's a typical protein. That's a whole lot more than the kinds of proteins that
exist on the biosphere that are coded for in the DNA or the RNA of the various creatures,
which are like a million. So any protein that exists is lucky because most of the other
alternate proteins don't exist. And why did it get lucky? It got lucky because, for example,
my code for hemoglobin, which is a fundamental way to move oxygen around within a creature,
and which there's a lot of, along with various variants and so forth. So if you ask why does
hemoglobin exist, sure, you've got to be able to analyze and see the laws of electromagnetism and
so forth, acting inside that crazy, wound-up, folded-up thing. But there's also functional
explanations, and both of them have got to work. And I think that's going to apply to everything.
And I also don't take the mathematics as dogma, as religion, if I can use that. I was at one time,
but I am no longer looking for that mathematical object, which has all the truth of that nature,
to somehow transcend our existence and give our life meaning. I think we give life meaning through
friendship and families and what we believe in and who we love. And the universe kind of thus
is doing the same thing. So I'm not, many of our colleagues are looking for something transcendent
when they want to know what the laws are, what the standard model, what the two unified theories are.
I would love to see some explanation of the structure of the standard model. I've been attending,
we have weird conferences, of course, as you know, some conferences are every week or somewhere every
month. So there's a conference about an idea that used to get you kicked out of the archive,
but it turns out to be solid enough that there are a lot of interesting people doing it,
which is that the standard model has something to do with the number system of actonians.
And that would be cool. But I'd certainly like some explanation. Where does the SU-3,
of course, SU-2 come from? Where does the three generations come from? We all want
some kind of answer to that. And my, I'm willing, I'm in fact, eager to have a functional kind of
example. For example, this might come up later. If you want the universe to reproduce itself
through black holes, which is an idea that I had, you want the upper mass limit of neutron stars
to be as low as possible so that as many supernovas
lead to black holes as opposed to neutron stars. And from that, you can get a prediction that the
heaviest stable neutron star can't be more than two solar masses. And there's, and the reason
is some complicated thing about the strange core, if I won't bore you with, unless you really, really
want. But the thing is that recently, there's better and better evidence that there are some
neutron stars up in 20, I'm sorry, two solar masses, 2.2, and so forth. And if those hold up,
then my theory or my hypothesis is falsified. And I will proudly say so.
Yeah, you talk about that a lot in the book. You talk about, you know, different gamma-ray
burst signatures that could be falsified as of 2006. You have other tests that could be,
you describe them as very exciting variation in the fine structure constant. You point out
as very exciting. And I've, I know that you have extreme, you know, integrity in all ways,
not only personally, but because you, you know, because I know you personally,
but also because publicly, you've talked about how this has gone away, that there's no,
you've stated that you've kind of abandoned that, that hope. And you admit that it was a hope back
in the early part of the, of the, you know, of the 2000s, that these fine structure constant could
be revelatory of new physics, but now it's ruled out. And you accept that and you move on.
I wonder, you know, when I first started hearing about you from my, from my best friend, Stefan,
you know, I always thought that, you know, when I first learned about you, it was like
what Stephen Hawking reputedly said about Jacob Zeldovich. When he met him, he thought that Zeldovich
was like Burbaki, like a collective, a set of people. And I thought that about Smolin. I thought
Smolin was like Satoshi Nakamura or whoever that guy is who supposedly or collective came up with
Bitcoin or blockchain. I want to ask you, you put out three or four papers recently. And some of
them with Stefan, some of them solo papers, this voluminous effort, I think you're writing a paper
right now. I'd like to see your hands, Lee, could you put your hands up so I know that you're not
typing out a paper as we're having this lovely interview. But I want to ask you, what would
a theory of everything look like? Would it be the semi classical Wheeler DeWitt equation that would
be fundamental? Would it be the Schrodinger equation? If gravity is fundamental, some say the
Schrodinger equation. If gravity is emergent, some say it's the latter. Your recent paper is so
fascinating. You have one called the quantum mechanics of the present written with Clea Verde.
And the other one, the symbiotic emergence of space and the quantum. That one is a solo paper.
Let's talk about that firstly, please. What does it mean for space to become emergent? What does
that even mean? What it means is that the organization of space, of things moving in space,
is not fundamental. It's real, for sure. Of course, we see it. But it's not fundamental. And what I
mean is that I'm looking, like many of our colleagues, for a formulation of
theory that is a story about the world and how it's made, that will explain the mysteries of
quantum mechanics. So I'm a little ambitious, for better or worse, to explain the mysteries of
quantum mechanics and resolve those issues like the measurement problem. I want that same structure
to explain general relativity. So to be the quantum theory of gravity, although the fundamental
theory that it's coming from is neither quantum mechanics nor gravity. And after a lot of thinking
and talking, here I've been influenced by a number of people. And it's always important.
I mean, we never do these things alone. So Fortuni Marco Pulo was the first person who said to me,
space does not exist so time can. Space is not in the fundamental list of things that are there
all the way down. But time is. For example, space time is in some fundamental way a different thing
than matter. And if space time is an emergent concept, then it's not really clear what you
would mean by unification. Surely it would not be the unification of matter with gravity.
It might be a way to get gravity out of matter that would be a different sort of,
I guess you could think of it as a unification scenario, but it's a bit different than what
people are considering now. I see. And Roberto Manguibara Hunger, who is a Brazilian philosopher,
was interested in the same kind of things. And we wrote it was hard, but we wrote a very interesting
book together. That book is called The Singular Universe. And the basic idea of that theory,
that theory is now called the causal theory of views. And the basic idea of that theory comes from
Leibniz, the philosopher. And it's that, and it's going to sound a little weird, it's that
the universe is composed of partial views of itself. So what I mean is that at every event,
and this is a theory of events and the causes between events. There might be two events here,
which in some sense are the cause of a third event, which is a cause of the fourth event.
And each event has a past, has the things that led up to causing it. And I call that the view,
that's far from Leibniz. And I take the set of all the views from all the events in the universe
to be what the universe is. And then I apply laws to those. And the main idea
there came from work in common with Julian Barber a long time ago,
which is to measure the complexity of some complex system, whether it's a city or an economy,
or a piece of quantum space and time, by making the views from different events or different
situations, may that be as diverse as possible. And you can write down a numerical measure of that.
And that we take as the quantity that gets extremized to give you the equations of motion.
Physics is often organized in such a way that physics and quantity that gets
extremized and minimized. That's called the action. And so the theory has an action which is related
to what we call between the variety. Now, the one last thing I have to say about how this goes
together is that if you don't have space, you don't have distances between things,
you don't have functions, you don't have fields, you don't have derivatives. So how are you going
to write down dynamics? All the things that we'll go into are writing down some law of a field or
a particle, involve distances or derivatives or fields. And so we don't have any of that,
but what we can do is compare the views. We can ask, you look around where you are,
I look around where I am, and that there's a mathematical language to record that view,
and then they can be compared. And so the whole dynamics that I developed is based on those
comparisons. So that's the basic idea. Then what happens in that paper with, unfortunately,
too many technicalities and so forth, is I derive quantum mechanics from those ideas.
Interesting. Now, you mentioned Julian Barbour, he's an upcoming guest
on the Into the Impossible podcast, and I asked him to ask a question of you,
and then he responded, and then I will ask you to ask him a question that I will convey through
me to him. So his question to you, if you're willing to play this game of time traveling
questions, this is a very inefficient way to use the internet, Lee. I hope you appreciate how
time inefficient this is to talk about time in this way. But anyway, Lee, Julian asks you with
warm regards he sends to you. If time is fundamentally, what is it like? What are its attributes?
Very good. So what we say, and this is in the work we did with Marina Cortes,
developing a prior structure to the theory that was based on slamming, what we say is that
the business of time, so I'm not going to define, I'm going to duck it, I'm going to say
that the business or the work of time is to continually make new events which make up,
so what I want to say, what time is like, is what we experience. That is, we experience the
momentary present and the passage of those moments when new things happen and new things happen.
And that's the business or the mechanism of time to keep choosing what new things get made
and what they, and therefore that chooses what their costs look like.
I talked to Frank Wilczak about time and his basic thesis is that time and entropy are
somehow fundamentally linked. Carlo feels this way as well that the Clausius equation of delta S
is greater than or equal to zero, entropy is, and that things change and that Frank then supplements
that equation with the fact that a clock measures something that is changing and time is what we
call the change in something. So it's sort of a tautology, but it's almost the best that we can
do. So clocks measure time and time is what measure, clocks measure changing time and time is what
clocks measure. And so, but to my opinion, because microscopic physics is reversible, except at the
moment of quantum measurement, it may be just like with the twin paradox, and you know I have twins
and I get to do experiments on twins all the time, something I share with a lot of physicists, David
Kaiser, Sabina Hossenfelder, Peter Diamandes, we all have twins, some of us have Boy Girl twins,
and that makes it even more fun. But anyway, you know, the kind of the classic twin paradox
which you talk about in your book on Einstein and the unfinished revolution at some level,
the question is, you know, two twins set out, one sets out at close to the speed of light,
turns around after a rocket voyage and comes back to Earth, the other twin gets, you know,
seems to have aged a lot on Earth, even though they seem to be moving at relativistic speeds,
each one experiences the other one moving relativistically, but it's the one that undergoes
the acceleration when he or she turns back and comes back. So at that moment, that instantaneous
moment, it's almost as if all the acceleration of time takes place. And I wonder, is that not
possible on the micro scale? In other words, yes, the microscopic laws of physics are immutable,
they're time irreversible, until you do a measurement. And then that measurement, that's
where all the time, you know, directionality of time takes place. Here's how I've been thinking
about it lately. And which is some of which comes from that last book, Einstein's Unfinished
Revolution. And some of it is recent work with another collaborator, he was clearly over a day.
And, and it was basically her idea. So she came to me and she said, so I start, I think,
I worry about the distinction between the past, the present, and the future. And so,
um, my friend Carlo and lots of people believe that there's no objective distinction between
the past, present, and the future. And I do, I think that the time is now, now is real. And,
and that that matters to stating the laws of physics. And the question is certainly the
present is real, but is the past is the future? And how does this relate to quantum mechanics?
So clearly his idea, which turned out when we looked into it, to, to have quite a legacy,
which I'll come to, is that the future realm is indefinite. And everything that from quantum
physics is indefinite, that is a part of the superposition, click go this way, click go this way,
is part of the future. That is the wave function, the quantum state is a description of the future.
And what the present is, is the resolution of indefiniteness and ambiguities to definiteness is,
because the past is always only definite. And I was really interested in that and shook up by that.
And then I started to ask some friends, and it turns out that Heisenberg said this
quite precisely. It's not, it's hard to find, but Heisenberg said this in Schrodinger and Freeman
Dyson, quite at length in one quote you can find, which of course we put in the paper.
So that's, and this is a new idea, so it could be wrong, but I'm kind of, I find it very interesting,
this idea that, that what the present is, is the resolution of indefiniteness and ambiguities.
And so let's play, let's think about that more.
Yeah, I wonder if, you know, some of the most interesting things in physics come about because
of anomalies. And those anomalies are really the things that make you sit up and notice, as you
know, I'm a pilot and, you know, an anomaly in the cockpit is a flashing red light, you know, and
you ignore that at your peril. And I think, you know, those are some of the greatest gifts that
physicists have. And one of the greatest gifts that we got was in the 1950s, when we noticed the
parody and chirality of nature was not a perfectly obeyed symmetry. But we do think, you know,
correct me if I'm wrong, that the combination of discrete symmetries, charge, parody, and time
reversal is respected. But I wonder, this is work you did with Joao Magaizio and others on
chiral gravitational waves in 2008 that had some startling predictions. But I remember one line
in particular that Stefan really drove home to me was that you make the claim that if the laws of
physics are unified, and if the electroweak sector, you know, violates parody, as we know it does,
then if gravity becomes unified with the electroweak sector, then it's almost unavoidable,
that gravity will have some chirality. And I guess this is characterized by this
Emiritese parameter, etc. Can you say more as you're thinking on that evolve? That was one of the
most, you know, kind of, you know, earth shattering bombshells that I ever heard, because it meant
that in my field, we might see bigger chiral anomalies in the cosmic microwave background that
might illuminate physics beyond the standard model indicative of Lorentz invariance violation,
which is more startling to me than inflation. Yeah, me too. I think I don't know if I have
anything new to say. I'm very grateful for your interest and other observers who have taken these
things seriously enough to really look for them. But let me, here's something which fascinates me.
Generalitity. And I'm not assuming that our listeners, your listeners are experts in physics,
but generalitity has a reputation of being difficult, partly because the Einstein equation
is really complicated. And it's a function of this thing, the metric that measures distances,
but you've got the inverse of the metric and the determinant of the metric in the square root,
the determinant of the metric. And it's a mess to compute with, and it's sure a mess to make
quite a mechanical. So what Abay used turned out, we didn't know that, we didn't know that at the
time, but a Polish physicist was a refugee to Mexico named Plobanski had discovered something
wonderful, which is that you can look at the Einstein equations from a kind of different
point of view, which is chiral, that is where you only focus on how the left-hand and neutrinos
are react to a gravitational wave, and not the right-hand and neutrinos. And if you do that,
you get equations which are just quadratic equations, period. There's no determinants,
there's no square roots, there's no inverses, it's just quadratic equations. And if something
were simpler than that, it would be linear, and then we get those linear or linear equations
we can solve. So it's as simple as it can get while still being non-trivial.
And loop quantum gravity, the reason why all those ideas worked is because Abay rediscovered
Plobanski's formulation. So now, so that makes me wonder, does nature know about this?
And so for example, Roger Penrose's great construction, I mean he's done so many great
things, but to grade it, in my opinion, is Twister theory, which has found a lot of use in particle
physics and string theory and quantum gravity, but of its own is a very radical idea. And Twister
theory has this chirality built into it. The left-handed gravitational waves are described in
a way that's different than the right-handed gravitational wave. Interesting. So that was
an earlier yes, and you do speak about that in the book, and also Roger's been a guest four times on
the show as well. And his 90th birthday is coming up, and I'm delighted to be asked to speak on
behalf of that wonderful occasion. And that'll be something to celebrate in August, I believe,
is his 90th birthday. It's quite amazing. And thinking about his late-grade colleague, Stephen
Hawking, who passed away three years ago, it's hard to believe. And this notion that he kind of
died without having unified quantum mechanics with gravity, I've been having this provocative
statement, Lee, and at the risk of insulting my mentor, Lee Smolin and friend, I don't know that
gravity has to be unified with quantum mechanics. I mean, after all, there are only two situations
to my knowledge at which the quantization of gravity, the failure of gravity to play nice
with quantum mechanics becomes important. And that's near a singularity in a black hole,
and near the origin of the universe, if indeed it began with a singularity, which Sir Roger,
as you know, does not believe it did, and Paul Steinhardt does not believe it did,
and many others do not believe it did. Neil Turok, your colleague, does not believe it did.
And so there's one very questionable scenario that could get ticked off, that we don't have to
worry about quantum gravity in that scenario. And a black hole once below the event horizon is
you know better than almost anybody else. We cannot observe the details, what happens in
the singularity inside the event horizon stays inside the event horizon. So why do we care? I
mean, would there be any signature of quantum gravity outside the event horizon? And that would
be the own, or are there other scenarios in addition to physics beyond the event horizon
that is relevant to the mandate that we must quantize gravity?
Very good. So I'm going to give you another reason. I mean, I'm very interested in the idea of quantum
gravity. I don't think there's an open and shut case that we shouldn't quantify. But here's something
I've been fascinated by since graduate school days. And in, I'll tell the background, in graduate
school days, I got interested in Einstein, I was always interested in Einstein. And I had a friend
who was a historian of physics, Amelia Michelle Cohn. And she made a proposal to me. She said,
why don't we read all of Einstein's papers from the beginning, at least the first 10 years or so.
And very few of them were in English except the three or four classes. But why don't we start
with his very first paper, which was on thermodynamics and light, and read with her
translator and read forward. And so we did that. And there was a thing that was very apparent
as we did that, which is that he was enormously interested in the consequences of applying
thermodynamic ideas to light. And therefore, he was very interested in the situation, which is
called the ultraviolet catastrophe, where if you make a box with conductors, and you must,
you must actually know how to do this. And you put some light, you have a little hole,
and you put some light in, and you close the hole, the light bounces around. It doesn't interact with
itself, it interacts with the walls where the conductors are, and it thermalizes itself. It
bounces, and bounces, and bounces, and bounces, and thermalizes itself. And then you open a little
hole, and you put a spectrograph there, and it comes out the black body spectrum.
And that was really interesting for Einstein, because the black body spectrum, without even
having the form of the spectrum, although he did actually, of course, this was after Planck, so he
knew Planck's guess. And it was obvious that classical physics couldn't explain the fall-off
at the high frequency, either the minus h bar omega over the temperature, basically.
And this was a reason why you had to quantize electromagnetism, was to prevent that
spectrum from just going out unstably to infinity. And so we read that in several different versions,
and I thought, I wonder if you could make gravity waves do that. That is, if you could make gravity
waves, put them in a box, and force them into a catastrophe, which you had to save by saying there
were gravitons. And then h bar omega, because the energy applied to gravity as well, to gravitational
waves as well. And you know what? You can't do it. You can't make the analog of conducting
planes, which reflect and keep confined gravitational waves. You can show,
and I managed, I'm not that good at this kind of stuff, but I managed a derailation of the
efficiency of reflection of gravitational waves off a wall made of any material. And as long as
the speed of sound of that material is less than the speed of light, and the thing is not a black hole
in the energy, the positivity of energy, the conditions are met, then you can show that the
efficiency is bounded way, way, way away from one. And the gravitational wave just sorters outside
the box. Never is forced to come to equilibrium. And you can even build on that and show that in
the history of the universe of gravitational waves, you'll never come to equilibrium. That is,
at any time since the Big Bang and the Big Bang picture, the mean free time of gravitational waves
is longer than the cosmic time. And you can show it in equality. So I think that's a little,
there's an interesting bit of physics that supports you.
Interesting. And if you look out at kind of other tests that one could devise, it's natural to kind
of look at, look for tests that could potentially be crisp or decisive tests, as there's a word for
this in Latin, you know, critical tests that could not, the theory could not survive otherwise,
but to pass this test. The bending of light by massive objects, the Eddington experiment is
often cited as such an example, even though many experimentalists doubt that it was really,
truly feasible in the technology back in 1919 to truly verify the level of precision that
Einstein achieved. But nevertheless, we won't get into that. People can read your book.
And Jim Gates's books and other books about Einstein, of which there are many. But I want to
turn to the other aspect, which kind of fascinates me and also dismayes me about string theory,
but about kind of all theories of everything. And our mutual friend, Max Tegmark, has written
about these, and that's really the multiverse. And this is quite disturbing in some ways,
especially not the least of which are the multiverses that Max speaks about,
you know, the kind of four levels of multiverses that can exist, including a multiverse in which,
you know, the laws of nature can vary from string vacuum to string vacuum. And this is part of
the fight I had with Michio Kaku. Of course, you know, he was a gentleman, even if I wasn't.
But the argument was, you know, I said to him, you know, you say it's not fair to test string
theory, because I have to tell you which of the 10 to the 500th or more vacua we live in. And he
said, that's just like solving Newton's equations. How many solutions are there in a Newton's equation?
I said, there's an infinite number of solutions to Newton's equation. How many solutions to
Maxwell's equation? There's an infinite number. What do you need to solve them? He asked me. I
said, boundary conditions, initial conditions. But I said, the situation seems hopeless in string
theory. In even more hopeless, maybe, than Max Tegmark would admit. And I think I've discovered
a fifth level of the multiverse, Lee, if you'll indulge me and forgive me. Because as I think
Rabbi used to say, the Nobel Prize should go to someone who doesn't discover a new particle
back in the 30s. But in this case, I think the Nobel Prize should go to someone who doesn't
discover a new multiverse. I'm worried that there could be a type of multiverse where not only the
laws of physics change, but the laws of logic change. In other words, why should it be that
Modus Tolens holds in some universe or two plus two equals four in another universe? And he claims,
no, no, no, that was a foolish question. But if there are 10 to the 500 different laws of physics,
why should there not be 10 to the 500 different laws of mathematics?
So first of all, of course, there are different, I don't know how many there are, but there are
different versions of set theory and logic and mathematics, depending on how you answer questions
like the continuum hypothesis and the exclusive middle. And there's a whole bunch of different
logics in different worlds of mathematics. And that I find that fascinating. Since I'm not
a Platonist, I don't believe I don't have to believe that they're real. And any of them are real.
But they're, they're, they're, they're structures by which we reason. And it's what you say is
interesting. And what I don't know if it's worrying, but it's interesting. And I could come back to
that because, because I would think a lot about mathematics and I worry about, especially since
I'm not a Platonist. Right. So I do want to talk about this, this third paper that you wrote,
co-author with Stefan and six other authors, Geron Lanier, Geron Lanier. Can you say something
about him? He's an interesting character. He's, his, his, his affiliation is listed as Microsoft
Research in Redmond, Washington. I once met him in Berkeley, California. Can you say something
about Geron? I know he's a friend of yours and Stefan's, but he's an interesting character. Is
he not? He's a very interesting person. And I, I feel very lucky to have him as a friend and we're,
we're very good friends. Geron is speaking about auto-didact, didactics. Geron is almost entirely
self-educated. He went to a few schools a few times. He is wonderfully imaginative,
wonderfully, he's really quick. He's, he's a great communicator. He's a great writer. He's one of the
few people I think of as, you know, this class of people who are endlessly original and have
endlessly important things to say. And he does have a lot that's very important to say, whether it's
about thinking about artificial intelligence or the role in the economy of the internet companies.
And so, and lots and lots of other things besides we were talking about yesterday
about a whole lot of these things. Yeah, yeah, go ahead. So here's how that came, came to be.
So first of all, I have been interested, as we mentioned, in the idea that the laws of physics
could change for a long time. And there was cosmological natural selection, if we discuss,
I had another approach or have another approach called the principle of precedence.
And Geron is interested in that idea. And over several, maybe even many years,
Geron and Stefan are also friends and they're both musicians. One thing, Geron plays an incredible
variety of musical instruments from all over the world. And there are so many stories to tell
that I'll skip doing that. I'll keep doing that now. Well, there's one, let me just bracket this.
This is the time Geron took Stefan and I to meet one that called me. And let me just use this.
Can you speak a little closer to the microphone? There's a time that Geron took Stefan and I to
meet one that called me. Oh, that's right. Which stands out in my as one of the very fortunate
experiences I've had. Geron has, Geron is, among other things, a computer scientist.
So we didn't even get to that. He is credited with inventing virtual reality.
And his position in Microsoft, I don't really understand it, but it seems to allow him complete
freedom to do whatever he wants and think about whatever he wants. But he's also involved clearly
in projects there. And so anyway, over years, he and Stefan and I talked about a variety of
different ideas. And I don't know where the key idea in the paper comes from. I try to think of it.
The key idea in the paper is that we can talk about the laws of nature
learning and learning the laws and finding the its way around those
vacuums that you're worried about to one that is somehow benefits the universe best.
And this sounds crazy. And what we're going to argue is the following.
There's a lot in that paper that's an 80 page paper about what learning is because we had to do
it because it couldn't find you anywhere. But let me skip that and say that people are interested
in these machine learning algorithms. And let's just give me that what they do is to learn.
They learn facial recognition, they learn pattern recognition, they learn bunches of other things.
And let's not get into the epistemology of what it means to say that one of those machines or
algorithms learn something. You just give it to me that they learn. And I'm going to take
your favorite candidate for the laws of nature as long as they're of the form of something like
general relativity and something like gauge fields and fermions and scanners.
And we're going to map that theory into the learning machines and machine learning algorithms.
And we discovered that map. I don't remember why we were looking for it.
But at some point it became clear that there was a map. And the map uses a technical result
which I knew and which has to do with a class of models called matrix models.
And that's just the technicality that was used. So we demonstrated that result.
And then we have thought about what devices you could make that could be mapped to the
laws of nature to investigate this idea. There were seven people on the paper. Everyone was essential.
And they range from a senior Microsoft computer scientist who was kind of
bringing in all of the knowledge about machine learning. Will Cunningham,
who's a very talented young theoretical physicist who unfortunately were losing
at the moment to the world of startups. And it was a lot of fun. It was really hard. I haven't
worked on anything. You work in collaborations all the time. And for me it was kind of a new
experience to work in a collaboration that much. And it really did work and it came together. But
it took a year. That's a full year meeting together three times a week.
That's great. And you don't know what's in the Cunningham floor. There's a whole bunch of stuff.
Yeah, I believe it. Yeah, so I'll try to get Geron and Stefan on the podcast at some point too.
Stefan's been on three or four times already, but I've never met, I've never had Geron on.
I'm going to have Nathan Mirwald on who was director of research at Microsoft for a while and is
kind of an autodidact. And maybe that'll segue to my final question for this interview. I hope
you'll give us the opportunity to talk more about physics and in the intervening month or so before
we can talk again about maybe we'll do a dedicated cosmology talk next time. You'll probably write
10 other papers and three books. But I do want to talk just once about, I see you as an autodidact.
You've written papers in economics. You've written papers in, as you say, set theory and physics and
cosmology. You've written six books to date. And speaking of learning, as we just did with
computer learning, do you think you can teach creativity, Lee? Can you teach someone to be
imaginative, to be creative? Is there a nature-nurture thing? You just have to be born with it.
That's a very good question. And I don't know. I certainly believed that it was teachable most
of my life. And I would hope that that's true, because being creative is a great thing. And I
would hope that everybody, however their life was organized, had access to that. And it
doesn't mean that you're good at it. I mean, I'm not a good musician. I got, unlike Stefan,
he is a good musician. I got good enough to play with the people who are really good. And then it
was like, okay, that's not my genre. But I still have a few guitars and still play them sometimes.
And I'm working with two people now that are unusual people to be working with. And they're
endlessly creative and smart. And I don't know where it comes from. I, you know, Jared, Stefan,
Thalia, so many people I've been fortunate enough to know, have their own ideas about everything.
They look at the world, the same world I look at. They read the same stuff. And they come up with
stuff just, it's like turning on a faucet. Stuff that's worth thinking about and worth listening to.
And I don't know, I don't know where that comes from. There are certainly cranes that you can't
teach it. And the, but I'm going to, I'm going to take a left turn on you. Here's what I think is
changeable. And, and I hope I don't sound like, I don't know, I mean, some moralistic
something. And people are going to look like he said that. But let me try it. I think character
matters enormously. And being in this crisis that we've been, I see it every day. And I think that
the ability to see clearly what's going on around you and take responsibility for it and think about
it. The ability to follow your own compass, to not care as fine and put it, whatever people think.
And I think, and I have a friend I've learned a lot from, St. Clair Simen, who's a sculptor,
who's a great sculptor. And so I'm going to leave it with a kind of quote of St. Clair.
St. Clair used to tell me that, that you get sort of into your twenties for free.
And if you're, if you're going to go on and become useful and really make a contribution
with what you do, it really starts to matter what your character is and how much you're willing to
be on the edge and take risks and question yourself. And by 50 and 60, it really, it really
shows. It really starts to show. He was probably 40 something. And I'm about 10 years younger than him.
And then I'll say something else. You don't have to keep this in the tape.
No, it's great. But this is, I'm saying this to you from him anyway. Unlike you,
we had children late and had to be and talked about it and thought about it.
And he had his daughter a few years before we had time. And he said to me,
you have no idea what you're giving to the world by having a child. You're un-murdering somebody.
And you're giving this to the much higher degree than I am. But I am certainly fully
involved. And it is a great thing to do. You know, that's, it's wonderful that you say that,
Lee. And actually I was going to close with this to give us some time between our next
conversation. But I did want to say that I once heard, you know, Sam Harris talking about,
you know, the impossibility of, you know, teleportation and, you know, time travel.
It's kind of this, this fantasy that human beings have. And I said, no, that's, that's actually
a lie. I didn't say it to him because, you know, he won't pick up the phone when I call him. But,
but anyway, I said, actually, there is such a thing as teleportation. It's just you can't
teleport yourself. You teleport your values, you teleport your ethics, you teleport your character
into the future. And it's called children. And it doesn't even have to be your biological
children, Lee. It's your ideological children. And I count myself. And I don't blame you. But
I count myself as kind of one of your ideological children. So, you know, I have a great, you know,
friend, you know, her name is Melanie Notkin. She's known as the savvy auntie. She can't have
children. She didn't have children, whatever. She has influenced thousands of millions of people,
even though she didn't have biological children. So I am blessed to have biological children.
But even if someone is not, you can act like a parent. You can communicate and thereby doing
teleport yourself into the future. And what else is there, Lee? That's time travel. And, and,
and you've done that for me and you've done that for millions of people. I just want to thank you
so much, Lee, for being, being such a great human being and being an influence on me even long before
you knew me. And, and again, you don't get any of the blame for anything bad I do with your good
influence. Whoa, Brian, that's the, thank you. I have no words. Thank you. Well, Lee, thank you
so much for going into the impossible. I hope you enjoyed this episode with Lee Smolen. If you did,
you'll definitely want to check out this episode with Lee and Eric Weinstein. You'll also want to
check out other theories of everything, including critics of string theory, just like Lee, featuring
Sabina Hassenfelder and Carlo Revelli. Click this playlist right here.
