In 2001, 20 years ago this year,
my colleagues Andrew Lang, Jamie Bock,
and Bill Holtzampfel came up with a proposal
for what would later be called Bicep.
Bicep has morphed over the years into Bicep 2,
Bicep 3, and now Bicep Array.
It's a stunning series of experiments
that unfortunately I'm no longer involved with
if you've read my previous book,
A Farewell to Arms.
No, losing the Nobel Prize.
I described how I came to both part ways with
and also be inspired by the continuing developments
with the Bicep team.
Recently, an analysis was published
in physical review letters,
one of the most prestigious journals in all of physics,
that has the most stringent limits to date
on cosmic inflation and the observable signature
that might or might not be present
from an early inflationary expansion of the universe.
While I'm not involved with the project anymore,
I'm fascinated by it and I wanna explain to you
the significance of these results
and where will cosmologists go from here.
Come along into the impossible.
Any sufficiently advanced technology
is indistinguishable from magic.
Spoiler alert, we haven't discovered anything in this field
in terms of unequivocal proof or evidence
for an inflationary origin of the universe.
There's a lot of circumstantial evidence,
as we've talked about, but there's also competing models
ranging from Sir Roger Penrose's
conformal cyclic cosmology to Paul Steinhart
and Aegis's bouncing cosmological models
and many more that we will discuss in future videos.
Now, the question of whether or not the universe originated
in a massive superluminal expansion known as inflation
has fascinated me personally since the early 2000s
when I first came up with the idea
to build a tiny refracting telescope,
one that Galileo Galilei would surely recognize
at the bottom of the world, Antarctica,
specifically the South Pole.
And over time, we made more and more sensitive upper limits.
That is, we've excluded an inflationary energy event
above a certain value.
Cosmologists parameterize the amount
of inflationary gravitational wave energy
by what's known as the tensor to scalar ratio.
The symbol is lowercase r.
And that is the relative ratio
between so-called gravitational wave
or tensor perturbations and ordinary density
or scalar perturbation.
I'm your density.
We've been setting limits on these effects
for over a decade
with the dedicated bicep series of experiments.
And this new recent result comes
from the bicep-3 incarnation of bicep,
which is a massive expansion to anything
I would have ever conceived of back in 2001.
This is an instrument that has
about a half a meter diameter aperture.
And it's significantly larger, almost three times larger
than the original bicep-1 aperture.
It can cram in many, many more detectors.
And couple those detectors
with very, very sensitive phased array-type technology.
In the original bicep-1, we only had 49
polarized metal machine feed horns
that we used to detect these tiny differences
in the amount of polarization in the microwave background.
But the incarnation of these telescopes
from bicep-1 to bicep-2,
which used transition and superconducting detectors,
to the current bicep-3
and now bicep array series of detectors,
has been a slow, steady increase,
not unlike your iPhone and its evolution from iPhone 1
all the way up until the current iPhone 13.
And back in 2001, we barely had iPods,
and it's just stunning to think about
how far the technology has come.
And these detectors are made by brilliant colleague,
Jamie Bach at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
and also supported via a wide variety of scientists
all over the world.
And even though, as I say,
I'm not involved with the bicep-3 and beyond incarnations,
I still can't help but feel a tiny bit of interest,
vested interest, if you will,
in the success of the project.
Recently, we heard a great fanfare announced
because of the threshold that was reached
by the bicep-3 experiment.
This is reproduced from the physical review letters article
I'll show it on the screen here,
that broke through this barrier.
It broke through what's called an uncertainty level
on the amount of tensor to scalar ratio,
the amount of gravitational wave energy
in the early universe,
produced presumably by an inflationary event
where the Inflaton scalar field
had fluctuations of the space-time metric
that then nucleated waves of gravity,
which travel at the speed of light,
endure for all time,
and can make it to our detectors even today,
but we choose to detect them and their presence
back on the surface of last scattering.
And that surface of last scattering
is an imprint, a fossil record of how the universe looked
when it was only 380,000 years old.
So we're kind of putting the detector system
back as close as we can to the source of the explosion,
if you will, if you think of inflation
as a sort of type of explosion
that ignited the big bang that we subsequently measured.
The results reported by bicep recently
indicate that we're below the 1% level of sensitivity.
The precision level needed to measure gravitational waves
has broken through the 1% barrier.
And even though the likelihood
of the gravitational wave signature
is slightly above a mere two-time multiple
of that one sigma result,
namely the two sigma upper limit,
is actually higher than the two times the 0.009
our precision level.
That's because the likelihood is slightly shifted over,
i.e. it looks to the naked eye, to the untrained brain
as if there's a slight detection
of gravitational wave energy, but there's not.
There's not significant enough to claim detection.
But the power and the procession
from the relatively crude measurements
that we made with bicep one,
and even other competing experiments,
including my own experiments, the polar bear experiment,
and other contemporary experiments,
have yet to approach anywhere
near this level of sensitivity.
Now, we hope to proceed even further back in time
and closer to the source
of primordial tensor perturbations if they exist.
And remember, the stakes could not be higher
because if inflation takes place,
many of the most prominent scientists
do believe that the multiverse paradigm
is also ushered into a state of believability,
maybe even proof by discovering this.
And that, we know for sure,
would be one of the conclusions
because that's what happened back in 2014
when bicep two made the premature discovery claim
that we had discovered gravitational waves
from the universe's inflationary epoch.
Now, that was retracted.
Later on, our conclusion was retracted.
We didn't make a blunder.
The experiment is exquisitely sensitive
and far more sensitive
than any other experiment ever done of this type.
But the interpretation as owing to a primordial cosmic event
rather than dust in the Milky Way galaxy
had to be essentially the disconfirmed result.
So we weren't able to establish this conclusively.
Now, it doesn't mean that gravitational waves
don't exist.
It doesn't mean inflation didn't take place.
It doesn't mean the multiverse isn't true.
But we would like to have evidence.
And so the bicep three team has now taken data
from more than just the one frequency we used in bicep two,
namely two millimeter wavelength,
150 gigahertz frequency.
Or with bicep one, we had three channels,
90 gigahertz, 150 gigahertz and 220 gigahertz.
But those detectors, the very few of those
operating in the higher frequency bands.
Now cosmic dust in our Milky Way galaxy
was the ultimate source of the large tensor to scalar ratio
we claimed back in 2014
and is the subject of losing the Nobel Prize.
But that was later found to be able to be removed
using data from the Planck satellite,
who were our competitors at the time
and still kind of frenemies and no, we're not enemies.
But we did eventually collaborate together
to reduce the uncertainty from dust
and actually show that dust could contribute
the dominant, the preponderance of the signal
that we claim to observe.
Now what's interesting is that bicep three
is able in the very near future, if not now,
to actually no longer need ancillary data
from another instrument, namely from the Planck satellite
to go deeper into the removal process
to get rid of the cosmic schmutz
that contaminates the local galactic neighborhood,
the dirty window, the dusty window that we must look through
with our cosmic instruments.
So it's fascinating to note that kind of the gauntlet
has been thrown down by this phenomenal team
that continues to work on a single goal.
And although there hasn't been a detection,
this is an important proving ground
because what it does is starts to eliminate
many, many classes, entire classes of models
of inflationary parameter space.
So we're able to really narrow down
and zoom in on the allowable regime
in which these inflationary models could have taken place.
Now, will we ever be able to rule out inflation?
I claim no because even if we don't ever observe
gravitational waves, we could still make the claim
that inflation took place, but the energy scale
of inflation was too low to manifest a observable background
of gravitational radiation that persisted
to this epoch of last scattering.
So we can't really falsify that inflation took place.
Some say that is a negative for the inflationary model
and it's non-comporting with the scientific method,
that things should be, as Karl Popper said, falsifiable
in order to constitute good science.
We've talked about that a lot.
I won't go into it again in more detail.
There are also haters of the inflationary theory
that because it posits the existence of a multiverse,
which some claim is antithetical to the scientific method
because everything that can possibly happen
does possibly happen.
And we'll talk about that in a future video as well
on the physics of free will coming soon.
So where are we?
We've ruled out a lot of inflationary models.
We would need to measure an inflationary gravitational
wave B mode signal that I've talked about
at length in other videos in order to conclusively
demonstrate the existence of these gravitational waves.
And that would be important because that would not only
help provide evidence for inflation
and maybe even narrow down even further
as much as humans could ever do narrowing down
the varying parameters that characterize
the inflationary universe.
It would also eliminate other contenders
for the cosmic genesis event.
In other words, it would eliminate things
like the bouncing model, the pyrotic model,
the conformal cyclic cosmology of Sir Roger Penrose,
the string gas cosmology of Robert Brandenburger
and Cameron Waffa that we'll talk about
in other videos on this channel.
So this non-detection is actually an important stepping stone
towards an ultimate measurement perhaps
of the cosmic genesis phenomenon
if indeed it did take place via inflation.
And if it didn't, we may see surprising results
along the way.
So these are really truly heroic results.
I'm happy for my former colleagues and friends
on the bicep experiment.
I wish them great success.
And of course with our small aperture telescopes
that we're building here at UC San Diego,
at Princeton University at UC Berkeley,
around the Simon's Observatory,
our small aperture telescopes,
these will hopefully set an important limit
or constraint or detection perhaps
of these primordial B mode polarization signals.
And I claim, this is my editorial opinion,
that one experiment cannot make a definitive claim anymore.
We will not be satisfied in this field of cosmology
unless two different experiments
can confirm the same type of signal.
They don't have to measure the exact same thing.
That's almost impossible in science.
They have to measure broad consistency
so that we can develop a consensus that inflation
took place.
If again, if indeed it did, who knows if it did.
But it's quite exciting to note
that no one can really go to the limits themselves.
No one goes to Stockholm themselves anymore.
We need to have confirmation if indeed this exists.
And I think that hopefully we will make great progress.
Again, as a scientist, you never wanna bias yourself
with the confirmation prejudice
that you are going to detect
that which you set out to detect
because it often leads you to reject things
that are perfectly acceptable
but just don't comport with your philosophical
or scientific worldview.
So for now, this exciting news
released from the BISEP team, the BISEP3 team
and eagerly awaiting new results
to come from this exciting field,
including results that will come from hopefully
right here at UC San Diego
and the Simons Observatory team around the world.
