It is the night of August 23, 1995.
You got your GINCO jeans on?
You brought your Game Boy with you because you have no idea how long this is going to
take and you and your friend are waiting in line at Best Buy with hundreds of other people,
waiting for midnight to strike because that is when the all-new Windows 95 operating system
will be available for purchase on store shelves.
But do you even know why you're here?
Does really anyone for that matter?
What's the big deal?
Microsoft got the whole world excited for its latest operating system, Windows 95,
with its retrospectively famous Start Me Up campaign.
Its marketing was just incredible.
It worked so well, thousands of people waited in line at many retail stores across the world
to buy it, making it the most successful software launch in history.
People knew that Windows 95 was an important milestone, but did they understand why?
Yeah, but also probably not.
What's really interesting about Microsoft's product launch is that it was able to even
mesmerize people that, frankly, didn't really know what was going on.
Today we are going to look at the causes and effects of this great software phenomenon
and explain why Windows 95 was so important.
The seemingly everlasting influence of the Windows 95 operating system can really be
boiled down to three things.
Brilliant marketing, arguably the biggest component, innovative features, and just like
many other incredibly successful things, timing.
It's honestly really easy to overlook Windows 95 as this revolutionary piece of software,
even at the time.
But keep in mind that's not the question this video is answering, but rather why Windows
95 was important.
Being important and revolutionary are different things.
But was Windows 95 revolutionary?
Not really.
Or at least not as much as you think.
Heck, its exorbitant amount of marketing actually brought it a lot of criticism, particularly
from Apple users.
Many of these people scoffed at the features that Windows 95 was boastfully advertising,
and mockingly nicknamed it Macintosh 87.
This is because they claimed that Macintosh did it first almost a decade earlier, and
they actually weren't too far off.
A new feature included in Windows 95 allowed users to name files up to 255 characters long,
a huge improvement to the previous 11 character limit.
The Macintosh had already supported file names as much as 31 characters long since its launch
in 1984, and while 255 characters was much bigger than that, it was argued to be almost
unrealistically big.
Considering that file names more than 120 characters long were extremely uncommon at
the time, Apple users felt that this was just excessive, and unnecessarily adding onto a
feature that Apple had included first.
Basically, this was a feature the Macintosh had for over 10 years, along with a similar
looking GUI that used similar icons.
I mean if you really want to get technical, Macintosh actually copied Xerox, and Windows
just copied it afterwards, but that's a whole other video.
But it didn't stop Apple users at the time from giving Windows 95 some bad PR.
Yeah, the whole Mac vs PC debate is a lot older than you might think.
But Microsoft's incredible advertising serves as a testament for why people still chose
Windows 95 over the already existing Mac OS instead.
Yeah, Windows 95 was similar to the Macintosh, but its marketing gave it better personality.
Computing had an interesting role in the 90s, which was to be as relatable as possible,
to transform from this niche community into something that everybody did.
Computers were soon going to be as relatable and fun as cars or television, and Windows
95 in a lot of ways was the one that took initiative on achieving this goal.
Their commercials were upbeat, exciting, and appealed to the masses using pop culture references
of the time.
This is Jennifer Amiston, I'm Matthew Perry, we're here to see Mr. Bill Gates about a
possible starring role in the video guide to Microsoft Windows 95.
Their main focus was showing the operating system's simplicity and how much the user
could do with such little effort.
Windows 95 was less of a convoluted piece of software, and more like a person, when
in reality, Windows 95 honestly wasn't all that different from its previous version,
Windows 3.1.
Visually, yes, but under the hood, not so much.
With the way these previous versions were marketed, people basically just saw Windows
as DOS wearing a fancy outfit.
Windows 95 also ran on top of DOS.
Only difference was DOS booted into Windows by default, so you didn't notice it.
And of course, the ads wouldn't tell you that.
All this fun advertising excited people, and encouraged them to go out and see what all
the fuss was about, including those that were just getting into computers and had no prior
experience with them.
Consequently, many people weren't even exactly sure why they were in line, but just knew
that it was the start of something big, and that this product was going to soon enrich
their lives in one way or another.
Can the same thing be said about the Macintosh in 1995?
I mean, what did their advertising look like in comparison?
To be honest, which one are you going to buy?
Aside from some criticism that it was just copying the Macintosh, Windows 95 actually
did have some new features that proved to be innovative for the time.
The most notable being, of course, the Start Menu, the main subject of all Windows 95 commercials.
This was a big deal, particularly because it made all the difference when it came to organization.
The Start Menu was essentially the hub of the computer.
All of your files, applications, and system configurations were just a couple of clicks
away.
It was a big improvement on the previous Windows version, 3.1, where users had to use a tool
called Program Manager, which was much more complicated.
This new Start Menu, along with Windows Explorer, another new feature, made Program Manager unnecessary,
when navigating the computer wasn't as much of a hassle.
Again, there was, of course, criticism that this was just a ripoff of Macintosh's Apple
Menu, but the Start Menu was arguably easier to use and more convenient.
They were similar in that they were both system menus that gave the user access to applications,
but the difference is how these applications are displayed.
Many times you had to manually add your preferred applications to the Apple Menu by digging for
it through the actual file system.
Windows Start Menu did this for you, and if you didn't want something there, you could
just remove it at any time.
This was a great setup for non-tech savvy computer users, and saved them an extra step
of navigating an environment that they were completely unfamiliar with.
Compared to the Apple Menu, the Start Menu also just stood out better.
Often, inexperienced Macintosh users would assume that the Menu's icon was just a logo
that didn't do anything.
This would actually be the case in future beta releases of OS X in the year 2000.
Because of this, many users would initially struggle with navigating the machine.
For those who don't know where to start on a Windows machine, it literally tells them.
Another groundbreaking feature that Windows had to offer was the Taskbar.
If you were using multiple programs, it took just one click to switch back and forth between
them.
Much quicker and easier than the application menu on the Macintosh or other operating systems.
Windows 95 also had a great feature known as Plug and Play.
It had a lot of problems, but it was a brilliant concept that would prove to be essential in
future releases.
Rather than having to manually install hardware such as a printer, Windows would detect it
automatically and install the drivers for you, or prompt you to do so with a CD-ROM.
And lastly, arguably the greatest feature of all that Windows 95 had was access to the
internet.
This wasn't inherently revolutionary.
Most mainstream operating systems at the time had this, but it didn't matter.
Because of one thing, timing.
Timing caused Windows Vista to flop.
It caused the pet rock to become popular, along with flagpole sitting.
And in some respects, the Beatles.
So much of something's success can be attributed to just coming out at the right time.
And Windows 95 is no exception.
The 1990s were a very special decade, and that's because, historically, it can arguably
be divided into two different decades, because it has two eras that are so distinct.
In the early 90s, from roughly 1988 to 1994, you have the sort of pre-internet Golden Girls
MTV Grunge era of the 90s.
Still very much influenced by the 1980s, because the decade, in some ways, hasn't really had
much time to identify itself.
It's from around 1996 to 2002, where the 90s are really starting to solidify.
You have an era filled with AOL, boy bands, and a dot-com bubble.
Not that all of these trends are mutually exclusive, but when looking at the decade
through an historical lens, it's clear to see which trends took priority and which
timeframes.
1995 is smack in the middle.
It is the transitioning point between these two eras.
Essentially embodying both characteristics of these periods.
Of course, you might think I sound totally crazy bringing all this stuff up about two
eras colliding.
And you could be right.
I mean, you could really make this argument about any decade.
But the 90s especially.
Just like the 60s was a cultural revolution, the 90s was a technological one.
Defining the exact time an era starts and ends is totally subjective.
But in all honesty, it could be an explanation for people's thoughts and behaviors at the
time.
In 1995, it was clear that the internet was going somewhere big.
It was the year that most people were just getting introduced to it.
And going back to its influential marketing, Windows 95 acted as a friendly gateway to
the world wide web.
You didn't have to be a computer geek to use it.
You could be anybody.
Computer operating systems didn't really do that.
So yeah, Windows 95 wasn't the only OS to support the internet.
But everyone knew it as the OS to support the internet.
By 1999, your grandmother was using the internet.
You could not say the same thing back in 1992.
It's clear that the internet was going to inevitably boom by the end of the 1990s.
Microsoft was just smart enough to be the ones to lead the way.
Windows 95 did not start the growing popularity of the world wide web, but it was part of
it.
It was both the catalyst and the leader.
When seeing the big picture, it makes perfect sense why Windows 95 was so popular and why
it continues to influence us today.
Its marketing allowed personal computers to become even more personal than they already
Making something complicated like an operating system relatable to most people.
All of its design configurations set a precedent for how an operating system should look and
feel.
And its timing was the last ingredient in creating a perfect storm of circumstances that
would transform Windows 95 into this technological phenomenon.
And it's apparent that Microsoft knew this, because they did everything to prepare for
it.
Many features introduced, or at least emphasized in Windows 95, are still seen in many operating
systems today.
Features that likely never need to be changed because they were so convenient and timeless.
Windows 95 was the OS where Microsoft finally found its sweet spot, and all future versions
would essentially just build on top of it and make it better.
And Microsoft has been able to start us up ever since.
What was your experience with Windows 95?
Did you enjoy using it?
Too young to remember?
Let me know all that in the comments below.
Thank you so much for watching!
If you enjoyed this video, please subscribe and hit the notification bell so that you
never miss a future video.
Also check out my Patreon to get access to exclusive content and to watch videos early.
