Before it was fashionable, tattoos were for sailors and tough guys.
The stereotypical tattoo was a heart with the word mother on it.
One has a mother and who doesn't love mom?
Mothers seem to play a crucial role in child development, so you'd think that psychology
would have long focused on the effects of mothering, but no.
Freudian psychology sees the mother, at most, as the source of mental illness.
If the mother is properly feminine, then she becomes the source of the son's infatuation
leading to the Oedipal struggle.
To her daughter, she becomes a role model for passivity leading to the internal conflict
of penis envy.
If the mother takes on masculine properties and is assertive, aggressive, or controlling,
then we get the seeds of neuroses.
No matter what they do, mothers are a source of psychological damage that must be fixed
later on.
For the behaviorists, mothers are just a food source.
They provide sustenance and therefore condition the children, but since there's no mind
to worry about in behaviorism, mothers are merely suppliers of positive reinforcement.
Like the bar in the rat's cage where if they push it they get a pellet, mothers, according
to the behaviorists, are just dispensers for food and pleasurable feelings.
No matter which side of the psychological fence you were on, mothers were not an interesting
part of reality.
Then Harry Harlow began his work with Reese's Monkeys in the 1950s.
During Harry Israel, he changed his name as a young adult because potential employers
thought he was Jewish.
He wasn't.
And it was harming his search for a job.
After his name changed, he found a good job at the University of Wisconsin studying learning
and development.
Behaviorists had established the use of animal models as a standard tool.
If there's only brain, and no such thing as mind, and if animal brains were just simplified
versions of human brains, then there would be much to learn about the human brain by
studying those of lower animals.
In science, it's standard to simplify systems, removing messy complexity that makes observing
specific elements more difficult.
Physicists do it by idealizing the system, recall again the joke about physicists assuming
spherical chickens, or by building computer models.
Physicists do it by observing simpler brains, namely those of mice, rats, dogs, or for more
complex phenomena, monkeys.
Harlow found that the process of rearing by monkey mothers was introducing a wrinkle into
his work.
He was studying learning, and therefore needed to isolate young monkeys in an environment
where he could see which stimuli were the most effective in expeditious and skill acquisition.
But were the young monkeys interacted with their mothers?
The mothers were teaching them too.
This contaminated his experiments, mothers being mothers messed up his data.
So he separated the newborn monkeys from their mothers, raising them in a nursery.
This didn't seem problematic, after all, it's what we did with human babies in a hospital,
taking them away from their germ-ridden mothers and keeping them safe in a sterile nursery
where they could be bottle-fed by masked nurses on a set schedule.
He treated these rhesus monkeys like we did our own kids.
But Harlow noticed a difference in these nursery-raised monkeys.
They were more emotionally fragile.
They would cower or become aggressive much more quickly than the other monkeys.
They were not properly social, reacting strangely to other monkeys and alienated by them.
They were monkey weirdos.
Harlow wondered if this effect could be studied rigorously.
So he began one of the most famous research programs in the history of psychology.
Harlow took newborn monkeys away from their mothers and raised them in pens with surrogates.
Some of these surrogates were made of wire with a milk bottle inside.
The others were made of wood with a bottle, but wrapped in foam and terry cloth to be snugly.
Those with the wire surrogates exhibited a greater degree of psychological distress
and abnormal development, which led to them being mal-adjusted adults.
Harlow changed the experiment and put in both a wire and a cushy fake mommy.
Overwhelmingly, the baby spent time with the soft one.
Perhaps it's because they're warmer.
So he added heat lamps, making them equally warm.
Still, they preferred the cloth one.
Finally, he put the milk in the wire ones only.
The monkeys would go to the wire surrogate to feed, but repeatedly returned to the cloth
one for cuddling.
It wasn't warmth or food that the monkeys needed.
It was something else, something that behaviorists did not want to acknowledge the existence
of emotional comfort.
Harlow went on to see what the difference in behavior would be if the cloth monkey was
present or absent.
With the soft mommy present and new objects introduced, the young monkeys would cling
to the mother at first, but then explore the novel elements and their surroundings with
a sense of curiosity.
Without the mommy, monkeys quickly became agitated, often becoming wild and aggressive
or extremely passive, rocking and sucking their thumbs.
Mothers seemed important in a way that psychology before Harlow would not allow.
Mothers were there to fulfill more than merely biological needs.
Mothering is a necessary for emotional development.
As Harlow put it, man cannot live by milk alone.
The irony is that Harlow's own life mirrored his work.
He had been popular with students, a generous caring professor who would bend over backwards
for them.
He frequently had coffee with the janitors in his building, treating everyone as equals.
He was playful when someone made the mistake of asking the psychologist how he was doing.
He'd respond, I wonder, but then his beloved wife died of cancer.
Without her affection, he became depressed and an alcoholic.
He became nasty, rude and sarcastic, just a miserable human being.
But what he had done was important.
This work meant that the mind, the internal world of personal experience, had to be reinserted
into the psychologist's purview.
The behaviorist attempt to limit the world in the vocabulary of the psychologist to only
the external, the observable stimuli and the responses, created a universe that was too
limited in its concepts.
Reality, after Harlow, had to be redefined to once again include the mind and mental
states as not only existing, but as a central element of who we are as human beings.
Indeed, since the experiments were on monkeys, who we are as conscious beings.
After Harlow, the mind was back.
And so psychologists started to once again look at the human mind and its development.
At the University of Chicago, Lawrence Colberg examined the development of morality, instead
of focusing on skills acquisition or fact memorization, he became interested in the
ways we develop our internal means of moral deliberation.
He identified stages, six of them, and found that we could see some people using each stage
to propel themselves to the next, to a more mature approach to ethical dilemmas, and others
who would progress up to a point and become stuck at one level.
These last stuck individuals, he classified as morally retarded in the way they approached
the conundrums of living in human society.
These stages were normal and appropriate for certain developmental stages and certain ages.
Most people will move through these stages naturally, but some will fail to completely
advance.
He divided these stages into three groups of two.
The first two stages are what are called pre-conventional, that is, they see ethical situations as isolated,
not part of a larger rule or convention.
In the first stage, decisions about what to do in situations concerning other people
are completely a matter of obedience to authority in order to avoid external punishment.
Behaviorism studied how humans behaved under conditions of reward and punishment as if
that's all there was to human psychology, but Colberg contends that's the lowest level
of a more complex story about behavioral development.
As young children, we don't hit our siblings because we know if we do, then we'll get spanked
or put on a timeout.
There's no sense of why we do or do not do what we do, there's simple association with
external reinforcement mechanisms and a story.
From there, we grow into an internalized vision of pre-conditional thought.
Step one is looking to external authority for reward and punishment for motivation for
acting.
Step two, then it's finding the motivation in our own desires.
We become egoistic.
All that matters is figuring out what's best for me.
If you have interests, who cares?
Your interests are only of concern to me if I can use that fact to get what I want.
The first level of moral development, the pre-conventional, then focuses only on the here and now, at first
gaining pleasure and avoiding pain from external authorities, and then, in the second, gaining
pleasure and avoiding pain from personal ones.
The second level, an adolescent approach to morality, is what Colberg terms conventional.
That is, there are conventions, rules which guide us in our ethical deliberation.
The first level here is to see rules as a form of etiquette, as socially enforced norms.
Why should you act that way?
Because that's what we do.
If we act in the right way, others give us approval, and that's what we seek at this
level.
If we act wrongly, others express their disapproval, and we never want to be thought ill of by others.
We choose the right moral action, because if we don't, what would the Dabers think?
The second, higher conventional level moves the perspective from being a matter of getting
the approval of other people to one of serving an abstract duty.
I do the right thing because I'm a law-abiding citizen.
I have an obligation to the law, to society, to God and country.
The rules at this new level are abstract, not dictated by concrete social context.
But there is no philosophical deliberation about why these rules are the rules, as opposed
to, say, any other rules.
They simply are the law, and the law is to be followed.
In the highest level, the post-conventional stage, we take these rules and seek a justification
for them.
Here we're engaged in what philosophers call metaethics, that is, setting out the means
by which we generate ethical rules.
It's the rules beneath the rules.
We're now adult in our ethical deliberation because we're seeking a more general understanding
of the nature of morality itself, not individual commands.
The fifth level is one where we consider ethical prescriptions in terms of the social structure
in which they're embedded.
They serve a larger social function of helping us create a society that's well-ordered, safe
for all, and conducive to human flourishing.
Think back to Thomas Hobbes' state of nature that we talked about earlier.
Life in the state of nature was solitary, nasty, brutish and short, and so we created
a social contract that set up the society, taking out the state of war each against the
other and creating civil society.
We may shape this social contract in multiple ways, so when we think about ethics at this
level, we're thinking about how to set up an entire system of rules in comparison to
other systems.
The systemic viewpoint is more abstract, more general, and this is the mark of a more mature
mind.
Another step is to take the meta-ethical thought beyond the cultural context and assume a universal
standpoint.
True human wisdom is achieved when we engage in completely abstract reasoning about the
universal principles that generate the action level rules.
The pinnacle of human moral thought is the most theoretical, the one that removes us from
the world in its messy details and places us in the realm of non-concrete absolutes.
Real thought that we should be ruled by philosopher kings, that only philosophers had the vision
needed to rule wisely.
Kolberg agrees.
But according to Kolberg, these philosopher kings are likely to be men.
Women he contended tended to remain stuck at the conventional level, not making the move
to the conceptual way of thinking.
Women, unlike men, tend to worry about nurturing those around them, those with whom they have
relationships, and thus get stuck in the concrete, the particular.
They never advance to the higher, more abstract, more advanced level.
This claim did not sit well with his research assistant, the American psychologist Carol
Gilligan, who noticed that in Kolberg's work, and indeed throughout all of psychology, there
was a blind spot concerning gender.
Students including Kolberg would do their work trying to find out truths about the human
mind and study only men and boys.
Studies involving females said something about the female brain.
Studies involving males said something about the human brain.
Men were the default.
Men are human, women are a separate species at best, an inferior species at worst.
And the ancient Greek sophist Protagoras said, Man is the measure of all things.
Gilligan observed that he was absolutely correct in psychology, philosophy, and the rest of
the intellectual landscape.
She had another suggestion.
Gilligan argued that perhaps there are two quite different ways of being in the world.
One that stresses the experiences of traditionally male gender roles in western society, and
one that focuses on the experiences of traditionally female gender roles in western society.
Both focus on a central virtue, but these virtues are quite different.
Men tended to take jobs that focused on the marketplace, or the courtroom, or the legislature.
The ruling principle here is justice.
You do something wrong if you cheat someone, if you break a rule, or if you break a promise,
or worse, a contract.
There are rules put in place in order to guarantee that exchanges can be counted upon.
Without such faith that any person with whom you enter into an agreement will be compelled
to fulfill their part of the bargain, the entire economy would collapse.
But when everyone behaves as they're supposed to, things run smoothly.
Everyone can seek his fortune by working harder or smarter.
Prices find their natural equilibrium, and everyone seeking their own best self-interest
can find it.
Justice leads to harmony, justice leads to human flourishing, justice leads to good.
But notice the presupposition beneath this picture.
The picture that comes out of traditionally masculine ways of interacting.
The picture that informed Colbert.
It assumes, along with Aristotle, that humans are political animals.
That is, that an essential characteristic of humans, that we live in groups, that our
normal course of life forces us to deal with each other.
But it goes further in typifying a particular way of relating.
The standard relationship between people in this masculine picture of human reality is
based on the idea of a contract.
A contract must be entered into willingly by both parties.
When a contract is made, the result is that each party must do something for the other,
and this exchange is agreed upon as fair.
When the party of the first part executes his agreed upon duty under the contract, he
is freed from the contract.
He can expect that the party of the second part will also execute his end of the bargain,
and if not, he can bring in the authorities, have the party of the second part arrested,
or sue him in court.
Aside from this expectation, there is nothing else binding the party of the first part to
the party of the second part.
Since both parties have done what they've said they would, the contract has been fulfilled,
and there is no longer a relationship between them.
Acting frees you from a contractual relation.
You could choose to enter into another contract with the person, or not.
You could choose not, and take your business elsewhere.
It's up to you.
It isn't personal, it's just business.
McGilligan argued, if you look at the sort of relationships women tend to have based
on the expectations shaped by traditional gender roles, they do quite different things.
Women tended to be secretaries, nurses, teachers, and most of all, mothers and wives.
The sorts of relationships in these jobs is quite different.
It's not contractual.
It's of a different nature.
It's not about justice.
It's about caring.
Entering into a care-based relationship is quite different from entering into a contractual
relationship.
In a contract, there's an explicit period of negotiation to make clear what is expected
from each party, and if either is not satisfied, then the contract is not agreed to, the relationship
is not brought into existence.
But when you enter into a care-based relationship, there are no explicit terms.
The point is not to do X because the person wants X done, but rather to get to know the
person's needs, to care about him or her becoming the person he or she could be, and
to do what you can to help.
You do things for the other person, not because you've promised to do so, but because you
are legitimately concerned about the other's well-being.
You act in a contract-based relationship because you think it will lead to the best outcome
for you.
You act in a care-based relationship because you think it will lead to the best outcome
for the other person.
And when you do act in a caring fashion, it's different from acting on a contractual basis.
In a contract, acting frees you from the relationship.
In a care-based relationship, acting further embeds you in the relationship.
Acting on care and accepting someone else's caring deepens the relationship.
It strengthens the bond.
If you find someone with whom you would like to have a deep interpersonal relationship and
you signify this by sending a box of chocolates only to have it refused, it doesn't mean
that she doesn't like chocolate.
She just doesn't like you.
Why would a rational person refuse a free box of chocolates that you would greatly
enjoy eating?
Because they're not free.
Accepting a caring act is to deepen a care-based relationship and lead the other person to
expect that you will act out of concern for them.
Kohlberg was right, Gilligan contends, that women do tend to approach ethical issues differently.
More concretely, more focused on relationships.
But this is not because they're morally retarded.
It's not because their development has stopped short of wisdom.
It's because there's a different virtue, a different model guiding their development.
In this way, Gilligan constructed a Kohlberg-like series of steps for moral development in a
care-based fashion.
The pre-conventional stage is again self-centered.
In this stage, there's no sense of the self as part of a larger whole.
There's a sense of abandonment, of alienation from others.
In this stage, the natural thing to do is to look out for number one.
To act out of pure self-interest, greediness, self-centeredness, jealousy are all part and
parcel of this stage.
But those who base their moral worldview on care can progress to a conventional stage.
Unlike Kohlberg's conventional stage, which is rule-bound, for Gilligan, the second stage
is one where the self is no longer the focus.
Indeed, where self-sacrifice takes center stage.
What is it that I can give or do so that there are solutions that minimize the harm through
everyone else involved?
How can we give up ourselves to fix things for others so that they are not suffering
as a result?
It's a purely altruistic, other-oriented approach that's always outwardly directed.
The energy is always focused on the other person, not the well-being of the person acting.
It is playing the martyr.
The final stage is where we come to see ourselves as part of the larger world, where we take
our relationship with ourselves as central alongside the set of other relationships with
those whom we care about.
Here I learn to balance my own development and needs alongside of those whom I care about.
This is not the selfishness of the first stage, but one in which we see ourselves not just
as needy or as a vehicle to meet the needs of others, but rather as we see everyone including
ourselves as projects, as walking along a developmental path, and we act in such a way
that we advance everyone along the journey as much as possible.
We realize that we can't care for everyone, and that our own growth is important as well.
This is wisdom for those with a care-based perspective.
Gilligan was clear not to privilege one above the other.
There's nothing problematic with the masculine or the feminine approach.
The title of her book is, In a Different Voice, Not in a Better Voice, and it became one of
the most influential books ever written by a psychologist.
It helped launch the intellectual feminism of the late 20th century, what is often referred
to as second wave feminism.
First wave feminism was the activism that led to women getting the vote and recognition
of their equality under the law in the late 19th and early 20th century.
The movement here focused largely on legislation.
Susan D. Anthony and Elizabeth Katie Stanton were among the leading lights in the United
States, and their focus was on getting the right to vote, to own property, and to divorce.
Second wave feminism, on the other hand, looked at the ways in which informal social structures
influenced the way women and men thought about themselves and each other.
Patriarchy, the view that there's an unequal distribution of social power that privileged
men over women, was examined to see how it would affect those on both sides of the fence.
When you have the power, you assume you deserve it.
You assume that what you see is good is good.
You assume you are normal, and everyone different is pathological.
That is what Gilligan saw in psychology, where studies that used only male subjects were
reported as disclosing truths about humans, whereas studies that focused on women only
told us about women.
Men were humans, and women were, as the French philosopher Simone de Beauvoir put it in the
title of her famous book, the second sex.
De Beauvoir famously begins by asking herself who she is, and the first thing she thinks
is that she's a woman.
Men would not answer this way, a man would start with, I'm French, or I'm a philosopher.
Why the difference?
Because when you are the other, when you are defined by your otherness, but when you are
the powerful, you have the power to define yourself.
To be the outsider is to have your nature defined by those who have the social and political
control, and you are inevitably placed below them.
You are inferior.
You have problems.
You need fixing.
This is beaten into you until it's internalized, and you don't even realize it.
Women are socialized in such a way that they do not act out or speak out.
They do not allow themselves to write themselves onto the world, into history, into themselves.
It's not right.
It's not fair.
But if you get angry about it, the powerful will stigmatize you further.
Women are emotional, and they'll medicalize the difference.
Women are hysterical.
They'll claim that they just don't understand you.
Women are a complete mystery.
Who can understand women?
No one.
It could not be that there's a problem with those who have the power.
No, that's unthinkable.
If we had a problem, we wouldn't be in power.
This of course is a central theme in the 1991 Ridley Scott film, Film and Louise, in which
two friends, Louise, a single waitress with a physically absent boyfriend, and Thelma,
a married woman with an emotionally absent husband, set out for a night on the town.
When a man threatens to violently rape Thelma, Louise kills him.
Louise, having been raped years earlier and having seen nothing done to her salient, insists
they run.
Having defended themselves from a position of weakness, they continue to find the structure,
the society, the culture stacked against them.
Defending themselves in the way men are allowed, expose them to harm, and defending themselves
against that harm only opens them up to greater harm.
Informally, men can do and say what they want.
Formally, men use the law to make sure they keep the power, but women can have neither.
In the end, the film is a tragedy.
The protagonists find themselves trapped and they die in a fiery crash, but they were not
killed by the authorities.
They intentionally drive their car off of a cliff.
In de Beauvoir's existentialist terms, they acted out of radical freedom.
They were going to die no matter what.
All humans die, that's the one thing about which we have no choice, but in choosing how
and when to die, they exercised their free will, choosing death on their terms.
They lived in the choice to die, but they did die.
That one does not see much at Hollywood movies anymore.
Filma and Louise were denied one more right given their male movie protagonist's peers,
the right to a sequel.
De Beauvoir argues that men have a problem.
They have power, all the power.
Well, almost all the power.
They cannot give birth.
They cannot create life.
That alone belongs to women.
That was just seen as the great mystery.
And that's the basis for the most important feminist piece of art in history, one that
predates second wave feminism by a century, Mary Shelley's Frankenstein.
Now the book is quite different from the movie versions.
In the films, Dr. Frankenstein creates the monster and things go badly because he over-reaches.
His hubris is that he, the scientist, aspires to be God.
He believes that he can create life and avoid death, and therefore achieve the immortality
that is reserved for God alone, and for this he is punished when his creation goes astray.
On the other hand, in the book, Dr. Frankenstein's hubris is not that he as a scientist replaces
God, but that he thinks that as a man he can create life.
His arrogance is that he, as a man, is capable of doing what a woman does.
Now, the monster in the book does not have a defective brain.
He does not kill randomly, quite the opposite.
The monster is eloquent and well-spoken.
The monster kills, but he only kills those whom the doctor cares about.
The monster is the doctor's creation.
He was given life by the doctor.
Dr. Frankenstein is his mother.
What does the doctor do?
He recoils at the sight of the monstrosity.
Instead of entering into a care-based relationship with the monster where he would do all he
could to make the monster's journey of self-fulfillment successful, he rejects him.
And what happens to a being when it does not receive affection after birth?
Harlow's monkeys show us we get individuals who are not well-socialized, who will pull
inward or lash out.
The monster runs amuck because he was not loved, because his creator is not a woman.
His choice of victims shows this.
The monster only kills those who reject him or those whom the doctor cares about.
If he can't have his mother's love, then no one will.
The creature becomes a bad child because the doctor, a man of great renown, was incapable
of doing what so many women do every day.
To understand the great monster story of the 19th century, we need to look for advances
that came in the second half of the 20th.
No longer is this the world just of nature, red, and tooth and claw, and the arbitrary
contractual style of relationship.
If we want to understand reality, we now need to see a place in it for care and affection.
