Darwin's theory of evolution changed our picture of reality in many ways. It forced us to look
at the nature of the human differently. It forced us to change our sense of the history
of life. It set the table for so much in terms of genetic and ecological thought in
the century that followed. But there's a subtle change it forced on us that gets a
lot less press. It made us take the notion of a species more seriously. Now, since Aristotle
and through the work of Carl Linnaeus, we've categorized life forms according to a hierarchy
of categories, kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species. The idea was we
could take anatomical similarities found in the members of species and create a well-ordered
structure. This structure allowed us to account for the similarities between the plants and
animals we see throughout the world and see groups as related to one another. If there
was a way in which the Aristotelian or Linnaean systems revealed a deeper sense of reality,
it was tied to the old metaphysics. For Aristotle, all living things had souls, and the taxonomy
showed which animals had common parts of their soul. For Linnaeus, we had to reject the great
chain of being in which all things could be ordered from the least divine to the most divine.
God's creation was more intricate than that. To fully appreciate the divine plan, we had
to understand it in terms of its detailed structure. Like the theology behind the great
chain of being, Linnaeus' work presumed a creator and a perfect creation.
Of course, this taxonomy lives on even when its theological basis has been stripped away
by modern understanding. As such, it became merely a bookkeeping matter, something useful
and helpful, but not disclosing anything deep about an underlying reality. But once we had
Darwin's account in which species emerged, changed, and split, such taxonomies had to
be seen differently. Two species share a category if they share a common ancestor. The more
basic the group, the farther back you need to go to find the common ancestor. If two
species are in the same genus, then they diverged not too long ago in evolutionary time. But
if they share only a class, then they split off long, long ago. The taxonomy was a record
of development. It came to be understood as a family tree.
The important point for us is not the taxonomy itself, but the fact that we're now looking
at the species level for discussion. For Darwin, individuals do not evolve. Individuals
are born, they mate, they eat, they get eaten, but they do not evolve. Individuals may mature,
but they don't evolve. Only species evolve. In order for something to change, it must
exist. If species evolve, then species are real. Species are things independent of the
individuals that make them up. Species as entities independent of the individuals that
make them up are a part of reality. Species are what we call emergent beings.
Now the term emergence refers to a non-reducible entity that has parts that do not share the
properties of the whole. Recall that when we looked at thinkers several conversations
ago who held a view about the unity of science, that psychology reduced to biology, that biology
reduced to chemistry, that chemistry reduced to physics, and so everything is just complicated
physics of some level or another. When we eventually reach a sophisticated enough level
in our physical understanding they held, these other placeholder scientific disciplines will
disappear and our theory of everything will be all the science we need. It will be a complete
description of nature. But those who contend that there are emergent elements to reality
hold that you can know all about how the parts work and never gain a sense of the full nature
of reality. The emergentist view is that reality has levels. In the case of biology, you can't
understand the organism without knowing the genetics, but genetics, while necessary, is
not sufficient. You also need ecology. The grand-scale questions may have genetic or
molecular level aspects, but it's the interaction on this larger level, this ecological level
that has to be seen to be understood, and they can only be seen at that level.
The fact that there's a mountain range separating two groups of organisms that share a common
ancestor is important when we try to explain and to understand how the two became different
species. Looking at the molecular level would never give you the relevant insight. The emergentist
point of view surfaces not only in our work on biological species, it also comes into
play when we start thinking about humans. Are there human groups that have a reality
independent of the individuals that make them up? Intuitively, the answer is yes. I'm
a fan of the Baltimore Orioles. The Baltimore Orioles exist as an organization, a group
of people in a structure. You can change those people and the organization still remains.
When Eli Jacobs sold the team to Peter Angelo's, the team remained the Baltimore Orioles. When
Earl Weaver retired as manager and Cal Ripken Sr. took over, they remained the Baltimore
Orioles. When his son Cal Ripken Jr. retired from playing for the team, they remained
the Baltimore Orioles. The Baltimore Orioles are an entity unto itself. We can say things
about the Baltimore Orioles that are not true of any single player, coach, executive, or
member of the organization, but yet are true of the whole. For example, if one year I'm
exasperated with the roster, I may not be a fan of any of the players. I may not be a
fan of the manager because of the way he plays them. I may not be a fan of the general manager
who hired the players in the manager. And I may not be a fan of the owner who refuses
to pay the salaries of better players. I may dislike every single element of the team and
yet it will be perfectly reasonable to say that I am a fan of the team. Indeed, it's
my love for the team that leads reasonably to my disgust in all of these parts in this
example. What is true of the parts is not necessarily true of the whole. This, of course, is an
extreme example. But the idea is that for human groups, we may have to think of the
group as a thing with a reality distinct from those who make it up. This is the reasoning
behind the idea that corporations are people. Corporations have boards that make decisions.
Corporations act. Corporations have interests and own property. Yet, it's possible that
no particular individual within the corporation agrees with the decision. Perhaps the board
was deadlocked. There are option A and option B. While no one thought that C was the best
idea, it was deemed the only one that was minimally acceptable to everyone. So, while
there were no board members who believed that C is the best option, it received a unanimous
vote from the board. The board therefore believed something no one on the board believes.
Now, it remains a question for us to decide whether we want to give legal rights we afford
to biological people to corporate people. We can decide that one either way we choose,
but the idea behind corporations being thought of as people comes out of the idea of emergence.
The place where emergence makes its most important debut in science is in the birth
of the youngest of the scientific disciplines, sociology. Some thinkers had set the stage
for the emergence of sociology before the turn of the 20th century. Auguste Comte coined
the term sociology in 1838 and discussed a general science of culture. He held that society
progressed through three phases. Cultures begin in the religious phase where all of
the change is the result of the will of God. Then society moves to the metaphysical phase
where a divine consciousness is replaced with unseen forces. Finally, we emerge into the
scientific phase in which we no longer seek to answer why but only how. In the final phase,
we accept there are regularities to the way the world works, regularities that are not
the result of some supernatural desire or unseen forces, but simply describe the way
things work. What's important for us is not Comte's particular theory, but the fact
that the subject is not the individual, but the emergent whole of society. He argued that
we can apply this to societies of all sorts. We can look at the society of physicists.
At first, they thought objects moved because gods moved them. Next, they adopted the belief
about immaterial forces acting over distances. Finally, they settled upon equations of motion,
eliminating the why questions altogether, and contenting themselves with descriptions
of how things move. We can apply it to politics, to nation states, to human groups of any sort.
We have a science that does not look to explain social phenomena by appealing to the individuals,
but to the emergent group, the societal level itself.
We see this also in the writings of Herbert Spencer, one of the early social Darwinists
who coined the phrase survival of the fittest in the 1860s. Spencer viewed society itself
like an organism. Like plants and animals, society adapts to environmental changes.
These adaptations are governed by the processes Darwin described. When we organize our society,
when we come up with new institutions, we can evaluate the health of the cultures according
to measures that are analogous to what we see in nature.
Now, again, we're not interested in whether Spencer was right or wrong here. Like all
early works in a field, there's a naivete that gets struck down once things become more
sophisticated. What's important for us is that with Spencer, we see sociological explanations
happening on an organizational level above the individual people in society. Society is
seen as an emergent entity unto itself.
Karl Marx, around the same time, had a theory of cultural development that focused on class
as an operative factor that drove large-scale social change. Marx took the work of the German
philosopher Friedrich Hegel, who saw history as developing along a necessary path. He twisted
the theory away from the Hegelian notion of spirit as what's real and replaced it with
a materialistic metaphysic, that is one in which material things are what exist. But
while his theory changed the nature of reality, it kept the Hegelian progression, the dialectic,
as the path of cultural development.
Again, our concern here is not whether Marx is right or wrong. We're looking at the fact
that Marx is considering the development of the society as a whole, that society influences
the individual and individuals influence the society. More important, too, is that he also
sees society emerging as a thing in itself, and that we can only talk about the development
of a society on the level of society.
So from Comte, Spencer and Marx, we get the precondition of sociology, namely that society
is a thing and not just a collection of individuals. In order to study society, we have to study
from a sociological vantage point.
The person who took the next step and made this study scientific was Emile Durkheim.
Durkheim was a French Jew whose father, grandfather, and great-grandfather were rabbis in France.
He was expected to follow suit, and indeed he was in training when he became fascinated
with questions about the nature of communities instead of the questions relevant to his community.
As a Jew, he was an outsider, something that was made very clear during that time of the
Dreyfus Affair in France, where Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish member of the army, was falsely accused
and convicted of treason. The actual traitor, a non-Jew, was protected in an orchestrated
cover-up. The relations of communities in society, how communities differ, how they
perpetuate themselves, and how they adapt themselves were questions that one could not
help but ask, especially when one looked from the outside in.
So he launched himself into a study that at that time hardly existed. He became the first
professor of sociology and went on to launch the first ever Department of Sociology. He
literally built the intellectual infrastructure of the study single-handedly. The book recognized
as beginning sociology as a science is Durkheim's masterpiece, Suicide.
The motivation for the study was current events. There was a sudden dramatic uptick in suicides
in the late 1880s. It was happening all across Europe. People were killing themselves at an
unprecedented rate. Why would this be?
Now on the one hand, the decision to end one's life is incredibly personal. If one were to
ask each of the victims beforehand why they were thinking of taking their lives, each
would appeal to their own circumstances. Now perhaps there would be similarities in the
story, financial difficulties, love interest turned bad, medical problems, depression,
but every story would be based on idiosyncratic aspects of the person's individual life.
It was not a fad, it was not a fashion. People were not killing themselves to fit in.
The reason people made this incredibly important decision was based entirely on the context
of their own life. But while each decision was made on its own, the people were making
the same decision at a much higher rate than previously. Was there something, not at the
individual level, not at the psychological level, that could be operative? Was there
something at the sociological level that could not be reduced to individual deliberation?
Durkheim thought so, especially once he started collecting and evaluating data. Now immediately
one thing jumped out. The suicide rate was correlated with religion. The higher the
proportion of Protestants to Catholics in a country, the higher the suicide rate in the
country would be. The greatest number of suicides per capita occurred in the primarily Protestant
nations. The lowest rates were in the predominantly Catholic countries. The same held when you
broke a country down into smaller regions within the country, invariably the ratio of
Protestant to Catholic citizens in an area was directly correlated with the suicide rate.
Why would this be? Clearly both are working from the same sacred text in which suicide
is discouraged. So what then? Could it be something in the theological details? An examination
of the foundational differences between interpretations of the New Testament didn't point to anything.
And what could it be? At the turn of the 20th century, the Protestant-Catholic divide
was mapped onto other socially relevant differences. Protestants tended to have more wealth, and
the Catholic populations tended to be poorer. Protestants tended to be better educated than
Catholics. In a society, positions of power tended to be in the hands of Protestants even
when they were in the minority. Businesses tended to be owned by Protestants with menial
labor jobs performed by Catholics. Protestants and Catholics occupied very different social
niches. Could the differences be a result of social structure? If so, what are the relevant
features?
He turned to other features, gender, marital status, occupation. Before we draw any conclusions,
we need to work from the data. The data gives us access to what Durkheim would call social
facts. In his second book, The Rules of Sociological Method.
Now, a social fact has two elements to it. First, it consists of a way of acting, thinking,
and feeling, external to the individual. We grow up in a culture, and as a result, we're
acculturated into it. We develop habits by virtue of being part of that society, habits
that are standard within the group. We internalize these ways of acting, ways of doing, and
ways of feeling, so they seem natural, but they're not the result of our own decisions.
These habits are not biological facts. They don't come from our makeup as human beings.
Similarly, they're not psychological facts. These ways of thinking are not the result
of our independent thought. We didn't come up with them and decide for our own reasons
to engage in them. Rather, they came from a social context in which we found ourselves
children. We were taught these social facts, and they became a part of who we are.
Indeed, they become so embedded within us that we may not even recognize them. They
become invisible to us. We take them as truths of the world and not truths of society. Consider
trousers. We all wear them. We feel weird walking around without them, but we never
think about whether we should put them on. In the morning, we simply reach for them.
Never do we stop and think, hmm, is this a trouser day or a no trouser day? You know what?
Trousers. No, we just put them on. It's a social fact that we wear trousers.
The first element of a social fact is that something external to the individual becomes
part of the individual's way of being. The second element of a social fact is that if someone
chooses to ignore the social fact, there are consequences. We don't think about wearing
trousers, but if we did and decided against it, we would pay the price. Informally, we would get
nasty looks that would make us feel looked down upon. Friends might avoid us. Dates might be
canceled. Formally, we might get arrested, lose our job, get reprimanded in some fashion.
Social facts are norms and norms are enforced. They are, in Durkheim's words, endowed with
coercive power. Follow the social fact and you're normal. There are perks to being normal.
Disobey them and you're pathological. There are penalties for pathological behavior. Society
not only teaches us the social facts, it makes sure we follow them. The person who walks about
without trousers or who wears baggy trousers that droop down and show their underwear are condemned
in the strongest terms, often moral terms. These trouserless renegades are bringing about the
death of society. There are bad influences on our youth. Again, notice that this enforcement
mechanism requires a society. It's not enforced biologically, adaptively, as we see with Darwin.
They're not enforced psychologically. We could have cultural context in which people follow
different social facts and live quite happy. Well, adjusted lives without trousers.
The enforcement comes from a social structure. Social facts are sociological facts. They're
the building blocks of a science which looks at an emergent entity, society. It's the sociologist
job to find those social facts, to classify them and to explain them. Sociologists look
to see what's universal. The fact that it's normal everywhere means that it serves some
function in the social structure. When you look at every society, Durkheim argues one universal
is crime. Crime is everywhere all the time. Crime is normal. A complete lack of crime
would be pathological. From this Durkheim contends that crime is good. Crime is necessary. Crime
plays a crucial function in society. Now, this should strike us as bizarre. Crime, we think,
is a bad thing. If you could live in a country with more crime or a country with less crime,
surely the one with less crime is the better one. And one with absolutely no crime would be the best
of all possible countries, right? Durkheim says wrong. Crime, he argues, is necessary for a
healthy society. Crime is an activity that is determined by the society to be unacceptable
behavior. The rules by which we determine acceptable and unacceptable behavior, the social facts,
are internalized. We never think of them. But when we face a criminal or hear on the radio
or read in the newspaper about criminal activity, then and only then do we think about the social
facts. Criminals push the social boundaries. Now, sometimes those boundaries are there for good
reasons, but sometimes they're not. Some social facts undermine our ability to live completely
fulfilling lives, and these social facts must be challenged. But such challenges are criminal acts.
If there was no crime, that means there's an incredible degree of conformity in that culture.
Social facts are enforced, and that means the society is breeding a coerced uniformity and
acting, thinking and feeling. If a society has succeeded in achieving a given amount of conformity,
it won't stop there, but tighten its grip, insisting on ever greater conformity. Smaller and
smaller differences will become criminalized. There's no boundary between crime and acceptable
difference. Social structures will always push for greater and greater uniformity.
The problem with this push for uniformity is that it creates what Durkheim called anome.
If we internalize an overabundance of highly restrictive social facts, the result will be an
internal struggle within ourselves. We feel pressured from inside and outside to live up
the standards we both have made a part of ourselves, but also ones we resent. We're torn. Our usual
mileposts that help guide our behavior are lost. We're at sea. We don't know what to do. We feel
abandoned. We feel conflicted with ourselves. In such a case, the irrational seems rational.
We're torn apart. We know how we're supposed to live, but we also know we can't live that way.
Perhaps the only answer in such a case is suicide. Suddenly, the inscrutable becomes
understandable. The reason we see the stark difference in the suicide rates between Catholics
and Protestants is not a theological difference. Both equally strongly condemn the act, but rather
a function of the greater integration of Catholics into their familial and institutional structures
than was found among Protestants. There was a comfort from being within the group that Catholics
were more likely to have, and thus more alienation amongst members of the Protestant community,
more enemy, more feelings of abandonment, and so more suicides.
To avoid such situations of enemy from forced conformity, society needs those who push against
the boundaries. We need those who constantly check the boundaries and compel us to make
changes to social facts under which we operate when need be. We need criminals. It's only criminals
who can bring about positive social change. Now, Durkheim is not saying that we should
give civic awards to murderers, recognizing the fine work they do for our society.
There are acts that should be criminalized, and when we face these heinous acts, we recognize
them for what they are. But not all social facts are desirable facts, and unless we're forced to
confront and justify them, they will remain of their own inertia and become worse if not challenged.
We see Durkheim's view in contemporary film from both sides.
On the one hand, consider the 1975 classic The Stepford Wives, a thinly veiled science fiction
representation of the soullessness of contemporary suburban life. The wives in a seemingly perfect
Connecticut town appear to be all too perfect. They cook, they clean, they love their husbands
exactly as their men would have it. It's as though these women were not even human, because
they aren't. The Stepford wives are perfect because they're robots.
What contemporary suburban life demands from women is conformity, to such a degree that in
order to succeed in their socially determined roles, they have to completely surrender their
autonomy, their dreams, their modes of self-actualization and self-determination. In short, their humanity.
What The Stepford Wives illustrates is that the social facts in post-World War II suburban
America were so restrictive that they created a sense of anomy for women.
While we have representations of the effects of overly restrictive social facts,
we also have the celebration of the criminal. We love pirate movies, even though piracy is just
water-borne armed robbery. We love gangster films, despite the fact that gangsters are organized
criminals. We love gamblers and pool sharks. We love bank robbers. Consider Butch Cassidy and
the Sundance Kid. Butch has a gang of thieves, the hole-in-the-wall gang. They rob banks. They
rob trains. Yet we love them, despite or indeed because of their criminal exploits.
When we see Jack Sparrow, Tony Soprano, Fast Eddie Felsen or Butch Cassidy, we don't see a threat to
our well-being. Instead, we see somebody with the freedom we don't have. We see someone who's
willing to ignore the social facts we may find overly restrictive. We see people who do not play
by the rules, who flaunt their individuality. Perhaps no film better illustrates this than
Easy Rider. It's hardly accidental that the main character, Peter Fonda's Wyatt, goes by the nickname
Captain America. With stars and stripes on his helmet, he takes on the name of a superhero who
defended American virtues, while at the same time exhibiting everything that runs counter
to American values. He and his partner are running drugs and using the proceeds to keep from
having to hold straight jobs. He's threatening the Protestant work ethic with a completely
pathological way of being. They take psychedelic drugs and have casual sexual encounters. They
explicitly break all the rules and engage in acts generally considered taboo. Yet they're heroes.
We root for them. We want to be them. This was a film of the times. It was a period when the social
facts were being challenged. Social norms were not only in flux, but were under the microscope.
Faced with enemy coming out of the highly structured 1950s, the choices seemed to be
cultural malaise, cultural suicide, or cultural revolution. Easy Rider was making a case for
the last option in exactly the way we would expect, given Durkheim's view. But this seems to mean
that there's an essential tension underlying society, that there's a pull in and a push out.
Does this mean that societies are inherently unstable? Some sociologists thought yes.
