The
human mind is what we've always pointed to when we distinguish ourselves from the rest
of the universe.
There seems to be something unique about us, our ability to be rational, to understand
and manipulate our surroundings, to be creative, and to make meaning out of events and places.
It appears to be unlike anything else in the world.
This has led us traditionally to think that there was a second component to reality, a
human soul which is a different sort of substance.
Once psychology became scientific, this history became a sore spot to researchers.
Much like alchemy to the chemists, the past attempts to explain human behavior with terms
like soul was a professional embarrassment to psychologists tried to ignore.
The working of the brain was to psychology, much like atoms were to chemists, something
that was not accessible to observation.
This was a problem as the hallmark of science is empiricism, that theories are rooted in
measurable properties whose relationships can be tested and supported or undermined by observable
data.
Just as chemists in the 19th century were hesitant to accept the atomic hypothesis because
it seemed non-empirical and based on mere conjecture that skirted the edge of being unscientific,
so too we've seen that psychologists like the behaviorists wanted to banish all notions
of the human mind for the same reason.
Freudian talk of unobservable mental structures like the aid in the super ego never mind the
entire unconscious itself were magical fairy stuff and only fed the opinion that psychology
was a soft science, if a science at all.
Indeed some argued that human consciousness is not something that could be studied scientifically.
So it was with great enthusiasm that psychologists greeted modern neural imaging techniques.
The first was the CAT scan or CT scan, which stands for computerized axial tomography.
A CAT scan is a computer aided x-ray process.
The word tomography comes from the Greek words tom and graph.
Tom means cut, recall that this is also the root word for our term atom, a tom, that which
cannot be cut, and graph meaning right.
So the idea is that we use a computer to interpret the x-rays absorbed, reflected and transmitted
through tissue so that we can generate images of slices of the brain.
We can look at the structure of the organ at increasing depth, which allows us a three
dimensional perspective.
CAT scans gave us the ability to see structures of working brains.
For centuries, anatomists had been dissecting the brains of people who had been traumatic
injuries to the head and whose mental disabilities had been documented during their lives.
In this way, we could determine that certain parts of the brain were relevant to certain
processes.
Recall this is how Paul Broca was able to determine that the region named for him, Broca's area,
was essential to speech.
But having to rely on documentation of abnormalities during life and then observing the physical
brain only after death, of course, limited the ability to really see how brain structure
was important.
CAT scans for the first time opened this up to investigation and it changed the study
of psychology forever.
These imaging machines would give us access to observations earlier psychologists could
only dream of having.
The new imaging technology meant that psychology would become a new field, a modern field, a
hard science.
Freud's id, ego and unconscious mind as well as Jung's collective unconscious could be
rejected as insufficiently scientific.
The behaviorist rejection of mind could also be rejected as we now could observe more than
mere stimulus in response.
The world of the brain had been opened up to us.
The CAT or at least the CAT scan was out of the bag.
Now the CAT scan does have two problems.
First, x-rays are dangerous to patients.
Advances in computer power and x-ray technique improve this by limiting exposure to radiation
but an alternative way of seeing inside the living brain would be welcome.
Second, it only gave us snapshots of structure.
We don't see action, changes inside the brain and the actual working of the parts, just
structural elements, just a blueprint.
These concerns were answered by two new technologies.
One was magnetic resonance imaging, MRI.
Magnetic resonance imaging was developed by the physicists but its value in medical
and psychological research was quickly realized.
Now remember that moving electrical charges generate a magnetic field and that atoms have
a central nucleus with negatively charged electrons outside.
As such, atoms and the molecules they combine into all generate magnetic fields.
So if we expose these molecules to a strong magnetic field, the result will be to line
up the molecules in the direction of this magnetic field.
If we then cut this external field to shut it off, the internal magnetic fields will again
fall out of alignment but the time it takes them to do so will vary based on the composition
of the molecules.
As such, by measuring this relaxation of the magnetic fields, once we cut the external
field we can determine what kind of substances are inside.
This lets us do what CAT scans do, look inside of the brain without having to physically
go into it but at a higher resolution and with no cancer causing radiation.
It's safer for the patient and gives us more detailed pictures.
Problem one solved.
But we still only had snapshots.
We could see tumors and structural abnormalities but we still didn't see the brain at work.
For this we would need positron emission tomography or PET scans.
Now the basis of a PET scan is positron emission, that is the result of radioactivity that can
be detected.
We inject a radioactive form of oxygen attached to a sugar molecule that's taken into the
blood and used by the cells like normal sugar.
When the organs of the body are active, there's more blood in them.
And a part of the brain is active, blood flow to it increases.
Because there's the radioactive molecule in the blood, we can detect at any given moment
which part of the brain is active because there will be a spike in the emitted radioactivity
from the sugar in that part of the brain.
The advantage of the PET scan is that instead of looking at architecture, we're now looking
at process.
PET scans give us a completely different view, one that lets us know how the brain is working,
not just how it's structured.
We can literally see parts of the brain light up in various sequences when the person engages
in different sorts of activities.
So with these new tools, psychologists figured they could decode which parts of the brain
were responsible for what.
This not only included behaviors like speech and movement, but now elements of internal
consciousness like finding something tasty, or falling in love, or thinking someone untrustworthy.
Aspects of human experience that psychologists long thought they could never study in a systematic
objectively quantifiable way.
The presumption was that they would pick up on the work of Broca and Wernicke from the
end of the 19th century and use the technology developed over the following hundred years
to give detailed maps of brain function that those researchers could never have dreamed
was possible.
We would create an atlas of the brain, a broad-scale picture of the functions of each of the areas
of the brain, and then build detailed roadmaps for each of these neighborhoods showing fine
structures that let areas do what they do.
It was a plan.
It was an ambitious research project.
And it's providing us to this day with insights into human behavior that are completely unexpected
and at odds with our traditional picture of who we are.
We thought we were rational agents.
We act because we choose to.
We weigh possibilities, determine what's in our own best self-interest, or in the best
self-interest of our society, and from the force of our will, we do what we want.
With our new imaging tools, we should, we thought, observe the parts of the brain responsible
for appetites, deliberation, and action.
We should see them light up in appropriate order, displaying our consciousness.
Of course, it turned out to be more complicated than that in some very surprising ways.
Recall the path of development we've been observing throughout the progression of the
various sciences.
We begin by defining reality in atomic terms.
We see the world as filled with individuals.
We gain knowledge by putting those individual entities under the microscope and finding
their properties.
We then progress to realizing that reality is not found in the things themselves, but
in the relationships between them.
Finally, we move to a place where it's the entire system that seemed to be the ultimate
reality, the things just being aspects of the larger whole.
We see that pattern here again, right?
When we look at the brain, we lose our sense of people as autonomous individuals distinct
from their environment.
Instead, we have to see ourselves as yet another part of the environment.
We are not atomic individuals acting on the world through the force of our will, but rather
a part of the world.
We're shaped by it, and reacting to it in ways that show us to be connected to each
other and to externalities in a deeper fashion than we are accustomed to considering.
It begins with the development of the brain and the human fetus.
On the one hand, the process is guided by genetics.
25,000 of our genes are active in the creation of our central nervous system.
Cells divide from the fertilized egg and differentiate themselves, that is, they adopt particular
form.
This is in order to take on specific roles and giving rise to daughter cells that form
the various organs of the body.
In the case of the brain, there are hundreds of types of cells that need to develop.
Some are neurons, or what we usually think of as brain cells, which emit and absorb
electrical impulses to give rise to the neurological functions we observe.
There's a great variety of neuronal cells.
These form complex webs to send particular signals.
There are also glial cells, which glue these neurons together, creating stable structures.
So if neurons are bricks, glial cells are like mortar, holding the neuronal structure
together and sustaining the necessary gaps, called synapses, between the neurons.
The neurons themselves transmit or inhibit chemical electrical signals that move along
the complex web of the brain.
But, while this process is guided by our genetic makeup, the environment plays a crucial function
as well.
The effect of the chemical environment of the mother's body greatly affects how the
brain develops.
The reason is that the brain has an inflationary stage, much like the universe in Big Bang
Theory.
Recall that the reason the universe has the structure it does is that there's a point
where all of a sudden it expands extremely rapidly and the state immediately before is
then reflected in the architecture afterwards.
Around the second month, the embryo develops a thin tube of fluid that becomes the brain.
It's lined with progenitor cells that will ultimately give rise to all of the brain cells.
Around the fourth month, these progenitor cells divide unbelievably rapidly at a pace
of up to a quarter million times per minute, creating cells that become the brain.
Ultimately, there will be about a hundred billion neurons and at least a trillion glial
cells.
Once they're created, they lose the ability to further divide.
The brain cells that are made are the only ones the person will have for the rest of
their life.
Unlike other organs, the brain cannot rejuvenate or fix itself by cell division by creating
new raw materials.
Because so many cells are made so quickly and because they're the cells that will be
present throughout the lifespan of the individual, how they're created makes a difference in
the functioning of the brain throughout the lifespan of the individual.
Now we know that certain environmental factors will cause serious problems.
Exposure to radiation is what?
The children born around Hiroshima and Nagasaki after the dropping of the atomic bombs were
seen to have serious neurological problems as a result of the effect on the expansion
of brain cells.
Similarly, the presence of alcohol in the mother's blood during this period has a significant
effect on the development of these cells, giving rise to cognitive and self-control
issues later in life for affected children.
We're often attempted to conflate biologically determined aspects of humans with genetically
determined aspects of humans.
We think that our genes determine everything about us, but as we see in the explosion of
neural activity in the two to four month period of fetal development, who we become is a function
of how our brain develops.
While there are certainly important genetic factors at play, there are also important
environmental factors that help determine who we will be.
We are who we are, in part because of the chemicals that surround us during our development.
Our genes are a part of the story, but the universe outside of us also plays a part.
This is even more evident once the brain has developed and, after birth, when we begin
to interact with the environment.
The more we've studied the working of the brain, the more we came to realize how dynamic
it is, how much it's affected by our experiences, by our environment, by our surroundings.
We can no longer see ourselves as insulated from the world, understanding it, acting on
it from outside.
The more we look, the more we see ourselves as an inextricable element of that environment.
Now, genetically, we're certainly predetermined to have certain connections made at certain
times.
Children pretty much all begin to make sounds, form words, and later sentences on roughly
the same schedule.
Children begin to crawl and then pull themselves up and ultimately walk at roughly the same
time.
We have the phrase, the terrible twos for a reason, right?
Two to three year olds go through a period of neural development that leads to certain
sorts of behaviors or misbehaviors, much to the chagrin of parents and the delight of
grandparents.
It's all quite predictable.
And so, we would think that development is purely a genetic matter, but it turns out
that exposure to certain sorts of stimulation is also important.
If a child is brought up in the dark, then the parts of the brain responsible for sight
will not be stimulated and therefore never develop.
There's a genetically determined period of growth, and that growth requires a certain
sort of interaction with the child's surroundings.
Think of the way we tend to talk to babies.
Our voices radically change pitch, from low to high.
We use tones we would never think of using with adults.
Why do we do this?
Turns out it's important to brain development.
We've seen that there are certain deficiencies that develop in the children of depressed
mothers.
While there are other factors at play, one of the effects of clinical depression is
a flat affect in tone when one speaks.
The lack of changes in pitch has effects on the growing brain that give rise to cognitive
problems later on in life in these children.
Baby talk may be annoying to adults, but it's essential for babies.
Who we become is in part determined by the world we grow up in.
But this is not just a result of neurological development.
The interaction between our brains and the environment is a fundamental property even
once the brain is fully mature.
Our brain is not separate from our surroundings, contemplating them from outside.
It turns out that when we use PET scans to see how the adult brain works, that brain
is inextricably interconnected with its surroundings.
We came to realize that there are parallel processes happening in the brain.
We have cognitive processes, the sort of thing that involves contemplation, making meaning,
connecting events and cause and effect relationships.
And then there are others that do not require cognition at all.
We have automatic processes.
When we're in a crowded room with lots of noise, somehow we hear our name through the
climber more clearly when somebody utters it than other sounds that are at the same volume.
Our brain just picks it out for us and highlights it so that we can then cognitively wonder,
who's talking about us?
Are we being praised or is it someone spreading vile rumors?
Is it someone I know?
All of this cognitive consideration is done after the initial automatic non-cognitive
work our brain did for us automatically.
Another example, we're wired to see faces.
We see them even when there aren't any.
Look at the front of a car, right?
The headlights appear to be eyes and the grill a mouth.
If there's an emblem on the front of the hood, we automatically think it's a nose.
There is no man in the moon, but look at an arrangement of craters and we see a face.
This is an automatic process, something we think without having to think about it.
It's a psychological reflex, but there are other mental processes that are more interesting
for our questions about the nature of reality.
These are pre-cognitive processes.
Like the automatic ones, they occur independently of cognition, but they're more complex and
more interesting to analyze.
We often act in ways we do not consciously consider.
So think about how we stand when we talk when we're in a group.
Look at a group of people chatting and more often than not, they'll all have the same
stance.
If one person has his arms folded, everyone else will as well.
If one has his hands in his pockets, others will follow.
We pick up on an accent if we stay in an area for an extended period of time.
This is not a conscious choice, but it's called the chameleon effect and is the result
of our neurological structure.
We have what are termed mirror neurons in our brain.
These cause us to internalize the behavior of the people we observe and with whom we
interact.
When people feed infants, for example, they often open their mouths and close them as
if they were receiving the spoonful of strained carrots along with them.
This is not, as we often later try to explain, a modeling of the behavior we want to see
in order to teach the little child how to eat.
Rather, it's a reflex brought on by the mirror neurons.
We see others act and our brain records it.
Not just as a memory of an external event like other external events.
When we see a person do something, our brain internalizes it, stores it in the same sort
of way as if we, too, acted in that way.
We see from PET scans how the brain reacts to different sorts of observations and if
we see a person and a robot execute similar actions, they affect the brain in quite different
ways.
Our brain recognizes the other humans as human and creates a special connection with their
actions, stores them in the brain in a special way, making them a part of us.
This is what gives us the ability to empathize, to feel someone else's pain, to humanize them
in a fashion that we are able to care about them and their welfare.
This is the foundation of morality.
Now, this is not to say that ethics are programmed into us.
Ethical deliberation is an intricate process with deep cognitive, conceptual and philosophical
aspects, but that it's even possible is the result of our neurological processes, processes
that are themselves not cognitive, not conscious choices, but fully reactive to the environment.
We see this in what's called emotional contagion.
We take cues from our surroundings and as a result, we feel or act in accord with them.
In India, we see the practice of laughter yoga, where groups of people assemble and begin
intentionally laughing out loud.
Eventually, the forced laughter turns to authentic laughter and the people reap the health benefits
that come from a good belly laugh.
Laughter may not be the best medicine, but it is good medicine.
And like many diseases that medicine is designed to combat, laughter is contagious.
In 1982, the comedy writing team of Zucker, Abraham's and Zucker, the makers of the films
Airplane, Kentucky Fried Movie, Top Secret and other classic comedies, they made a short-lived
television series called Police Squad, starring Leslie Nielsen as Lieutenant Frank Drebben.
They later turned it into the very successful Naked Gun films, but it started as a television
series.
Now, despite being one of the funniest shows ever made, it was canceled mid-season after
only four episodes.
Got critical acclaim, but the audiences weren't laughing.
Part of the reason is that because of the frenetic pace of the jokes in the shows, they
didn't use a laugh track.
Laugh tracks were initiated once television went from live to tape performances.
Now, with a live studio audience, the viewers at home heard the laughter and were more likely
to laugh because of the emotional infectiousness of laughter.
When the audience was removed, the laugh track was used not only to cue viewers that there
was a joke, but to put them in the laughing mood.
Audiences reported greater enjoyment watching the program when they felt they were laughing
along with others.
When Zucker, Abraham's and Zucker opted against the use of a laugh track, they not only left
people unsure of whether they should be laughing, but without the infectious element, they left
viewers with a sense of comic isolation.
As a result, a very funny show was thought less funny, leading to its cancellation.
We may think that we determine how we feel, how we stand, how we behave, to some degree
we do, but much of it is precognitive.
It happens before we think about it.
In the 1980s, the Benjamin, American psychologist Benjamin LeBette, demonstrated that the firing
of the necessary neurons in the brain to execute actions we believe to be freely and
consciously determined actually occur before the parts of the brain associated with cognition
are invoked.
In other words, the brain begins to move our hand to pick up the cookie before our mind
is decided that we want a cookie.
The brain has separate elements that work at the same time.
The amygdala deals with many of the automatic and precognitive aspects, but the thoughtful
cognitive functions occur in the frontal cortex.
What often happens is that the action is begun or a reaction to a situation is formed in the
amygdala on a purely reflexive basis, only to have the frontal lobe immediately afterward
spring into action to create a coherent narrative.
This narrative is formed to provide a rationale for our response, to justify our reaction.
The result is that we think our action is the result of free will, and we think that
the gut reaction we have is not a reflex, but justified by some principle.
But really, the action and reaction we have is independent of our higher cognitive functions.
We know from watching what lights up in the brain when, and how it is that we came to
do what we did, and how we came to believe what we believe.
We know from the stories we tell why we think we did what we did, and why we think we believe
what we believe, but according to studies, the sense is that only about five percent
of our decisions are caused by conscious attention to situations.
The overwhelming majority of our decisions are made by the non-cognitive parts of our
brains.
Our brains decide for us, and then we interpret that decision to make it seem to ourselves
that we meant it all along.
We know from people who have had the connection between the hemisphere of their brains severed,
often to prevent epileptic seizures, that the emotional and the interpretive elements
are distinct.
Evolutionarily, this is a good thing, of course.
If we had to think about everything and didn't act automatically in certain situations, we
wouldn't be good enough hunters to have lunch, and we'd be such poor prey that we would be
lunch.
We need a portion of the brain that just reacts and does so quickly without consideration.
But, we did develop that other part, the part that thinks about things.
This we long thought is what makes us human, and we wrongly asserted that all our decisions
came from this part of ourselves.
The truth is that much more often than not, the decisions come from the connection between
the brain and the world, more so than between the contemplative mind and the world.
This distinction does not mean that we're back to the old metaphysics of Descartes
with a body and a soul as distinct kind of entities, but in distinguishing between the
purely material parts of the brain that deal with cognitive function and the parts of the
brain that deal with pre-cognitive functions, we have to reevaluate our place in the world.
If our actions largely result from activity in the pre-cognitive aspects, then we have
to see ourselves as much more a part of our surroundings, as an extension of them, in
deep ways.
But this connection, interestingly, is only partly a physical connection.
That is, it's not merely the interplay of physical stimuli that led to automatic actions
of fight or flight.
Like color patches shaped on a saber-toothed tiger on our retinas, this is one element,
and it's one of the elements investigated by evolutionary psychologists and eco-psychologists.
But it turns out that just as important to our non-cognitive judgments and actions are
concepts that are socialized into the mind.
Our culture imprints itself on our brains through the process of socialization.
How does this happen, and what does it mean?
Those questions don't belong to psychology, they belong to the field of sociology.
