Throughout this course, we've looked at ways in which scientific discoveries have forced
us to alter our view of reality.
But it's not just scientific advances that have this power.
Political developments have also changed our view of what's real.
In the contemporary mind, we often conflate science and technology.
We think of them as the same thing, or as flip sides of the same coin.
Now, perhaps it's our profit-focused presumptions, or the strength of our self-interest, but
anytime you hear someone try to justify scientific research, the grounds upon which it's done
are invariably invoke the technology that comes out as a result of the research.
Why spend money on space exploration?
Well, look at all the household products we now have because of NASA's work.
Knowledge itself, we often think, is not valuable, even if it does cause us to revise our picture
of reality.
It's only that which we can make life longer, more convenient, or more entertaining that
we consider valuable.
We often think of human progress largely, if not solely, in terms of the material development
of our technology.
We are more advanced.
We are better off than, or more strongly, we are better than those who came before us
because we have computers, smartphones, antibiotics, space flights, you name it.
Some believe that if those in the past were as advanced as we are, as good as we are,
they would have had those things too.
Others think it's not our knowledge that defines us.
That makes us who we are.
It's the gadgets we've created with it.
It's the tools we use.
It's the lifestyle we've been able to adopt because of the objects we've created with
the knowledge we have acquired.
And still others hold that it's the knowledge we gain through scientific research.
It's interesting for, yeah, those nerdy folks who are into that kind of stuff, but in the
end it's not important in itself.
Knowledge without application is pointless, they argue.
Ideas are only valuable insofar as they affect life as lived, insofar as they will allow
us to meet our needs in more efficient ways, insofar as they serve our goals.
The standard understanding of technology holds that we have pre-existing goals and technology
is the set of tools we create to help us reach them.
When we can do what we need done or want done more efficiently, we have more time to create,
to discover, to flourish as humans.
Technology is a part of human progress because it allows us the time and space to be more
human.
It frees us from the tedious necessities of life in order to grant us the ability to pursue
our real interests.
But it has long been argued that this progressive picture of technology is flawed.
Technology the line goes does not free us from anything.
In fact, the reverse is true that we become slaves to our technology.
Technology is not our tool, it's our master.
It governs what we do, what we think, what our goals are.
When you have a hammer, everything starts to look like a nail.
If you have a hammer, you want nails.
You need nails.
You never have enough nails.
Consider possibly the most important technology in the history of humanity, the alphabet.
Now, we have written language so deeply embedded in our sense of the world that we often fail
to realize that the alphabet, that writing itself is a technology.
But it is.
Think about thinking.
We think that we think in language.
We think that we're like cartoon characters who, when thinking, have little bubbles over
our heads with sentences in them.
No sentences, no thought, no language, no thought.
Surely our ancestors who had no language could still think the technology of language
has so permeated us that we don't see it as a technology, but mistakenly think it's
a natural part of us.
And thus we see ourselves through this technology, the changed human becoming the natural human.
But once we realize that language is a technology, an engineered addition to human life, not
a natural part of it, we realize that the way we treat our own inner lives is determined
in large part because of our technology.
Our tools make things possible that otherwise could not be, and we embed ourselves in the
world of these possibilities in a way that makes our own being a byproduct of our technology.
Add more technology, and you get human life completely reshaped.
Things we never needed suddenly become necessities.
And then we need the accessories for our necessities, and the accessories become necessities.
Our entire way of life can be completely altered.
In one sense, this is worrisome.
Walk down the street and eyes are down, glued to smartphones, real human contact is minimized.
Often people don't talk because they're so busy texting.
But this interpersonal isolation could, if considered properly, be a good thing.
The German philosopher Martin Heidegger in his article, The Question Concerning Technology,
argues that technologies create worlds and reveal truths.
Technology at its best has the power of poetry.
To reveal ourselves and the world to us, technology is a creative revisioning of how
the world could be and then changing the world accordingly.
Elements that were hidden become accentuated, aspects we thought were necessary are seen
as arbitrary, choices we never realized we had become possibilities.
Think about the alphabet again.
Here's a technology that has unbelievable power to create worlds and to travel in time.
Think of every book you've ever read and when and where it was written.
Think about the quotations that make you reflect.
Think about puns.
Puns are only possible once we have written language.
We learn from studying etymologies.
How our language has changed is a reflection of how human culture has changed.
This door to ourselves requires this technology.
But, Heidegger argues, if we take the wrong approach to technology, it will not only fail
to create worlds, it will endanger them.
When we become captured by our technology, it dictates our goals and frames the world,
sets our view of it, and keeps truth from being revealed by shielding our eyes from
the rest of the world left unseen.
The earth becomes just a coal mine to be exploited, not a glorious mystery to be explored and
delighted in.
Heidegger is writing in 1949 when technology has done in two world wars what we never thought
possible.
World War I introduced chemical weapons that caused horrible, painful deaths, mechanized
weapons that could kill large numbers of victims at once effortlessly and from a distance
without seeing their faces.
The use of airplanes and zeppelins allowed death to come from the sky and submarines
were deployed so death could come from beneath the water.
World War II brought atomic weapons and the possibility of complete global annihilation.
Now is it that we were able to do this to ourselves?
Because Heidegger argues, we have allowed our technology to redefine the very notion
of humanity in accord with its own limitations.
Being with a capital B is defined by our technology and since technology shields off part of the
world, it shields us from parts of ourselves.
It limits our horizon and thereby limits our growth.
We use technology to achieve our meager utilitarian ends instead of engaging in fully creative
acts that would create the world and disclose truth.
In another work, his massive book Being in Time, Heidegger contends that the starting
point for this disclosure of truth is the glimpsing of death.
Every one of us he contends has the shocking realization that we are finite beings, that
we will die, that our time is limited.
It's only by seeing that our lifetimes will have an end point that we can project ourselves
into that bounded future.
The moments of our life are made meaningful by the fact that they will end.
Humans are beings who plan.
We envision ourselves being more than we are and that we make it so.
Who we are, Heidegger thinks, is determined by who we want to be.
But because we only have a limited amount of time, we have to make choices.
We can't be everything.
We don't have enough time.
We have to design ourselves as a project we select in the time we may or may not have,
because we are mortal.
The life do have a choir's meaning.
But if you look at some of our most prized technologies, especially those we're putting
the most resources towards, it seems that they're created with the goal of immortality,
that through them we're trying to destroy every path where we could meet our mortal
end.
Medical science comes up with drugs and procedures to cure diseases and heal injuries.
We pasteurize and radiate food to kill microbes.
We put airbags and cars and guardrails on the sides of roads.
Our sink cushion acts as a flotation device.
We put fire retardant in children's pajamas and asbestos in the walls.
Until we discovered they caused cancer.
We have the grim reaper on the run at every turn.
We think death is bad, death is evil, and we put up large sums of money to try to make
ourselves immortal.
Benjamin Franklin said that in this world nothing can be certain except death and taxes.
We use lots and lots of technology to try to avoid the first and aggressive accounting
methods in offshore tax havens to take care of the second.
Cheating on your taxes I won't discuss, but cheating death?
Is it also cheating us of a meaningful life?
Does our death-defying technology help us become more human, better living through chemistry,
or does it make us less human?
It depends, of course, on what we mean by the word human.
We do use death to distinguish human from non-human.
The instant before someone passes away we may say he is in the bed, but the moment after
he passes we say his body is in the bed.
We use the terms body or corpse to indicate that the deceased is no longer considered
a person.
But what property of the body is it that we use to determine dead from alive?
Now traditionally we use minimal functioning of bodily systems.
We need to have blood flowing through the body to deliver oxygen to the cells.
The blood only flows if the heart is beating.
A person is alive if he or she has a heartbeat.
Technology has made this definition problematic in a number of ways.
We have automated external defibrillators, which are capable of shocking a non-beating
heart back into service.
We say of someone who has received this treatment or successful CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation,
that she was dead, but brought back to life.
But while we think of the person as having been dead, we usually don't think of them
as having stopped being a person.
Death as a removal of personhood seems to require permanent death and not merely temporary
death.
The person was, as Miracle Max said in The Princess Bride, only mostly dead.
Intervention that allows the body to regain its ability to maintain itself implies that
continuing life was possible.
And it seems that where there is this possibility, personhood is maintained.
The idea of using the body's potential to maintain or regain its functionality as a
condition of personhood becomes more complicated when we consider life support technology.
We can artificially keep the blood flowing and keep the lungs inflating.
We can hook people up to machines that function like working kidneys.
Are those who are on the machines still human?
In the full sense of the word?
We have no question like this when it comes to prosthetic aids for other bodily functions.
These seem to be more than just window dressing.
They're seen as the foundation of life.
This conversation usually turns at this point from the heart to the brain.
Sure, we can think of the body as a machine, and we can just put in different parts to
keep it running like an automobile.
But people are not cars.
People think.
And while the physical body may still be artificially maintained, human life is correlated with
brain activity.
Death in this view is not bodily death, which can be arbitrarily full-stalled by the use
of life support mechanisms, but brain death.
This view is clearly related to the classical metaphysical picture we called dualism, in
which there are two completely different kinds of things that make up a person.
Bodies and souls.
Bodies are material entities, and souls are something non-material.
Now in Latin, the language of intellectual discourse until the last couple of centuries,
the word anima was used for soul.
But it also means mind.
It's the soul that has judgment passed on it, not the body, even though the body was
the one having all the fun.
Why judge the soul?
Because it decided what the body would do.
The body may have enjoyed the carnal pleasures, but it was the soul that sent it to do what
it did.
In this way, the notions of soul and mind really are the same.
In the dualistic view, when someone is brain dead, the body is still present.
But the will, the spirit, the mind is gone.
The soul has deserted the body.
The body is inanimate.
That is, it has no animus.
So the idea that brain death is human death is tied to this picture of the human body,
this dualistic view that has largely been abandoned in science.
We don't think there's a second kind of non-physical entity within the body.
So why cling to brain death as the essential property to define human death?
Even if we think of the mind as emerging from the brain, the mind plays a crucial role in
being human that the heart does not.
The mind is what lets us plan, lets us choose, what gives us autonomy.
To be human is not merely to be alive, but to strive, to have a picture of where one
is going and to figure out how to get there.
As humans, we may decide to watch a stupid television program because we know it will
make us laugh.
We may choose to watch a lecture series because we think it will make us smarter.
Here we're back to Heidegger.
We're not present in the now, but always exist as our potential selves in the future.
Our choices will take time to happen, so we may say, live for the moment.
But really, we're living for the moment to come.
The self we are not yet, but think we will be, and that we think we want to be.
The mind is what projects us forward and lets us choose.
When someone's brain dead, there's not a self to project itself, to create itself.
That is human life.
After brain death, it's not possible.
Of course, the brain science we've looked at makes this problematic too.
Because as we've seen, as often as not, we act without thought.
The brain acts on its own, and then the conscious parts backfill a desire to match the action.
We construct false but convincing narratives that we chose to take that cookie for reasons
we dreamed up.
Really, it was the amygdala working on its own.
So if the brain is not the seat of our autonomy like we think it is, why should we believe
that brain death removes our personhood?
Indeed, maybe we can resuscitate the brain in the same way we can resuscitate the heart,
and if not now, why not soon?
Or at least, eventually.
Cryonics – the cryogenic preservation of one's body, or at least one's head after
death by freezing – is undertaken by some as an attempt to remain a human even after
death.
The hope is that if technology now can't cure the problem that caused death, surely
in the future, an effective treatment will be found.
At that time, the body could be thawed, cured, and restored to a normal life, or the head
could be attached to a new or artificial body.
Ted Williams, widely considered to be the greatest hitter in the history of baseball,
is the most famous person who has been cryogenically frozen after death.
We say that Ted Williams is dead, but is he still a person?
If we think of that person whose heart was restarted by the defibrillator, we thought
she was dead while she had no heartbeat, but never stopped being a person because she still
had the potential for living, which was actualized by the shock from the defibrillator.
Isn't the same thing true for Teddy Ball game?
We generally think not.
No, he's dead.
He was a person, but is no longer.
But what if we do find a way to resuscitate him?
Would he regain his personhood?
Or would he have always kept it?
Wouldn't that make him like the woman whose life was saved by CPR or the defibrillator?
If that's true, then brain death would not be the true definition of death.
The cessation of brain function would not be what removed our personhood for us.
So we return to the question, is death the thing that removes our personhood?
Or is death what makes us people?
We're made up of cells, and we have a natural life cycle of birth, growth, aging, and death.
This is what happens for the body as a whole because it also happens for the cells individually.
With few exceptions, our cells replenish themselves in our body by dividing.
They split and make new young cells.
But this process does not create two exact copies of the parent cell.
Recall that cells have nuclei, and inside the nucleus are chromosomes which contain
the DNA.
The DNA is in the form of a double helix which unravels itself, then the two have split off
and recreate the other side because the base pairs only pair up in a particular way.
As a result, we have two copies of the DNA molecule, each of which can form the genetic
material needed in the two cells that split out of the progenitor.
DNA is like a pair of pants.
At the bottom of the leg of your pair of pants is a hem, the place where the fabric is folded
over and sewn closed.
Why do we hem the bottom of pants?
Think what happens to homemade denim shorts we make by cutting off the legs from a pair
of jeans.
The ends fray, they unravel, they get shorter, losing their integrity, they slowly fall apart.
DNA is not only in your jeans, it's like your jeans.
If it weren't hemmed at the end, it would unravel and fray.
So we have what are called telomeres at the end of the chromosomes.
Their discovery earned the Nobel Prize for the Australian geneticist Elizabeth Blackburn
and the Americans Carol Greider and Jack Sostak.
These telomeres are the genetic equivalent of hems.
Every time a cell divides, the end of the chromosome gets ripped off.
So we have at the end of the chromosome a series of meaningless repeating base pairs,
TTAGGG, TTAGGG, TTAGGG in the DNA.
This is genetic code that carries no information making it disposable.
Indeed, that's exactly its purpose.
With each passing generation, a little bit more of the telomere is shaved off, making
it shorter.
When the telomere is gone, the meaningful genetic information begins to get ripped off,
making the cell's information incomplete and making it impossible for it to do its job
since it doesn't have the full manual.
So once the telomere is gone, the hem is completely gone and the cell becomes unable to divide.
With the ends of the telomere, the cell dies, unable to replace itself through replication.
The telomere is sometimes compared to a fuse.
Once it burns all the way down, the cell destroys itself.
The effects of cell death in the body are signs we all recognize as aging.
Our cells are pre-programmed to age and to die.
In a sense then, so are we.
It seems that we're designed with a finite shelf life from the inside out.
It turns out that telomere length is affected by environment and lifestyle choices.
Smoking, emotional stress, lack of exercise are all associated with shortened telomeres,
while regular exercise, a plant-based low carbohydrate diet, and stress management techniques are
associated with longer telomeres.
But even those with longer telomeres still have them shortened over time.
Their fuses burn more slowly, but they still burn.
Aging and death work at a slower pace, but the process is still humming along, leading
to an inevitable end.
While that seems worrisome, it actually is helpful in a sense.
Every time a cell divides, there's a chance that the ripping apart of the strands and
the helix and the DNA will accidentally knock out a rung in the latter.
It gets replaced, but not always by the same base.
This changes the genetic code.
Sometimes this isn't a problem, but sometimes it means that the newly created DNA has a
wrong manual.
It gives the wrong instructions to the cells.
It turns a cell from a helpful part of the system to a wrench in the system.
And as it divides, it creates more and more copies of this non-helping cell.
The cells that need to be there, working hard to do the job they're supposed to do in order
to get things done, they get crowded out by these do-nothing layabouts.
We call this cancer.
By making sure that cells only divide a certain number of times, we have an internal means
of trying to minimize cancer risk.
But then, the cancer cells themselves would die out too when their telomeres run out,
right?
Well, this is the interesting part.
There's an enzyme called telomerase, and it builds back up the telomere in cells.
It's like a little tailor going around and re-hemming the pants inside the cells.
In the case of some cancer cells, they produce their own telomerase, making them seemingly
immortal.
The cancer cells replenish their fuses so they never go off, meaning that they divide
and divide and divide while the healthy cells die off.
They crowd out the cells that are supposed to be there, and the resulting tumor grows
until it interferes with the body's ability to do what it needs to do.
Could we beat cancer at its own gain?
Could a cure to cancer be finding a way to make the telomerase ineffective, thus making
the cancer cells burn themselves out?
And in the other direction, could we use telomerase to lengthen the hems on the cells
we want to keep dividing?
Could we use telomerase inducers to reverse aging and make ourselves, and therefore possibly
ourselves, immortal?
Seems possible in mice.
Researchers engineered mice to have a telomerase switch.
That is, they would produce no telomerase themselves until they were given a particular
chemical, which would start the production inside their bodies.
At first, the mice aged absurdly fast, becoming old and decrepit at a young age.
But then, they were given the chemical which triggers the production of telomerase, and
the results startled even the scientists who expected it.
The premature aging reversed itself at a stunningly quick pace.
The cells regenerated, and the mice became young again.
The telomerase partially reversed the aging process.
Indeed, researchers in Barcelona showed that telomerase treatments in mice were capable
of increasing lifespans from 24 to 40%.
The fear is that you're not only feeding the good cells, but also supercharging the cancer
cells.
Interestingly, however, increases in cancer rate seem not to be associated with the increased
telomerase.
But maybe that, in addition to feeding the cancer cells, we're also keeping the cancer
killing cells in the body young, or that the telomerase is keeping cells from turning
cancerous in the first place.
It's not known, but there is a buzz about the possibility of genetic or medicinal treatments
that could hold the key to immortality.
We fear death, and as a result, our technology has raised the possibility of avoiding it.
But does this possibility rob us of our humanity?
The great Argentine author Jorge Luis Borges thought so.
In his story, The Immortal, Borges considers what immortality would do to a human, and
the results are not pretty.
When a Roman soldier drinks from a river that gives him immortality, he finds himself in
a city full of fellow immortals.
The city is in ruins, designed as a great maze.
At first he thought that this had to be built by gods, but then he determines that no, it
was built by madmen.
The purpose of a maze is to baffle those inside, but this was a maze with passages to nowhere,
blocked hallways for no reason.
It was architecture, he said, with no purpose.
That building was a metaphor for the immortals themselves.
Without alluming death, life for them had no purpose.
They remained silent, retreating inside their own heads.
They would never be taken away from this world, and so they intentionally retreated from it
into themselves.
Immortality gives you time to do everything, and so nothing holds any meaning, any value.
Life itself becomes purposeless, when every purpose could be achieved and an eternity
still lay out in front of you.
The Ron Howard film, Cocoon, on the other hand, takes a decidedly more positive spin
on the idea.
Aliens return to Earth to rescue some long lost compatriots and store the pods protecting
their bodies in a swimming pool in Florida.
But the senior citizens from the neighboring retirement community have been sneaking in
to use the pool, and when they bathe in the life-giving medium the aliens put in the pool
to nurse the pods, the seniors are rejuvenated, giving back their youthful energy.
The aliens discover them as they discover the aliens.
The aliens offer the seniors a chance to leave Earth and be granted immortality.
Almost all of the seniors accept the offer after both experiencing eternal youth and
knowing what it means to age.
Would we choose immortality, and would it more closely resemble the portrayals of Borges
or Cocoon?
Would immortality rob life of meaning or allow us the time to do all we want and thereby
allow us to fully realize the complete potential of our lives?
Regardless, our technology continues to point in the direction of immortality.
Would it make a difference to our understanding of death if we also had to reinterpret life
and birth?
Our technology is as busy addressing concerns at the start of life as it is dealing with
those at the end.
