The phrase, the human condition, means that to be human is to be limited, to be confronted
with a universe more powerful than you and more complex than you could ever understand.
Yet somehow, you have to live a meaningful life given your limitations.
We have hopes and dreams that we are unable to fulfill.
We want things we can't have.
We must find a way to live a good life.
While recognizing these boundaries, reality has placed on us.
The classical approach to the human condition is to embrace our inherent constraints.
Step one is to admit that we are small elements of a larger reality.
Then we construct ourselves as beings whose lives can nonetheless have meaning in spite
of or indeed because of these limitations.
We can transcend ourselves through relationships with others, by alleviating suffering in the
world or through a connection with the divine.
After all, it's God, or the God's alone, who are free from these limitations.
Traditionally, to be a God is to have human properties, but to have them without limits.
We may have strength, but the gods are omnipotent.
We may know things, but the gods are omniscient.
We may be caring, but the gods are omnipotent.
In the classical approach, we must begin by accepting that we aren't gods, and then
seek to find our place in the cosmos from there.
The contemporary approach to the human condition is different.
We are technological beings now.
If we're defined by our limitations, then our job is to redefine our own reality to
smash those limitations.
Humans may be constrained, but it's up to us to make ourselves more God-like, with
no limits.
No longer is it considered hubris.
It's standard operating procedure to strive to be gods now.
The contemporary approach to the human condition is to recondition the human.
Some of the technologies we use in this quest to change the essence of who we are, others
maintain the core of human nature, just making us better, more efficient.
We've looked at both chemical and genetic medicine, and their ability to make us better,
but still maintain some unique human identity.
We've thought about surgery and life-support technology.
We think of these interventions as medical because they're used to restore, preserve,
or enhance health.
However, the uses of these interventions have raised interesting issues that are both metaphysical
and ethical.
They make us redefine reality and challenge ideas about what we are and how we are to act.
What should we think about employing these technologies for cosmetic uses?
Now, suppose we employ our technologies for reasons that have nothing to do with solving
a medical problem, but simply to change ourselves.
How much control do we and should we have over our own identity?
Could we remake ourselves into someone or something completely different?
Or is there some core of our being as humans and as ourselves that must be maintained?
After a haircut, we say, this is the new me, and surely that's meant metaphorically.
But could there be cosmetic adjustments that you could literally use to create a new you?
That is, could you make changes to your body that could turn you into a different person
or even something other than a person?
When thinking about recombinant DNA technology, we raise the concern about human nature becoming
a blank slate about our ability to manipulate ourselves to the point where there remains
nothing underneath that's part of the definition of human.
Can we remake ourselves in a way that removes us from the species?
Let's start with non-genetic changes.
If we leave the genome alone and mechanically or chemically alter the body, are we still
the same person?
Do such changes raise special ethical concerns when used not to make us healthier, but simply
to suit our desires?
First, how do we draw the line between medical and cosmetic uses?
Now, there are certainly clear cases on both sides.
There are cases where the procedure saved lives, quadruple bypass surgery, which is employed
to clear blockages in the coronary arteries, clearly medical.
Now consider a case in which one has Botox injected into one's forehead in order to
get rid of wrinkles.
Straightforwardly cosmetic.
Botox is a strange technology.
It's a deadly poison.
Indeed, amongst the deadliest in the world, it's the botulinum toxin produced by the
bacterium Clostridium botulinum, the agent responsible for botulism.
If ingested, our gut enzymes don't destroy it, allowing it to enter the bloodstream.
Once there, it goes into the brain where it blocks acetylcholine.
Acetylcholine is the chemical that triggers brain cells that cause muscles to contract.
Without acetylcholine, you literally can't move a muscle.
This includes the muscles that makes the heart beat.
Botulinum toxin is among the most potently poisonous substances on the earth.
Two billionths of a gram is deadly.
This ability to cause paralysis was then harnessed for therapeutic uses.
Optometrists have been using a very diluted amount of botulinum toxin to help people who
suffer from blepharospasms, uncontrollable twitching of the eyelid.
By injecting infinitesimal amounts of the toxin, the muscles controlling the blinking
are paralyzed, causing relief from the symptoms.
Now in the 1980s, there was a plastic surgeon who was sharing an office with an optometrist,
and he overheard a patient who was angry with her treatment.
The optometrist would inject the botulinum toxin in various places around her eye to
control the spasms.
But this particular day, he didn't inject it into the patient's forehead above the
eye socket, and as a result, she got angry, demanding the placement of the needle there.
When the doctor said that the location of her current spasms made it medically unnecessary,
she again demanded it because that shot made her wrinkles go away.
When the plastic surgeon heard this, the din of their argument was quickly drowned out by
the sound of ringing cash registers in his head.
The ability of plastic surgeons to remove signs of aging means that aspects of our body
that were once unavoidable facts of life became choices.
By selecting to have or not have wrinkles, we turned biological processes into fashion.
We can now make a cultural statement by allowing our bodies to age naturally, or arresting
the appearance of these changes.
While facts are shuffled, experience implies wisdom, and displays of age gave one respect
and standing, but now displays of youth imply vitality.
A different cultural value system is advanced with our advancing technology.
The use of this technology for patients with uncontrollable spasms is clearly medicinal.
But the same treatment with the intent to remove wrinkles is cosmetic.
Medical use restores health, while cosmetic use displays cultural values.
So if we can determine what uses are cosmetic, then we have sociological truths to mind
from the practice.
But how do we draw the line?
The first move we usually make is to say that a procedure is medical if it restores something
to its natural state, and is cosmetic if it takes one intentionally out of a natural state.
The wrinkles were a natural part of the woman's face, and so the Botox treatment made her
better than natural, hence it's cosmetic.
But when the optometrist used it to deaden the muscles controlling her eyelids, it returned
her body to its natural state, and that treatment is medical.
The problem here is that sometimes, well, faro spasms are natural.
That is, they come from nature, from the person's biology.
People with cerebral palsy, for example, are prone to it.
In other cases, there's an environmental cause that brings it about.
The same, of course, is true of wrinkles.
So if we try to use natural or unnatural to draw the line, we can't separate the two
uses of Botox because wrinkles and eye spasms are equally natural.
But there is a difference, right?
While both of these may be natural in that they're part of what nature had in store for
the person based on genetics and environment.
In one case, the treatment returns the person to a state where he or she can live a normal
life, and in the other case, the treatment isn't necessary for living a normal life.
So the difference between medical and cosmetic use is defined by what we mean by normal.
Consider another example.
Macromastia, abnormal enlargement of the breast tissue, is a medical condition.
When a woman's breasts are significantly larger than normal, it can result in pain,
ulceration of the skin around the breasts, and back problems.
Surely, breast reduction surgery for such cases is medical.
Similarly, we might think of plastic surgery after a radical mastectomy to be medical.
If one lost a breast in order to deal with a tumor that could spread, it's relatively
uncontroversial to call the procedure reconstructive, that is, returning the patient to a physical
and physiological state that's similar to what the body would have been if it hadn't
experienced the disease.
Reconstruction is allowing the individual to reclaim a normal body that had been compromised.
But the American Society for Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons worked to set the line between medical
and cosmetic in a new place.
If breast reduction treatment for macromastia enlarged breasts is considered to be medical,
then the Society argued in a paper submitted to the Food and Drug Administration in 1982,
so should breast enlargement treatment for micromastia having small breasts?
In their words, there is a common misconception that the enlargement of the female breast
isn't necessary for the maintenance of human health or treatment of disease.
There is a substantial and enlarging body, so to speak, of medical information and opinion,
however, to the effect that these deformities, that is, small breasts, are really a disease,
which in most patients results in feelings of inadequacy, lack of self-confidence, distortion
of body image, and a total lack of well-being due to a lack of self-perceived femininity.
The enlargement of the underdeveloped female breast is therefore often very necessary to
ensure an improved quality of life for the patient.
Their claim is that what we define as a medical disorder, disease, or syndrome as a result
of an anatomical abnormality, if this clearly self-serving argument is accepted that having
smaller than average breasts, which causes some women psychological emotional difficulties,
should be seen as a disease, as a medical situation.
Breast enhancement surgery should be seen not as cosmetic, they contend, but as medically
corrective.
In this case, they cited the harms being corrected as social and psychological.
Patients aren't suffering physical pain or an inability to act, but rather feelings
of inadequacy, lack of self-confidence, distortion of body image, and a total lack of well-being
due to a lack of self-perceived femininity.
We have a deviation from a presumed normal, which causes the patient to suffer.
Is this enough to deem it a disease?
The American Society for Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons have justifiably been mocked for this
argument, but it raises a question we need to consider.
Is the amount or type of harm caused by a biological difference a viable standard in
setting the line between medical and cosmetic procedures?
How much and what sort of harm is relevant in making this determination?
Is psychological distress or cultural harm to be considered in deciding what disorders
require a medical response?
Let's consider a more recently classified diagnosis, attention deficit disorder.
Now, there's no doubt that there are physiological reasons why some people have shorter attention
spans than others.
This in and of itself has no medical effects, but we are in a culture where children are
schooled sitting in desks for hours at a time, listening to lectures, and graded on their
ability to soak in and retain information from this process.
These grades are used to determine college placement, and ultimately employment opportunities,
and thus social standing.
A short attention span can seriously limit an individual's options.
Knowing that certain amphetamines will interact with the brains of those with shorter attention
spans, allowing them to concentrate better, alleviates the potential social harm in many
cases.
The combination of the cultural disadvantage and its ability to be treated has caused us
to classify ADD as a recognized disorder requiring medical response.
But there's a lot of disagreement about ADD, so how do we make sense of this?
First, consider in what ways the diagnosis of a disease is an objective feature of reality,
and in what ways, if they political matter determined by cultural and historical factors.
We like to think that everything in science is purely a matter of objective observation
and calculation, but this isn't the case.
Consider the reclassification of Pluto.
In 1930, astronomers at Harvard determined that they had discovered a ninth planet, which
came to be called Pluto.
For three-quarters of a century, everyone learned that the solar system had nine planets.
On September 12th, 2006, the solar system had nine planets, but the next day it had
only eight.
Pluto hadn't been destroyed, it was reclassified.
Astronomers had discovered facts about the shape, structure, and origin of Pluto, and
knew that there were a multitude of other objects in the solar system that shared those
properties.
These properties differentiated them from the eight planets discovered before Pluto,
so either the term planet could mean both the sort of thing the other eight are, plus
the sort of thing Pluto is, meaning there would be a huge number of planets, or the
word planet could be defined by the set of conditions that met by only the original eight,
limiting the number of planets to a more manageable number.
That was the choice they made, and Pluto ceased to be a planet.
The important thing is that we see that the definition of planet is a matter of politics.
But once the definition is in place, it becomes an objective question of facts in the world
as to whether something meets the new criteria for being a planet.
Now, when I use the word politics, I mean simply that it's decided by people.
This doesn't mean there's not good reason for the decision, but that it is, in fact,
a decision.
It's a linguistic line we choose where to draw.
Another example of this question of objective reality in the cultural or political content
of science is the reclassification of homosexuality in the psychiatrist's diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders in the early 1970s.
This reclassification, and ultimately the removal of a category of mental disorder,
is something that was done by a group of specialists based on a vote.
Now, this is political in both the sense that it was influenced by the change of beliefs
amongst the community at large, but it was also a reflection of the changes in how psychology
itself thought about the brain and human sexuality.
To move from Freudian and behaviorist views to a more neurologically based picture were
factors in this event.
Whether a given person is homosexual is a feature of reality, but whether homosexuality
is classified as a disease or a disorder, that's a matter of politics.
We create that classification, and we do so by considering people's ability to live what
we think of as a normal life.
Let's get back to Max Weber's notion of an ideal type.
The healthy human body is exactly that.
We create a notion of what it is to be healthy, of what it is to have the physiological conditions
for human flourishing.
Deviations from it are considered situations requiring medical intervention.
But this definition as something that interferes with the conditions for human flourishing
is cultural.
Where does it come from in our culture?
Like almost everything else in our culture, Weber would argue, it comes from the Protestant
work ethic.
In Weber's most famous work, The Protestant Work Ethic in the Theory of Capitalism, he
shows how deeply entrenched in Western and particularly American thought is this notion
that human goodness is to be equated with the willingness to work hard and the willingness
to suffer.
Get back to Weber's predecessor, Emile Durkheim's book Suicide, in which he wrestled with the
statistical result that Protestant areas had proportionately and predictably more suicides
per capita than Catholic areas of Europe.
In trying to explain this, Durkheim pointed to general facts that Catholics had less money,
property, and power, and were often employed in positions of menial physical labor.
Catholics were on average, wealthier, better educated, and held positions of greater social
importance.
This difference, Weber later argued, was a result of differences in how the different
communities envisioned the well-lived human life.
Religion is usually associated with asceticism, that is, rejection of the worldly, the bodily,
the profane.
This life is but a test, and the reward is to come in the afterlife.
But European and American Protestants believe that modeling the suffering of Christ should
take the shape of meaningful labor that pays a dividend.
If one really is working hard, there ought to be results to show for it that is tangible,
observable evidence of the labor, namely, wealth.
Suddenly, we've taken a religious view, focused on the next world, and created an earthly
measure of piety and virtue.
Benjamin Franklin said that time is money, and the Protestant work ethic tells us that
money is the result of time properly spent.
According to Weber, what we place at the center of our notion of a well-lived life are the
ideas of utility and discipline.
We think that somebody is a good person if they endure suffering while they work hard
in order to generate wealth.
The successful person is a rich person who pulled himself up by his own bootstraps, who
went from rags to riches by the sweat of his brow, who made it to easy street by keeping
his nose to the grindstone.
If Weber is right about our sense of what we value in this culture, then we ought to
see its fingerprints on our notion of disease and disorder, and indeed we do.
In America, someone is considered disabled and eligible for social security benefits
– that is, payments from the federal government – if they have a physical ailment that
makes them unable to work.
The ability to be gainfully employed is the defining characteristic of a healthy human
body.
Notice something important about this definition.
It makes human health not a feature of the body itself, but a function of humans as relational
beings.
We're healthy if we can be of use to the economy, to the transfer of wealth in order
to meet the wants and needs of others in the marketplace.
We're healthy if we can work, and we require medical attention if we cannot.
The ability to work, though, includes not only physical abilities, but emotional and
psychological ones as well.
Consider what we term clinical depression.
Some studies contend that 10 percent of Americans at some point in their life have depression
and the rate is increasing rapidly.
If one is depressed, it leads to the inability to interact well with others.
It leads to turning inward and a loss of motivation, if not a complete inability to do that which
is useful outside of the self, and sometimes is utterly destructive of the self.
Clinical depression is a horrible place to be, and results in great suffering of those
who are diagnosed with it.
Depression as an illness is both objective and political.
It's political to the extent that we have labeled it as such based upon our values which
are informed by our view of human flourishing.
But it wasn't always labeled an ailment.
Aristotle argues that depression, or melancholy as he referred to it, was a condition from
which wisdom can emerge.
This in geniuses, he argued, tended to be melancholic, and this was a cause, not an effect
of their intellectual depth.
It isn't that their brilliance made them depressed, but that their depression made them
more reflective, opened their minds in ways that made them more brilliant.
Aristotle's picture of the good life, of human flourishing, is quite different from
ours.
One result is that he thought depression was abnormal, but healthy, not a disorder to
be treated and cured.
We, on the other hand, prize utility, and tend to value a genius most highly if he or
she is using that brilliance to create goods that will corner the market, or new investment
strategies that will pay huge dividends.
However, for us, genius isn't, in and of itself, valuable.
This difference between depression and genius leads to some interesting consequences.
One of the ways we treat depression is with medications.
The most popular are SSRIs, Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors.
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter that's associated with feelings of well-being.
When the body experiences something positive, it releases serotonin, and we enjoy the moment.
SSRIs stop the serotonin that was released from being reabsorbed, making it more effective,
making us feel happier than we otherwise would.
Now, in someone who's depressed, there are diminished levels of serotonin, and treatment
with SSRIs often brings them more in line with the average.
One result is that people on SSRIs, like Prozac, are better employees.
By increasing the amount of serotonin, workers are more effective.
They do more work and are happier while doing it, and, if the work involves interacting
with other people, they have better outcomes.
Happier customers, bigger sales numbers, more motivation.
But what if the problem isn't clinical depression, as we've defined it in the DSM, but simply
being less effective as a worker?
Dr. Peter Kramer, in his best-selling book, Listening to Prozac, raises exactly this situation.
He considers a patient who isn't depressed, but simply shy.
She has a personality that isn't assertive by nature, but she has a job where aggressiveness
is a positive quality.
As a result, she's suffered professionally, but, and this is the interesting part, when
she takes Prozac, she's transformed into somebody who is assertive, aggressive, a real
go-getter willing to put herself out there, stop the competition, and get stuff done.
Her personality is hampering her ability to work.
According to her 21st-century cultural norms, would that make her natural state a disability?
Would taking drugs to change her personality be medical or cosmetic?
Kramer contends that it is cosmetic, but argues that it's morally acceptable to use
psychoactive substances in a cosmetic way if it serves their desires.
We're free to dress for success, we're free to eat well and work out if that serves our
needs.
You know, we're able to change our brains by getting additional education if we think
it will better serve our goals.
Why then can we not also change our brains with medicines if we think it will better
serve our life goals?
This idea that our personalities are ours to change neurochemically is surely provocative.
It says we're tampering with a part of ourselves that seems to be the self itself.
But I believe the question is even deeper than Kramer suggests.
Michelangelo used the blank canvas of the ceiling in the Sistine Chapel to paint an
image of God.
If genetic and medical advances are allowing us to become similarly blank canvases on which
we can redesign ourselves to meet the challenges we choose to face in our own cultural context,
shouldn't we too be able to create a more God-like image?
That is, shouldn't we be able to redefine our realities in order to overcome our limitations?
To think about this question, let us think about one group of gods our culture creates,
athletes.
We treat them like gods, we celebrate them like gods, we pay them like gods.
We've adored them since the Olympians of ancient Greece because they seem to transcend
ordinary human limits.
They're faster, stronger, more skilled than we thought humans could be.
In breaking records, they also break the definition of what it is to be human.
The human condition is the grappling with our limitations, but our athletes strive to
push against them to make us less limited.
They do this in part through pain and hard work, through giving up donuts and exercising
harder than we would be able.
They are the embodiment of the Protestant work ethic.
They do this through the use of technology.
Their workouts are computer monitored and utilize special equipment to strengthen them
in ways never before possible.
Their diets are designed by experts.
Their form is analyzed with tools that detect inefficiencies that couldn't be spotted with
the human eye.
All of this is acceptable to us, but steroid use isn't.
Antibolic steroids are synthetic substances that work in the body like testosterone, a
naturally occurring hormone that does a variety of things.
Steroids enhance protein synthesis in our muscles, enabling us to get stronger.
Different people have different levels of testosterone.
It not only differs person to person, but changes over the course of one's life.
At times of high testosterone, our muscles are able to more quickly repair themselves
and to get larger as a result of increased activity.
The picture that many may have about steroid use in athletes is that steroids function like
Popeyes can have spinach, open it up, ingest it, and the huge muscles just pop out.
But what steroid use really does is allow the muscles to heal themselves quicker than
they otherwise would have.
It allows someone who's lifting weights vigorously and usually requires a three-day rest between
sessions to be able to lift again in two days.
Steroids aren't a shortcut to muscles.
People who get stronger because of steroid use aren't getting results without working
as hard as others.
In fact, those people are lifting more and lifting more often.
They actually are working harder than those not on steroids.
If we celebrate people who work the hardest and get the greatest results out of increased
dedication and effort, why do we condemn our sports heroes who are found to have used
performance enhancing drugs?
It's one thing if they're getting a benefit from not doing the work.
It's cheating to use a motorcycle in the Tour de France.
But some of the steroid using cyclists were working harder with the drugs.
Indeed, they were able to work harder because of the drugs.
Humans can bike faster up mountains, hit more home runs, and score more touchdowns if they
use these chemical technologies.
But steroid use is illegal, and athletes who use steroids are thought of as cheaters as
having gotten an unfair advantage.
We want our sports heroes to extend the bounds of what it is to be human, but we limit their
ability to transcend our limitations.
Why?
Is it that we don't want the canvas on which we create the human to be completely blank?
Perhaps there are boundaries beyond which we can no longer see ourselves in our sports
heroes if they completely technologize themselves.
Our technology has raised the possibility of remaking the human being in radical ways.
Could these routes be open to us, or is there some limit beyond which we cannot even recognize
ourselves as human?
And is that the point at which we put the brakes on?
The point at which we become frightened?
Could we dehumanize ourselves completely with technology if we set no limits?
If we permitted the widespread and unmonitored use of serotonin-regulated drugs in people
without defined indications for their use, if we permitted the widespread and unmonitored
use of steroids in athletics?
Think of our membership in the species as the result of a natural process of evolutionary
selection over millennia.
Is it an inalienable belonging?
Can we opt out of being human through technology, or can we use technology to wipe the slate
clean and rethink ourselves from the ground up?
Can we tolerate making ourselves into cyborgs?
