When you look back at industrial age predictions about the future, what's funny is how large
they thought everything would become.
Charlie Chaplin, in the opening scene to his masterpiece Modern Times, is in a factory
full of massive machines with huge gears and giant cogs.
He has a large wrench with which to fix them.
Greater production required greater size.
We advance humanity by scaling up, bigger is stronger, bigger is faster, bigger is better.
Or at least that's what we thought then.
In the early days of computing, this notion held true as well.
Computers were just the next step in this progression of human development.
We grew as a species when our tools grew in size.
Vacuum tube-based mainframe computers required entire floors of buildings.
This was a testament to their ability, their utility, their power.
With the growth of our tools, we also saw growth in the size of some companies.
Corporations were getting bigger, stronger, more powerful.
Computers were for them.
Computer corporations and government agencies, especially the military, had big needs and
big questions, so we needed to develop big computers to help them solve those problems.
The view of computers that came from early proponents of artificial intelligence followed
this line.
The human brain is incredibly complex, and if we're going to model it and its functions,
then we are going to need big computers.
Our built circuitry could mirror the capabilities of the natural circuits of our brain, but
the artificial ones would have to be larger in size.
As a result, electronic brains would be bigger than organic ones.
Further, once we figured out how to do it, we could increase their size even more when
we make them smarter than us.
Our brain power might be limited by the size of our cranium, but no such limitation could
be put on the electronic brain.
The dream was someday to be able to substitute the artificial brain for the human so that
big problems could be solved quicker and more efficiently without the potential for human
error.
The computer would replace the human at things that took so much mental energy, complex numerical
tasks.
Computers in this view were massive calculators.
Think of the name we still use, computer, that is, a thing that computes, a thing that
does mathematical operations.
Computers were thought of as giant math machines that could do the math better than we can.
Artificial intelligence would be better, faster than human intelligence, and could be a tool
for human advancement led by the large institutions that used them.
But there was at the time a very different picture of computing and the future of humanity.
It was not a picture that had big companies, big government, and big computers at its heart.
Indeed, it was exactly the opposite.
This was a picture in which computers didn't belong to the rich and powerful for the sake
of giving them, and them alone, the power to have the answers that gave them even more
wealth and power.
The idea was to shrink the computer to give the power to the people.
The vision was quite different from that of the researchers working on the artificial
intelligence approach.
It was not to replace people, but to augment them.
We wanted the technology not only to make each one of us better at being who we are
and doing what we strive to do, but even more to bring us all together, to allow us to become
more interconnected.
We wanted to become a global village of symbiotic communities, lifting us all up as a unified
human race in peace and harmony.
We wanted to create the conditions where our consciousnesses could be expanded.
Now, if this vision sounds like something that would have come right out of the San
Francisco counterculture hippie movement, there's a reason for that.
It did.
In the words of Stort Brand, one of the pioneers of technology who was a part of this group,
we owe it all to the hippies.
They gave us the personal computer, the smartphone, and the internet, and in this way, radically
changed what we think of as reality.
But we need to trace the start of this movement back before the mainframe computers, before
headbands and love beads.
The story starts in 1948 with the sadly forgotten genius Norbert Wiener.
He was a brilliant mathematician.
His was the sort of flexible and nimble brain that never got stuck in the technical aspects
rather he moved insightfully back and forth between the nitty-gritty and the big picture.
He was the person who first coined the prefix cyber long before the worldwide web.
He took the Greek term kyverno, which translates as to steer, and became the roots for the
Greek terms for governing and government.
He transliterated it to kyver and then to cyber and titled his most famous book Cybernetics,
for control and communication in the animal and the machine.
The central insight of the book is that if you take the state of all sciences in the
late 1940s, there's a new universal concept at the heart of it all, information.
Before Wiener, the central notion in all of science was energy.
The idea was that energy could take different forms, it could be transferred, it was the
source of all change.
To do science was to find the equations that govern energy transfer in the particular system
and to show how energy creates work, light, order and life.
But Wiener looked at the advances in physics with quantum theory and relativity, the advances
of biology with genetics, psychology with behaviorism and social psychology, and the
start of the project to create mechanical calculating machines in early robots.
He suggested that we could reframe what they all share in common terms that are not based
on the flow of energy, but rather as about questions about communication, about the flow
of information.
If nothing can travel faster than the speed of light, including physical forces like
gravitation, then events at points in space sufficiently separated will not be able to
influence each other.
Cause and effect, the basic notion underlined all science is shown by the theory of relativity
to be about communication by signals sent between points in space and time.
When you have spin correlated particles removed from each other and the wave function collapses
as a result of looking at one of them, how does the other one know what properties state
to assume?
Quantum mechanics, that's about information.
Evolution, it's based on the passing of what?
Genetic information.
Consciousness is nothing more than a body's ability to take information from the environment
and adjust the body's actions as a result.
Then it reassesses itself after the adjustment and reprocesses it in order to readjust.
Psychology is about information and communication.
Same with the technologies aimed at creating more efficient machines for accomplishing tasks
that humans want completed.
We need these machines to be able to learn, that is, to adjust themselves and how they
do what they do based on their surroundings and whether they're succeeding at the design
task efficiently or not.
They need to be able to monitor and modify how they do what they do.
Think of a thermostat.
You set it to a desired temperature and if it's too hot, then it triggers the air conditioning.
If it's too cold, then it starts the heat.
When the temperature hits just right, it shuts everything off.
It's constantly monitoring the system and deciding how to change it.
The way a thermostat works is based on a simple fact.
Bonds expand when they're hot and contract when they're cold.
But the amount they expand or contract is different for different substances.
Now if we take two different metals and bond them together, the different sides will grow
and shrink at different rates as the temperature changes.
The result is that the bonded piece will bend at predictable angles at different temperatures.
Set up the dial so that the temperature is where you want.
Now it has the bonded piece pointing straight up.
Now if it gets hotter, the piece bends one way, starting the circuit launching the air
conditioner.
If it gets colder, it bends the other way, starting the heater.
When it hits the desired temperature, it's straight up and down, therefore cutting off
both.
In a sense, the thermostat thinks.
It monitors the environment and changes the system according to what it senses.
Then it acts to alter the environment in accord with certain desires.
With each change, it readjusts itself, and then the environment, again accordingly and
continuously.
A thermostat is a non-computerized thinking machine, and it works based on information
and communication.
Wiener's ideas and cybernetics deeply influenced the group of computer pioneers who gave us
the advances that led to the personal computer on the Internet.
But they were influenced by other things as well.
Some of the important work was done in Boston at MIT and in Los Angeles at UCLA and in Salt
Lake City at the University of Utah.
But the main center of development was in the area that has come to be known as Silicon
Valley in Northern California outside of Stanford University.
There, American engineer Douglas Engelbart formed and led the augmented human intellect
research center, a division of the Stanford Research Institute.
Eventually, the name was shortened to the Augmentation Research Center, or ARC.
Thus Engelbart acquired the playful but respectful nickname of NOAA, the man who built the ARC.
The group of programmers, engineers and technicians he brought together were visionaries who were
deeply influenced not only by developments in technology, but in San Francisco Bay Area
culture in the late 1960s.
ARPANET, the first computer network that became the Internet, was a military-funded project.
But those who developed it were not doing so to serve in the war effort in Vietnam.
Indeed, many of them developed it to avoid serving in Vietnam.
A military draft deferment was available for those continuing their education.
A significant number of those working on the project were graduate students at Stanford
who were biding their time until the war ended so they could then enter the private
sector without fear of being drafted.
There was also a critical industries deferment where, if one was working on a project deemed
in the natural interest for a corporation or a publicly funded lab, one could avoid
being sent to fight.
The money for ARPANET came from the Department of Defense and the project was seen as a priority
of certain folks in the Pentagon.
So, many of those developing what became personal computers and the Internet were doing so to
dodge the draft.
Indeed, many of them were working on the development of a personal computer to help the movement
to end the war.
Computers in the IBM mold were seen as tools used by the powerful against the people.
Computers gave those with wealth and influence additional tools to reinforce their position.
The personal computer on the other hand was seen as a tool to dismantle the power structure.
The counterculture of the late 60s had two different strands.
One sought to undermine the government military industrial complex by opting out, by going
back to the land, by taking an anti-technological neo-Luddite stance.
But the other saw technology as an essential part of a future in which individuals were
liberated, freed to flourish and grow.
Inglebart's hippie computer researchers were of this ilk.
In addition to Norbert Wiener's cybernetics, they all read the works of Robert Heinlein,
the Dean of Science Fiction, especially Stranger in a Strange Land and The Moon as a Harsh
Mistress.
These books are notable for high lines weaving together of stories that portrayed a technologically
advanced human future that still grappled with social problems similar to those seen
in the 60s, but amplified.
Stranger in a Strange Land is a science fiction retelling of the story of the life of Jesus,
where the main character is a human raised on Mars where he acquired what seemed to be
magical powers.
According to Earth from the heavens, he finds that the planet is governed by a combination
of religious cults and political parties.
To save the planet, he begins his own church, promising his followers the same powers he
possesses.
Ultimately, he's killed by a rival church, but his voice comes back from the dead in
order to allow his followers to evolve beyond mere humans and survive the forthcoming Martian
Apocalypse.
The Moon as a Rough Mistress is a story of a lunar penal colony in which the workers
revolt when they find that they're being left to die in their work camps once the earthlings
have gotten all they can from them.
With the aid of a supercomputer transcendent, they strive to assert their freedom and autonomy
in the face of violent resistance from their captors.
Highline's work appealed to the programmers in two ways.
First, it showed a technological future in which human abilities were augmented by technology.
Whether this is the special powers of the human Martian hybrid, Smith, in Stranger in
a Strange Land, or the colonists aided by their supercomputer Mike in the search for
freedom in the Moon as a Rough Mistress, technology can help us make ourselves more than we are.
Second, it appealed to the anti-authoritarianism that was a significant part of the counterculture
movement.
Computers could be tools of oppression or tools of liberation.
And the move from mainframes to PCs was seen as given the power of computing to the people.
Some of the programmers were active anti-war organizers and quickly realized that computers
could be used not just for crunching numbers, but for keeping databases of activists and
cross-referencing their interests, abilities, and contact information.
They could be used for more easily creating pamphlets in literature.
They could be used for communication, a revolutionary notion given that the big players in the computer
industry just thought of them as giant calculators.
Another cultural inference was the music scene.
Some of the engineers used their technological prowess and equipment to create psychedelic
light shows for local rock concerts.
These rock musicians would allow their concerts to be recorded by the audience, bootlegs as
they came to be called.
Indeed, the Grateful Dead began to set aside space in the hall, specifically four tapers,
where the sound mix could be best captured.
These people would have tape recorders that used magnetic tape to record the shows, the
same sort of magnetic tape that was used to store data from computers.
Once recorded, the tapes of the concerts could be replicated and distributed.
Now if Norbert Wiener was right and everything is information, then everything could be stored
on tape, replicated, and distributed.
If the rock bands were freely allowing the information from their shows to be promulgated,
then shouldn't computer data also be free?
Not only free, freely accessible, individuals may have their own computers on this view,
but they form a network, a digital commune, where there is no sense of independent ownership
of programs or data.
We would have a globally interwoven network of personal computers, a worldwide web in
which there is no private digital property, but an interconnected universal community.
One young entrepreneurial member of that early computer community, Bill Gates, wrote
angry letters to the rest of the community when copies of his work on the computer language
basic were being shared freely.
But he was dismissed as being greedy and trying to ruin the vision of what the community
should be.
From the San Francisco area group of hippie computer pioneers came Apple computers, spreadsheets,
computer processing, cut and paste, spell check, a computer mouse, windows, email, computer
music and graphics, the first video games, everything we now think of when we think of
computers in daily life.
The result is a completely different picture of the world.
Indeed, the internet has created in some ways a completely new world unto itself, where
the founders hoped it would augment us as real people in the real world.
What's actually happened is something unexpected.
It's allowed us to become different people in a different world.
Think about the word cyberspace, which we now use in an entirely unreflective way.
The notion of space indicates that it's a place.
It's the answer to a where question.
We use Wiener's prefix cyber to differentiate between physical space and this new distinct
realm, which we think of in spatial terms.
You go to a website or visit a blog.
We speak of online destinations.
We see cyberspace as an alternative universe.
We inhabit.
We live in two places.
We have two distinct but linked realities.
This alternate online reality is divided into neighborhoods.
One of its effects is to take people who are perhaps alienated in their physical space
because few or no people share their interests and passions in their physical vicinity and
let them discover or create online neighborhoods filled with people who are like them.
Only isolated people can find a virtual home, a community that feels comfortable in a way
that their actual surroundings do not.
There are social media pages that act as congregators for every sort of interest.
Anyone can go there and search for various sorts of pursuits.
The places dedicated to fellow aficionados will direct interested individuals to particular
major websites dedicated to that interest and from there there are smaller personal
sites and blogs to link to and that are linked to by the major players.
While the internet was conceived of by its founders as being a communal gathering place,
these online tribes have fluid but well-defined hierarchies with individuals of differing
status in their virtual communities.
Age views and links are the coin of the realm and local celebrities with social capital
and privilege are created.
We're able to create maps of these neighborhoods and what's interesting is how insular they
are.
When you look at links, you find that they're largely self-contained regions of cyberspace
where people of like mind link to, talk to and refer to people only within their area
of interest.
We have formed intellectually gated communities where we spend our online time only with people
who share our interests, our views and our biases.
It's electronic segregation.
One result of this e-bulkenization is an increase in what social psychologists call group polarization.
It's an observable phenomenon that when people find themselves in a heterogeneous group
in which opinions differ on a given matter, the general consensus of the group will generally
become moderated.
There will be people in the group of strong opinions who disagree with each other, but
the overall effect will be one of moderation.
The center will be found, compromises will be made.
But when we find ourselves in homogenous groups where we feel that others are like us, the
result will be that the group's sentiment will tend towards the extreme, often times
with the group ending up more extreme than most or all of its members.
The resulting positions, decisions or choices will thus be more risky, more excessive, more
aggressive, more punitive than would be the case if the members were to decide on a given
issue before engaging with each other.
This has added a second element of online life, perceived anonymity.
One effect of believing that no one knows who you are is what psychologists call disinhibition.
That is, when we think we're invisible, we're willing to do things we would never consider
doing if we thought people were watching.
Now this notion is nothing new.
In the Republic, Plato considers the myth of Gaijes, a ruler who had a magic ring that
would make him invisible.
Plato asked whether Gaijes would be moral when he couldn't be held responsible by others
for his acts.
The answer is no, because when we are online, we're often alone in a room, and because those
who read what we do online cannot see us as physical individuals, there is a sense that
we, like Gaijes, are invisible, and the result is that we act in ways we ordinarily would
not.
When you combine this online disinhibition effect with the extremism that comes from
group polarization, the result is not pretty.
The social interactions online are indeed very often less civil than we see in the face-to-face
physical world.
This is reflected in the most well-known sociological generalization on the internet, Godwin's Law.
Named for Mike Godwin, who first formulated it, Godwin's Law states that, the longer an
online argument proceeds, the more likely it is that a Hitler or Nazi analogy will
be employed.
No matter the topic, under discussion, in any internet-based forum, the more comments
made, the higher the probability of someone being compared to the Nazis.
Instead of a discourse in which differences are respected and rationally weighed, the nature
of web-based discussion is explosive, and ad hominem attacks are not unusual with Hitler
and Nazi references being the mother of all personal attacks.
This is indicative of the online world becoming more and more a part of our daily lives, in
certain ways they interact, but in other ways they are distinct realms.
This can allow us to become completely different people in cyberspace, with little or no relation
to our lived lives.
We may have friends on social media sites whom we've never met, but things get even more
virtual when we consider what we call massively multiplayer online role-playing games, such
as World of Warcraft, Guild Wars, Maple Story, and for children Club Penguin and Minecraft.
There's even one based on the Lord of the Rings books by J.R.R. Tolkien, something that
would thrill the pioneers of the internet, many of whom were devotees of the series.
In these games, people become characters, meet and interact with others, and work both
together and against each other.
Second Life is an online site which has taken this a step further.
Second Life is exactly what it sounds like, a world in which you create an avatar, an
online self, whose every aspect, from gender, to race, to height, to appearance, to behavior,
are completely determined by the player.
You become anyone you want to be, and Second Life has created a representation of our world
for you to inhabit in the guise of this new being.
You wander about and interact with other avatars, knowing them only as who they want to be.
There are millions of users who have created electronic versions of everything you see
in this world.
There are churches with virtual services you can attend.
Stores by major commercial brands exist where you can shop for virtual items.
There are events and gatherings, places you can visit.
There are movies and lectures to go and see, games and contests in which one can compete,
and bars and clubs where you can meet people or go dancing.
You can't dance in real life, but you can make it so that your alternative self can really
shake them down.
There's an economy there.
You have assets and can accumulate debts.
There are banks.
You can create goods or exchange services within the game, all of which can be bought and sold.
You can, at a certain level, own virtual land, and thereby buy and sell virtual real estate.
Super space is seen as an actual space that can be divided up, bought and sold.
When we think of the phrase virtual reality, what often comes to mind is some sort of goggles
or helmet that immerses the wearer in three-dimensional computer-generated graphics that respond to
the wearer's movement.
If you look to the left, the image shifts as if you're seeing what's to your left.
If you walk forward in a real room, the image looks as if you're walking across the virtual
landscape.
But this is an atomistic picture of virtual reality, one in which an individual person
is put in a false world.
What we see in Second Life and the other massively multiplayer online role-playing games is virtual
reality in a deeper sense.
Throughout these conversations, we've seen how views about nature of reality proceed
in three-step fashion.
We begin by thinking of reality as a set of distinct things which could be understood
by looking at closely.
We then move to the reality of relations among things.
This is the step we see with these online worlds.
Unlike the helmet, where virtual reality was a false place, where an individual could
be inserted, we now have virtual communities.
We exist in this alternative world as interconnected pieces of a larger network.
Cyberspace is a new space and it's populated with people who create communities, societies
and economies that may or may not behave like their counterparts in the material world.
We create them and so have more control there than we have here, but they are not completely
in anyone's control.
They are parallel universes we can choose to inhabit and in which we can be whoever
we like.
The third step in understanding reality has always been the move from sets of relations
to fields, where what's real is the whole, and the part you're seeing not as distinct
individuals but rather modes of the whole.
Interestingly, we see this as the next step in the development of the Internet.
