Throughout these conversations, we've been looking at the need to redefine reality in
light of scientific and technological advances.
We've seen that our picture of reality tends to proceed through a three-step development.
First, we see an atomistic world made up of individual entities.
We learn about reality by closely examining these objects one by one.
Then we move to a relational picture in which we realize the objects cannot be understood
in a vacuum, but rather that we must attribute reality to relations among them and must understand
reality in the context of these relationships.
Finally, we've taken the third step to seeing reality as an interconnected web, where what
is real is the whole of the seeming individuals being elements of this larger web.
Technological development and computer networking brought us the internet, and this has led
us to questions about self-identity and free will.
Cognitive biases, like group polarization, show us that we may be able to create new
selves online, but the way we create them is affected by the relationships we form in
life, on and offline.
Our web-based lives force us to move to a picture of virtual reality as relational, but
new advances in the ability of social scientists and marketers keep track of our online browsing
habits or our cell phone use, raise deeper and stranger questions that truly challenge
our picture of humans as self-determining beings, who freely choose what we do, where
we go, and when we act.
Data analytics leads us, once again, to the holistic picture, wherein we see ourselves
as possibly just predictable parts of a larger whole.
Recall that sociology began as a science when Emile Durkheim noticed the correlation
between suicide rates and religious affiliation.
What was so fascinating about this is how unexpected, and yet, how statistically tight
the relationship was between the two.
When you looked at any given case of a person tragically taking his or her own life, the
circumstances seemed completely idiosyncratic.
It was this person's particular life.
It was this person's particular troubles.
The specificity of the person's context makes each suicide seem unique.
Other people might share the person's problems, health issues, bankruptcy or cheating spouse.
Others might share important elements of the person's identity, the same religion, occupation
or socioeconomic status.
But the complete context of each person's life contains so many elements and is so complex
that we think the exact constellation of factors makes each of us unique.
That uniqueness makes us think that our behaviors aren't generally explainable and therefore
not predictable by looking at simple, measurable features.
The behaviorists tried to set up controlled psychological experiments to see if we could
in fact find correlations between stimuli and responses.
We would shield subjects from outside influences, change one thing in the environment and carefully
monitor how the subject reacted.
Was there a statistical relationship between changing environmental factor A and observing
behavior B?
Sometimes yes, sometimes no, but the deeper question is whether these relationships that
are observable in the laboratory setting really tell us anything about the human behavior
in the world outside the lab.
Sociologists could do some fieldwork, but never had access to the mountains of data
that would be needed to really justify large-scale results.
Epidemiology, the study of how diseases spread in populations, shows us that it's tricky
to extend a result showing effects in the lab, say rats exposed to a substance developing
cancer, to humans in the complex environment.
These factors in the world screen us off from effects, sometimes they block the effects,
sometimes they multiply the effects.
The real world is so full of contravening phenomena that it's really difficult to say
anything meaningful about the effects of anything on anything else outside the controlled environment
of the lab.
There are so many factors we don't have good ways to track or measure them.
Statistical analysis takes time and it's difficult to figure out which factors might influence
which others.
Then came computers, cell phones and the Internet.
All of a sudden, data about how we interact with our natural and social environments were
available.
Unbelievably huge amounts of data, more data than social scientists had dreamed of.
Computers got more and more powerful.
They could search for relationships that no one would have expected, but which were extraordinarily
explanatory.
This was the birth of predictive analytics, also known by the terms data mining and the
Orwellian big data.
Look at your key ring.
Are there little plastic tabs with scanner codes that give you discounts at the grocery
store or drug store as a member of their special club?
Why do they give you those low prices?
The answer is that they want your data.
They're keeping track of your purchases because when they combine that with other information
that's publicly available, things like your age, marital status, whether you own a home,
they learn incredibly detailed things about you and about their clientele in general.
Every major company has a department of data analytics now figuring out what your purchases
mean for them and how they can use this information to get you to spend more of your money with
them.
And it isn't just stores.
Police departments and government agencies, the phone companies, the internet search engines,
all are keeping tabs of you so that the data can be analyzed.
Now many of us worry about outsiders reading our email messages or listening in on phone
conversations, but we're concerned about the wrong thing here.
The real information that lets other people know everything about us isn't in what we
writers say.
That only tells them about what we think we'll do.
The real truth is in the so-called metadata, the when, where, and to whom.
Those facts can tell what we will do, even if we don't realize it at the time, and often
we don't.
Most of us think that we're constantly making free choices, determining at will what we want.
But the truth is that data analytics using modern computing techniques have shown that
we are shockingly predictable.
In 2004, 100 students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology were given free cell
phones on the condition that researchers could keep track of the data from the phones.
No one would listen to the calls or read the text messages, but using GPS and accelerometers,
which are in every phone, they would keep track of where the user was.
They would keep track of who was contacted, when, and how often.
They would keep track of the people with whom the person was spending time.
From all of this data, they would then look for patterns.
What they discovered was that by considering only six basic behaviors, what they termed
eigen behaviors, eigen is German for characteristic, they could predict how a person would behave
later in the day with a 90% accuracy.
By looking at what time someone woke up, or if they spent significant time in a place
with poor cell phone coverage, they could predict, say, who the person would be spending
time with that evening, or if a student would be sleeping in his or her own dorm room, or
somewhere else that night.
Such a decision, we would think, is so personal, so context-dependent, that surely it's not
predictable.
But it is, to a shockingly high degree of accuracy.
Metadata can be used for three main functions.
The first is prediction.
By prediction, we mean how a specific person will behave in the future.
This is, to some degree, a function of personal habits that require keeping track of your
specific data, but not always.
The social media network Facebook used their access to the data of millions of users who
announced on their site that they had begun seeing each other romantically in order to
create a profile that predicts when two users will begin a relationship together.
They looked at how often users visited each other's pages, how often they left messages
or commented on postings, and when they announced their relationship and found a common pattern
that repeated itself almost every time.
Someone may not be sure what his or her heart is saying, but Facebook already knows.
The electronic footprint will have the ads for roses and chocolates on Valentine's Day
ready to post.
Venture capitalists seek to invest money in new creative ideas put forward by entrepreneurs.
But the field is risky because it's hard to predict which ideas will succeed and which
individuals are well suited for the process of bringing ideas to market.
Using metadata, a group of psychologists, neuroscientists, and data analytics experts
developed two video games, the results of which gave quite accurate predictions about
the likelihood of success of the proposed venture independent of the successfulness of the pitch.
It isn't about beautiful presentations or properly schmoozing the money men.
Now we have ways of predicting whether a project will succeed independent of the idea itself.
If prediction is what's about to happen to an individual, the second function is diagnosis,
that is, giving a description of the person's current state.
The term diagnosis brings to mind medical contexts.
This is indeed one application.
With wearable monitors that keep track of vital statistics and physical activity, there
are certainly ways in which not only predilection for disease, but evidence of the earliest
stages of onset are determinable, well before symptoms that would first send one to seek
medical attention.
We can use big data to tell us things about our health that we would only have otherwise
known much later, often once the condition was more difficult to treat.
But there are many interested parties who would like to diagnose us on any number of
other fronts.
Advertisers waste money when they blast their pitches to huge numbers of people, many of
whom would never become customers.
They want to focus their message to exactly those most likely to be swayed and do so in
the most effective and efficient way.
We need to diagnose individuals to determine if they're in their target audience.
Advertising aims to create a reality that will be inhabited by customers of particular
products.
But not everyone invited into the commercially created virtual reality will enter.
It would be advantageous for them to know who is likely to take up the offer.
Brand loyalty is the term that's given to the fact that once people begin purchasing
a particular manufacturer's product, we almost never purchase competitive wares, regardless
of price, packaging, reviews, or any other external factors.
We're creatures of habit, and once we start buying a specific brand, we unthinkingly continue
to do so.
But this effect is strangely disrupted by major life events, and data mining has shown
a number of unexpected diagnostic correlations.
If someone begins to buy a different brand of coffee, there's a good chance that that
person just got married.
If someone begins to buy a different brand of cereal, it's a good chance that person
just bought a new house.
If someone begins to buy a different brand of beer, there's a good chance that person
just got divorced.
Perhaps the most major life change is having a baby.
It isn't only a big deal for the parents, but for retailers as well.
New and expecting parents are a big business, as they suddenly have to make major purchases.
Birth announcements are a matter of public record, and so the arrival of the stock also
brings the arrival of the mail carrier, with loads of junk mail that outweigh the precious
bundle.
In an effort to beat their competitors to the punch and keep their advertisements from
getting lost in the flood, one major retail chain decided to see if they could use data
analytics to diagnose which of their customers are pregnant.
They discovered that there are 25 products, the purchase of which in various combinations
will give a high probability not only of pregnancy, but due date.
If a person suddenly switches to an unscented body lotion and buys it in larger quantities
than normal, she is likely in her second trademaster.
When she begins buying increased numbers of packages of cotton balls, the third trimester
is underway.
Where predicting and diagnosing look at individuals, we can also come to larger scale knowledge
about social groups.
This is called forecasting.
We're used to hearing the term forecast when we think about weather.
As we saw in our earlier discussion about chaotic systems, this was the first use of computers
to take into account multiple factors to account for a developing system.
Thanks to data analytics, we can now forecast other things as well.
The Centers for Disease Control, or CDC, is responsible for keeping track of the spread
of infectious diseases.
Doctors and hospitals are required to report cases to the agency in order to have an accurate
sense of hot spots and the spread of communicable illnesses.
This information is important to try to help prevent the spread and to get resources to
the appropriate areas to help those who are sick.
But it turns out that big data is better at doing the job.
By keying in on certain terms and turning it on the internet engines like flu or influenza
and seeing how they're trending over time and in geographical areas, it turns out that
a much more accurate map of the spread of the ailment could be developed with many more
data points and in a much quicker time frame.
By seeing what people are searching for on the web, we can serve the public health in
a more efficient manner.
Perhaps the most notable example of data analytics based forecasting was the joint project between
the University of Memphis, the Memphis Police Department, and IBM in developing what was
termed Blue Crush.
The blue in the name refers both to the blue of the police uniforms and IBM's nickname
Big Blue.
Big Blue Crush is an acronym for Crime Reduction Utilizing Statistical History.
Police have long charted crimes to see patterns in hot spots, but the use of data analytics
took this practice to a completely different level.
Data mining allowed computer scientists, criminologists, and sociologists to add to pre-existing factors
a number of additional variables that forecast the likelihood of types, locations, and times
of crime.
By considering crime and arrest data, weather forecasts, economic indicators, maps of unoccupied
and recently sold housing, calendars of local events and paydays, and several other influences,
Blue Crush provided Memphis Police with unbelievably detailed forecasts about crimes that hadn't
yet been committed, predicting them down to the block and within a four hour time window.
The model was so accurate that dispatched officers were able to stop crimes that hadn't
been witnessed or reported.
Indeed the Memphis Police Department attributed a 31% decrease in overall crime and a 15%
reduction in violent crime to their use of the forecasting system.
One hope is that we can move from forecasting to prediction in this area, that is move from
being able to foretell the larger questions of where and when a crime would be committed
to the more specific question of who is going to commit the crime.
A program called the Offender Assessment System is the result of data analytics and uses information
about those who have committed crimes in the past and uses information about education,
relationships, personal savings and credit card debt, income and job history, lifestyle
and recent purchases, associates and emotional state to make predictions about who is likely
to commit further acts of crime.
The hope is to be able to predict what crimes a person is likely to commit in the near future
and intercede with appropriate services before the fact in order to stop the crime from being
committed in the first place.
This brings to mind Steven Spielberg's 2002 film Minority Report based on short stories
by the author Philip K. Dick.
The story centers on a police unit in the near future who use a combination of advanced
computer technology and altered human psychics to foresee crimes about to happen.
The members of the elite pre-crime unit are able to use this information to intervene
and make arrests before murders occur, thereby taking killers off the street while at the
same time preventing their victims from being attacked in the first place.
From a criminological perspective, it's clearly the best of all possible worlds, but only
if it's infallible.
If the system makes mistakes, then we're in the unfortunate position of not only convicting
people of crimes they didn't commit, but of crimes they wouldn't have committed.
When the chief of the unit is implicated in a murder he hasn't yet and believes he won't
commit, the plot of the thriller is off and running.
The question for us is whether the real life offender assessment system is liable to similar
issues.
In many collections of data, there will be accidental relations between factors that
aren't really related.
The old saying that correlation doesn't entail causation is true.
There are what we call spurious correlations.
Indeed, there's a wonderful website with that exact name which shows how data analytics
can be used to connect elements of the world in incredibly close statistical fashion which
don't actually have anything to do with each other.
For example, according to the regression equations they use, there's a 99.5% relation between
the per capita use of margarine in the United States and the rate of divorce in the state
of Maine.
Of course, that doesn't mean that every time you can't believe it's not butter, some
poor woman in Augusta can't believe her husband sleeping with his secretary.
The correlations discovered using the tools of big data aren't foolproof.
Perhaps the most well-known use of data mining comes from Michael Lewis' book Moneyball,
The Art of Winning an Unfair Game, which was used as the basis for a feature film in 2011.
It chronicles the use of predictive analytics in baseball by the Oakland Athletics in the
2002 baseball season.
While the use of big data did help produce the longest winning streak by any team in
almost a century, Billy Bean's Ball Club has yet to make it to the World Series, much
less win the fall classic in the succeeding 14 seasons.
The results of data analytics are certainly not fail-safe.
Indeed, no one would make such a claim.
But the interesting question for us in redefining reality comes from how incredibly successful
they actually are.
What does it mean that human behavior can be so unbelievably well-modeled and predicted
using the results of our credit card use, our cell phone information, and our web searches?
It can be determined with great accuracy that we are expecting a child having an affair
about to have a heart attack or are part of a terrorist plot based on a digital footprint
we don't even know we're leaving.
Social media sites know more about what's about to happen in our social lives than we
do.
Is this an affront to free will?
Just because your behavior is predictable, does that mean you didn't really choose your
actions?
Well, not necessarily.
Consider what we call mother's intuition.
Moms have the uncanny ability to determine when their children are about to do something
they shouldn't.
This doesn't mean that the kids aren't free to choose what they do and don't do, rather
it means that the mothers know their children so well that they can predict what the choice
will be and can parent in such a way as to try to instill new habits that can form with
the making of better choices.
One can have free will and still be predictable in the way that will is exercised.
But certainly after a while, if one becomes completely transparent in most or all of one's
choices, a question of free will has to reemerge.
What's the most interesting feature is that these behaviors are sometimes predictable independent
to the individuals involved.
The factors and relations that are uncovered using the statistical methods of data analytics
show us to be part of a giant web of people, places, and interactions.
The determination of our action isn't based solely on elements of our own profiles, but
on the interactions we have with others and the properties of their backgrounds.
We think that prediction could perhaps follow if we knew everything about someone, but in
fact there are cases where we need to know little if anything to successfully predict
future behavior.
For example, in the MIT study that kept track of the students through the use of their cell
phones, some behaviors were shown to become contagious.
That is, if a group of students displayed a predictive behavior and another student
began to associate with that group, the student who may not have had that predictive behavior
before would, unbeknownst to that student, acquire the predictive behavior him or herself.
It may or may not be true that there are reasons why we do what we do, but there are observable
factors that can determine in advance whether we will do it or not, even if we've never
done it before.
What is the crucial aspect is that we've become associated with others and thereby acquired
aspects of them as our own.
The central question of this course has been the redefinition of reality as a result of
the advances of modern science and technology.
We've looked at the trajectory of developments in the physical sciences, in the biological
and social sciences, and in the development of technology.
In all three, we've discerned a pattern.
Our notion of reality begins with an atomistic picture in which reality is pictured as a collection
of discrete objects, individual entities that have an autonomous existence.
We gain a sense of reality by looking at these individuals individually.
Reality in this view is made of pieces, and we learn about reality by sticking each piece
literally or metaphorically under a microscope.
Each time this view is developed, problems emerged because we came to realize that reality
isn't well described as an atomistic system.
The parts aren't distinct, but rather related to one another.
There are relationships, be they gravitational, parental, or political.
And we cannot really understand the properties or behaviors of the individual separate from
the relationships in which the individuals involved.
As a result, the picture of reality had to be enlarged so that we held what really existed
was a set of individuals and their relations.
In physics, this meant we not only had atoms, but energy and forces.
In biology, this meant we not only had organisms, but species and selection pressures.
In psychology, sociology, and economics, we not only had people with minds, social positions
and wealth, but power structures and institutions.
But then, in each case, we were forced to make a further generalization, where reality
was seen as a unified whole where the seeming individuals became embedded aspects of a single
coherent larger existence.
In physics, we lost atoms, subatomic particles and forces between them to the field, where
what we thought were individual bits are just vibratory modes and field values.
With advances in data analytics, the combination of social science and technology seems to
be forcing us to come to the same conclusion about ourselves and our social world.
We aren't the individuals we think we are, living the individual existences we think
we are living with our indomitable free will.
Yes, we have relationships that influence us, ask anyone and they'll have stories of
mentors, teachers, parents who help them become who they are, heroes whom they looked up to,
who inspire them to follow the path they choose.
But now we see that we may need to take that last holistic step with ourselves as well.
Do we need to think of ourselves as nodes of a larger social web?
Is the use of data analytics the first step in forming a sociological version of grand
unified theory, a humanistic theory of everything?
Do we really exist as independent entities?
Or are we just cultural modes of vibration in a psychological version of string theory?
The inventors of the internet were attracted to this sort of view, which we find in writers
like Carl Jung, and the effects of the internet seem to reinforce it.
Yet, the internet inventors were also seduced by libertarianism, with its deep commitments
to the existence of the individual and the notions of freedom that accompany it.
Does the success of predictive analytics mean that our individuality is illusory and talk
of freedom meaningless?
Does the move to sing society as an emergent web with a collective reality that affects
us in strongly predictable ways mean that ultimately we'll have to redefine reality
without the self?
If we're predictable and capable of manipulation, are we really individuals at all?
If our behavior can be predicted before we even knew we had a choice to be made, and
if the factors that lead to accurate prediction have as much to do with our surroundings,
where we are, with whom we meet, what others do to us, are we just pieces of a larger
system, elements of an integrated social whole?
And if investigation of our online habits is as effective in making predictions about
our decisions as our actions in the material world, is there really a difference between
the virtual reality of the web and the so-called real world around us?
So, in the end we're back to the question with which we started this entire collection
of conversations.
What is real?
Does science give us a definitive answer?
The beauty of science is that, in the end, nothing's definitive.
Scientific revolutions happen.
We're forced to completely revise the categories through which we make sense of the world.
But science does give us worldviews.
The paradigms used by scientists provide us with means of making sense of the universe,
of thinking about what's real.
We've seen that in the cases of physical, biological, psychological, and sociological
realms, we've moved through three stages in thinking about what really exists, starting
each time by seeing realities comprised of atomistic individuals, to seeing realities
instead of interconnected individuals where the relations are important to the objects,
and finally as a holistic system, unified, and coherent in structure.
Now we look at the effects of our technology.
Consider that, on the one hand, seems to be reinforcing the idea of the self as individual.
We're usually alone when we're online.
We can spend hours surfing the web without being in the presence of another human being.
Yet, this technology also allows us to see ourselves as part of a whole, part of a larger
system that influences us in ways we don't realize.
Data analytics has proved invaluable in epidemiology, marketing, crime reduction, real-life applications
of scientific theories.
It wouldn't be so effective if it didn't reflect some sense of reality itself.
So, are we real individuals or nodes of a larger cultural reality?
Remember that Albert Einstein won his Nobel Prize for showing that we need to think of
light as being both particle and wave.
A particle is an entity unto itself, an independently existing thing.
A wave is a disturbance in a medium, no air, no sound waves.
Sound is just a state of the air.
These seemed irreconcilable pictures.
It seemed it had to be one or the other.
But Einstein showed us that the real world is more complex than our categories.
That it had to be a complicated marriage of the two.
In the same way, perhaps data analytics and our online lives show us the same thing in
terms of the self.
Perhaps we too are social particles and waves.
That our reality is as intricate and multifaceted as the world of atoms.
That our reality is as intricate and multifaceted as the world of atoms.
That our reality is as intricate and multifaceted as the world of atoms.
That our reality is as intricate and multifaceted as the world of atoms.
That our reality is as intricate and multifaceted as the world of atoms.
That our reality is as intricate and multifaceted as the world of atoms.
That our reality is as intricate and multifaceted as the world of atoms.
That our reality is as intricate and multifaceted as the world of atoms.
That our reality is as intricate and multifaceted as the world of atoms.
Thank you for watching.
