Perhaps the scientific discovery that would most radically force us to redefine reality
is one that may not have happened yet, the discovery of life on another planet.
But we find that we're not alone in the universe, and will force us to re-examine our perspective
to enlarge our view of being. Scientists are dedicating resources to the search,
and there are some promising leads, but artists have been on the case even longer.
The portrayals of extraterrestrial life we come to discover, or who discover us,
tend to come in four varieties, aggressive, exploratory, cooperative, and transcendental.
The aggressive version is the central plot device of perhaps the first great extraterrestrial life
novel H.G. Wells' War of the Worlds, in which Martians invade Earth with the intent of season
control. Now, Wells' Martians were more technologically advanced than we were at the time,
not only capable of spaceflight, but armed with heat rays and black smoke, physical and chemical
weapons against which humanity had no defenses and no equal with which to fight back. In War of
the Worlds, Martians kill and feed upon their inferior earthling adversaries. Ultimately,
they're undone, not by human ingenuity, but by the simplest of beings. Microbes, against which
they have no natural immunity, infect the Martians and kill them. They had the secrets of spaceflight,
but penicillin was still beyond their understanding. H.G. Wells' story was famously revived on the
radio on the day before Halloween in 1938 by Orson Wells on CBS's Mercury Theater. The radio
drama took the form of breaking news bulletins discussing the landings and attack by the Martians
at Grover's Bill, New Jersey. The thought of an apocalyptic invasion was made effective,
not only by the wonderful production value of the broadcast with magnificent radio acting,
but also because of the historical context. These were days of cultural angst. The world
was on pins and needles with the Nazis taking over Austria, the Japanese invading China,
and concern about the Soviet Union and the spread of communism in the West. The Second World War
was not far away, and the thought of technologically-caused mass killings and the possibility of invasion
of those considered other was not far from the cultural mind. We seemed to be surrounded by
threatening foreigners with increasingly powerful weapons aimed at us. The exaggeration fed on
pre-existing fears and the quality of the production led not to scary entertainment,
but in many cases, complete horror, even though the broadcast included several announcements
that it was, in fact, a dramatization. But not all portrayals of alien life are aggressive.
Some see the extraterrestrials as exploratory and benign. Director Steven Spielberg gave us two
such representations in 1977 and 1982 with close encounters of the Third Kind and E.T.
Now, in both films, scientists are not only looking for extraterrestrial life,
but the aliens who come to visit are themselves scientists. We are not just their hosts,
but their research subjects. They have come to study and learn about us, not to conquer us.
We have a completely different social context giving rise to these films.
Produced in the waning years of the Cold War, there is an implicit hopefulness that those
who seem different can come to understand each other and coexist in mutual acceptance.
The capitalist Americans and the communist Soviets were deadlocked in an arms race
because neither could understand the other and saw them as a mortal threat.
But in close encounters, the aliens really were different and produced fear in people
by seemingly threatening the lives of their children. Eventually, they did figure out
how to communicate with humans through music, through rhythmic ordering of sounds.
Humans and aliens realized that they could live together in harmony,
both figuratively and literally, in this enlarged universe.
In E.T., we not only see the aliens as non-threatening, we see them as humane,
as relatable, as vulnerable, and as adorable. It was War of the Worlds meets the sensitive 70s.
This theme is extended in other films portraying alien life as cooperative.
This is a central concept behind the television series and sequels and movies of the Star Trek
franchise. To explore strange new worlds, to seek out new life and new civilizations,
to boldly go where no man has gone before. But all of it must be done in accord with
the prime directive. That is, not to interfere with the development of these cultures.
There is a fear of the sort of aggressiveness against the intergalactically vulnerable
as we see in War of the Worlds. In Star Trek, there is a governmental structure that prohibits it.
This rule was even applied to humans. In the first Star Trek, the next generation feature film,
Star Trek First Contact, it is not until humanity develops the technology necessary for long
distance space travel, the warp drive that the rest of the universe's life forms
consider showing themselves to us and inviting us into the club.
Once we have developed the technology on our own to be able to visit them,
we are deemed advanced enough to be worth contacting. At that point, and only at that
point, can the curtain be pulled back on the great diversity of life in the universe without
interfering with our own development. Now the result in the film is that the discovery of life
beyond our own world creates peace on Earth. That is, as soon as we find ourselves to be part of a
great cosmic society, we turn into a global community. It is a move right out of Ferdinand
Ternes. The instant we conceive of ourselves as part of a larger collective of life forms throughout
the universe, the differences between peoples on Earth shrink away and we see the human race
as being homogenous. We use the greater differences we have with those other worlds like the Vulcans,
the Klingons, and the Romulans to unite our own. The discovery of extraterrestrial life is the
cause of world peace, global cooperation, and human harmony. Scientific development led to a
unified human race, and then we go out in order to conduct more scientific research.
We see the same sort of narrative in Arthur C. Clarke's 2001 stories,
wherein Star Trek, the prime directive, an absolute rule not to interfere in the internal
affairs of alien planets, kept extraterrestrial life from meddling in the course of human events.
In Clarke's world, the aliens were an essential part of it. The first visitation of the aliens
through their monolith helps spark human evolution, leading to development of consciousness.
Once the human species becomes self-aware and able to use tools, it's on its way to develop
the ability to travel in space. This means that we can discover the other monoliths
placed around our solar system. This leads ultimately to the aliens opening a portal
to another spatial dimension, giving us a second sun.
As a Star Trek, the undeniable evidence of extraterrestrial life forces a change in
perspective. The result is seeing our intercontinental and geopolitical differences as tiny,
leading to world peace. If Star Trek in 2001 fold us into the plans of the rest of the universe,
Carl Sagan's contact takes us a step farther. When humans make contact with beings from another
planet, we're given plans for a machine whose function we don't know.
When the machine is activated, it takes its passengers through wormholes to meet these
more intelligent beings. The wormholes are intergalactic bypasses created by beings even
more intelligent than those whom we have just contacted. Our newfound alien interlocutors
tell us that they have found evidence of these advanced beings in the irrational number Pi.
After returning to Earth, the protagonist sets a powerful computer to examine Pi for
multiple expressions. The computer finds a pattern like a fractal. It finds circles inside of the
irrational number derived from circles. It's symbolic of an intelligence, not intelligent
beings, but a universal intelligence. Carl Sagan artistically makes the move we've seen
implicit in the development of science over the generations. We start with reality as a set of
individuals. First we think of humans as the only life. Then we move to relations. We see
ourselves as just one life form in a universe with others. Finally, we take the holistic turn.
That is that the entirety itself is the only thing that's real. The individuals are not just
elements. They're modes of some larger sense. Similarly, in contact, it's not that intelligent
life is here and there, but that the universe is an intelligence and we're an aspect of it.
Creating and caretaking, it's the whole that we find ourselves a part of, an aspect of.
Now, in Hamlet, Shakespeare says that the purpose of art is to hold a mirror up to nature.
The artists see the discovery of life beyond our pale blue planet to be a revolution that would
force us to completely redefine reality as we understand it. Scientists seem to agree,
as they've worked in several different ways to try to make this discovery of all discoveries.
The first approach to making contact with extraterrestrial intelligence and inviting
them to our earthly party is to mail out an invitation. The problem, of course, is that we
don't have their home address. So we sent out two letters unaddressed and hoped that they'll somehow
find a recipient. In 1977, when Spielberg had humans making contact with the mothership in
the film Close Encounters of the Third Kind, the U.S. sent out two ships of its own, Voyager
One and Voyager Two. They were sent out on trajectories with a couple of goals. First,
they would pass planets and moons in our own solar system in order to give us a closer look
than we had ever had before. Ultimately, though, they were sent out there with an eye towards
their continuing out of our sun's neighborhood into the Great Void and on towards other solar
systems where maybe they would be found like a court bottle with a note washing up on an interstellar
beach somewhere. The note in this case was a gold record which had, on one side, recordings of a
greeting from the United Nations Secretary General Kurt Waldheim and President Jimmy Carter, as well
as nature sounds and musical selections ranging from Western classical music to Indian classical
music to early rock and roll. The back of the record is engraved with images that include
elements of basic science like the structure of a hydrogen atom to establish a sense of
commonality and universal understanding. It includes beps to our sun and images of human and
non-human life and of the double helical structure of DNA to show the possibly unique elements of
our planet. It also includes images demonstrating how to play the record in case the alien life
forms find that they only use compact discs or MP3 players. There are several concerns about this
approach to finding extraterrestrial life. First, we really have created a needle in a cosmic haystack.
If there is life out there, the odds of hitting it by randomly pointing are next to nothing.
The universe is a huge place and we sent a tiny craft out randomly. The odds of hitting the
extraterrestrial life lottery are extremely thin. Second, it requires intelligent life,
life that would be able to find the Voyager, extract the record and make sense of it.
Finally, it requires the life form not fall asleep to the whale sounds and that they're
careful enough with the record not to scratch it, in which case all they'd learn about us is,
this is a present, this is a present, this is a present. So, another means of looking for
extraterrestrial intelligence was developed. If we aren't able to send something out and contact
them, maybe they have already sent something out and are trying to contact us. We just need to
listen in order to hear them. But, exactly what are we listening for and from where would it be sent?
The lead in this project was taken by the SETI Institute, SETI standing for
Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence. The SETI Institute is a non-governmental,
non-profit organization dedicated to the search for intelligent life. Founding members include
the astronomer and author Carl Sagan, as well as computer pioneers William Hewlett and David Packard
and Nobel laureates Charles Townsend, Beruch Blumberg. Looking for UFOs in the night sky was
once a fringe endeavor. The SETI Institute has been determined to bring it into the scientific
mainstream. Now, while some of their activities are on a smaller scale and involve individuals
with small antennae and personal computers, the most notable facility is the array of radio
telescopes being built in a cooperative effort with NASA and the University of California, Berkeley.
The Allen Telescope Array is a collection of hundreds of radio telescopes arranged over almost
two and a half acres of land at the Hat Creek Observatory in California. With an array that
large, the entire sky can be scanned for signals. But what signals? It's impossible to monitor
every part of the sky for signals at every part of the electromagnetic spectrum. What part to
monitor? The decision was made to focus on the so-called waterhole. Okay, recall that every
element has a fingerprint. That is, a set of telltale frequencies of light it emits when excited.
If you take hydrogen, the strongest line it emits is at 1420 MHz. If you take the iconic molecule
formed by combining hydrogen and an oxygen atom together, the hydroxyl radical, its strongest
light is radiated at 1666 MHz. Now, if you combine a hydrogen atom with a hydroxyl radical,
you get water. So, the gap between 1420 and 1666 MHz was thus dubbed the waterhole.
The idea is that, since life as we know it depends on water, maybe all life does. Hence,
this range of frequencies could be considered universal. It could be the sort of thing another
intelligent race would be seeing as more than idiosyncratic. It would be a place they would
send a message if they wanted other intelligent life forms to find it. Therefore, it might work
like a watering hole, a gathering place for animals. So, this band of frequencies is scanned with the
hopes that a message can be found. There's always noise out there no matter what part of the spectrum
you monitor. Pick a frequency and there's something in the universe that resonates with that frequency.
The key is to find the intentional messages from the noise. For this, computers check the results
for patterns that would be unexpected if they were random. Repetitions, specific modulations that
might correspond to meaningful values, anything that could be understood as the result of
intelligent intention. That's what we're looking for. SETI strategies have branched out beyond
looking at radio waves, looking for other ways to see if somebody's trying to call us on the phone,
but whose ring we need to figure out how to detect. There's been no success yet,
but there's always hope. That hope also leads to other approaches to looking for life beyond
Earth. The most tantalizing location to look for life is Earth's closest neighbor. Going back to
HG Wells, Mars has long been thought of as a possible place for life. Mars has virtually no atmosphere,
only a thin layer of mostly carbon dioxide with traces of nitrogen. Now, on the one hand,
this means virtually no heat is trapped by Mars' skimpy atmosphere, and that makes the surface
unsuitable for life. It's just too darn cold. On the other hand, the existence of carbon dioxide
does give us some hope that there may have been water at some point in the past on Mars, and water
might point to the conditions for life having been there as well. But it's the nitrogen
that generates the excitement. Now, nitrogen is the result of certain cellular processes,
and it may be a direct sign of life. It might also signal volcanic activity,
and this could indicate the presence of subterranean life forms similar to those Thomas
Gold describes in his Deep Hop Biosphere Conjecture. If Mars does, or did have life,
then we would want to look for evidence of water on the surface or deep in the planet,
and evidence of cellular structures or the molecular traces that life processes produce.
We know there are ice caps at the poles of the planet, so we therefore know that there's some
water there. Observations of the surface show marks that are consistent with flowing water.
Now, few processes can work on a planet the way water flows do. Water works in two different ways.
First, water is what chemists call a polar molecule. That means that there's a charge differential
across different parts of the molecule. Now, the water molecule has an oxygen atom in the center
bound by two hydrogen atoms, and the bond forms an angle of about 105 degrees between them.
The result of which is to focus more of the negative charge from the shared electrons
on one side of the molecule than on the other. This makes water electrically sticky to other
molecules since it has a positive side and a negative side. The result of this stickiness
is that it bonds easily to other substances. Now, everyone who has to do the dishes knows this.
If you have tough baked-on residue on a pot or a pan, let it soak. The mess will clean up easier.
Now, your mother always said to use soap and washing your hands because otherwise your hands
are just wet, not clean. Now, while soap certainly helps because it breaks the water-oil barrier,
allowing more dirt to be taken off your hands, the polar nature of water will in fact
do some of the cleaning itself. Now, on a planet, that means that water will dissolve things. Add to
that power. The sheer mechanical force of its flowing and the chemical and physical one-two punch
means that you'll find water cutting into places where it flows. It'll leave telltale marks,
usually gullies with parallel lines carved into the surface.
Photographs of the surface of Mars from both orbiting spacecraft and the rovers that landed
on the surface found exactly the sort of lines we would expect if there had once been water flowing
on the red planet. There seems to be good reason to think that there had been rivers and an ocean
on the surface at one time. Direct evidence comes from the Mars rover Curiosity. It took
a sample of Martian soil and showed a spectral analysis that gave us the fact that it contained
about 2 percent water. There's still some water left on the surface. Might there be more below?
If so, might there be, or at least have been, microbial life?
There are scientists from Great Britain who believe so.
Examining a piece of meteoroid that came from Mars over 1.3 billion years ago, researchers found
what could be a fossil of cellular life. The piece was blasted off the surface of Mars when a
giant meteor slammed into the planet and the piece made its way to Earth. Chemical analysis gives us
reason to believe it's Martian in origin and it shows features that are similar to what one would
see in fossilizations of early cellular life. Scientists looking at them describe them as
chains of globules. Similar fossils of early life on Earth exist in rocks we know to have a terrestrial
origin. Now the growing consensus is that it's unlikely that what we see here is indeed
fossilized Martian one-celled beings. However, the other explanation that what we see is the
result of water, meaning that more of it was present and perhaps the conditions of life were
at one point favorable. So Mars remains as tantalizing to us now as it was for HG wells.
With our rovers and other landings on Mars, we continue to work at hope to find physical evidence
of Martian life. We believe that perhaps the evidence is to be found on other planets around
other suns. The problem is that for a long time we had never seen such planets. Planets are small
in astronomical terms and give off no light. Optically, we can't see them. Could there be
other ways of detecting them? Yes. One approach is gravitational. Now, strictly speaking,
the Earth does not revolve around the Sun. This is not to refute Copernicus. Rather,
what Newton really showed us was that the Sun and the Earth both revolve around a common point,
the center of mass of the two-bodied system. If the Sun and the Earth had the same mass,
that point would be midway between them. But since the Sun is heavier,
the center of mass moves along the line, connecting them towards the Sun.
Indeed, the Sun is so much heavier that the center of mass of the Earth and Sun system
is actually located within the Sun itself. As a result, when the Earth moves around this point,
it moves around the Sun. But when the Sun moves around it, it's revolving around a point inside
itself but not at its center. The result is a wobble, much like someone keeping a hula hoop
going around his or her waist. The heavier the planet, the bigger the wobble in the Sun.
We can look for these solar wobbles optically. That is, if a planet is big enough on the stars
close enough, we might be able to see the movement over time. A better way is to spot that movement
as the result of Doppler shifts. We can check for changes in the light the star sends out.
That's how the first exoplanet was discovered. Now, pulsars are stars that emit a strong beam
of light. As the star rotates, this light flashes on and off like the light on the top of a police
car. As a result, we can get a good read on the star's rotation. The Polish astronomer,
Alexander Wolskan, and the Canadian astronomer Dale Frail, notice that the behavior of a pulsar star
they were observing was a bit askew. Their calculation showed that this had to be the
result of two planets orbiting the pulsar. And so the age of exoplanets was launched.
The exoplanet they discovered would not be hospitable to life, so the search for Earth-like
exoplanets began in earnest. Larger planets like Jupiter are called gas giants, and they were found.
More easily seen because of their large size, but again, not the sort of place that life as
we know it could be found. So, other subtler physical effects of smaller planets were sought.
One way to see them is in transit. Transit is the name that astronomers give to the
phase of a planet's motion in front of the star it orbits. For example, there are times when we
can observe the transit of Venus across the perceived disk of our sun. If viewed at the right time in
the right way, a black spot seems to move across the surface of the sun. That spot is not on the sun,
but rather is Venus moving between us and the sun, thereby blocking the light. Now with an exoplanet,
the amount of light blocked would be small, and the dark spot too small to see. But if we had a
sensitive enough meter to detect a slight decrease in the brightness of the star, we could infer
the transit of the planet. So, between the wobble and the transit methods, astronomers have now
identified about 1,800 exoplanets. We had feared at one time that planets were rare, but the most
recent estimate is that our own Milky Way contains about 400 billion planets, and that's just our
galaxy. Just finding planets isn't enough, though. We need planets that are Earth-like
and that orbit their stars at just the right radius, what scientists call the habitable zone.
Too far out, and there wouldn't be enough heat to sustain life. Too close, and the heat would be too
intense. Like Goldilocks and the Three Bears, it needs to be just right. Right now we've found
21 confirmed exoplanets that are of the right sort and in the right range of orbit, and another
hundred or so that are candidates. That is, whose existence in particular are not nailed down yet.
There's Tau Seti E, a mere 12 light years from Earth, all the way out to Kepler 283C, which is
1,740 light years away. The name Kepler refers to the Kepler space observatory, a telescope in orbit
used to get images that would be difficult with a land-based instrument. Perhaps the most tantalizing
result we have gotten from Kepler is the existence of the planet Kepler 186F, which orbits the red
dwarf star Kepler 186. It's virtually the same size as Earth, only about 1.4 times larger,
and has an orbit about the same distance as Mercury. Since its sun is smaller and dimmer than our sun,
there is a chance that the amount of heat it receives could be just right.
So is there life out there? There's so many planets and so much space. The chances are
that the right sort of planet, the right distance away from the right sort of star,
would have to be found out there somewhere, or perhaps lots of somewheres. But where is that
somewhere? We'll keep looking in hopes that when we find it, we'll have to completely redefine reality
once more. Will this redefinition bring world peace in the way that artists portrayed?
We don't know. They've been right before.
