The success of the genetics program in the 20th century has led to a particular view
of the human, one that puts the focus on the individual.
Every person is unique, and the source of that uniqueness resides in their DNA.
I learn about the real you by putting you under a microscope, or at least by looking
at the results of a genetic analysis.
Recall that there is a pattern to the approach we see in science when trying to make sense
of reality.
Early on, we start with an atomistic view.
We see reality as comprised of distinct entities, and we learn about the nature of them by examining
them closely.
In physics, for example, Aristotle's view of reality contended that a drops rock would
fall in a straight line towards the center of the earth because it, the rock, is trying
to find its natural place.
That is, the source of the movement is a principle located within the rock itself.
The rock has a natural place.
It is seeking to move there, and if you want to know why, you need to look at the composition
of the rock.
All our knowledge about reality is focused on the thing itself.
This is the same place the genetic approach to reality concerning living entities puts
us.
But, in physics, we then move to a stage where we see it as a matter of relations.
The heavy object falls towards the center of the earth, not because of some internal
drive, but because there is a gravitational force between the object and the earth.
Gravity for Newton is a relation.
You could study the rock all you want.
You could never discover that it would fall to the earth without having a system, including
another body.
Gravity is a force.
Forces are real, but they require relationships between entities.
We cannot learn about the complete furniture of the universe by examining the universe
one piece at a time.
Rather, we need to account for the real relationships among things.
This is the turn we take in trying to understand the nature of reality when we incorporate
humans into the universe.
People seem to be a different sort of entity.
Traditionally, this meant adding something to reality, like souls that only humans possessed.
After Darwin, we conceived of humans as just another sort of animal.
No extras needed in the picture of reality, and genetics allowed us to locate both the
human materialist conception and the uniqueness of humanity neatly, but the nagging sense
remained for many that there is something about humans that requires extra consideration.
It's the mind.
The human mind seems to be unique.
It seems different.
If we are going to completely account for reality, then there is something about the
human mind that requires deeper investigation.
Quick investigation of the mind began at the end of the 19th century when Wilhelm Wundt
and Gustav Vechner began to investigate the ways in which our internal experiences relate
to the world around us.
We may think that seeing is believing, but what we see and what is are surely two different
things.
Vechner, for example, studied just noticeable differences.
If two stimuli are just slightly different, our anatomically based sensory detectors,
that is our senses, will not be sensitive enough to detect the difference.
Vechner wanted to know how different two things have to be for us to notice the difference.
What Vechner found was a mathematical relationship that seemed to hold true for touch, sight,
and hearing.
But there was a way of expressing such relationships involving the human brain, according to the
strict standards that one would find in physics, sparked intense interest in the science of
the mind.
Something that was long held to be impossible since personal experiences are internal and
inaccessible to objective study.
Psychology was born as a science.
It remained difficult, of course, because you can't see the mind in action.
If you want to know how a machine works, it's often tricky when it's in running order
and humming along to see the parts and how they function.
But when the machine is broken, the malfunctioning parts become more obvious, and the relations
and functions more clear.
So psychology developed from the medical project of curing the ill.
The French physiologist Paul Broca was able to determine that damage to a portion of the
frontal lobe of the brain, now called Broca's area, led to speech problems.
From this, he inferred that the function of that region is speech.
Thus, science started the long task of associating regions of the brain with human abilities.
The problem, of course, was that the brain was not accessible to doctors until the time
of an autopsy, and treatment of patients at that point has an abysmally low success rate.
The German researcher Karl Wernicke found that similar symptoms were correlated with
lesions in a different part of the brain, now called Wernicke's area.
Thus, the picture got more complicated because you no longer had one part one function, but
interconnected areas of the brain responsible for complex human actions.
The study was tricky and advanced slowly.
Dr. Freud was a physician in Vienna who was very much in the mainstream of this brain-based
medical research paradigm.
He was interested in the way brain malfunctioning led to various conditions.
He did much work on the medulla oblongata, the part of the brain that forms the connection
to the spinal cord.
He looked at cerebral palsy and was part of the medical discussion about its cause in
terms of brain injury.
But then he got married.
To maintain a comfortable lifestyle, Freud moved to clinical work and private practice.
Vienna was an extremely cosmopolitan city and the money was to be made helping those
who had the money.
Dissecting brains at the hospital leads to interesting findings, but does little to cure
those who are suffering.
A different approach would be needed.
He found that in a senior colleague, Josef Breuer.
Breuer had a patient referred to by the pseudonym Anna Oh who suffered a range of symptoms,
blackouts, periods where she couldn't speak, remove her limbs, loss of vision.
These were not regular occurrences but intermittent events.
Breuer found that when she talked to him about them, the symptoms would vanish.
Just speaking of what was happening to her changed what was happening to her.
Just talking could help patients.
Breuer thought that it was an effect of catharsis.
Catharsis is a notion that goes back to ancient Greece.
Plato thought that the arts were corrupting to those who viewed them.
Poetry and drama purport to represent the world and the human condition, but what they
really do is put a false view of reality into words.
They present an extreme oversimplification in which the poet or playwright is capable
of manipulating emotions to give the viewer or reader the illusion of insight, whereas
it's really just an impoverished picture impregnated with the author's biases and misunderstandings.
Art, Plato thought, was dangerous.
Aristotle disagreed.
He thought the arts were helpful to human life.
Humans often have undesirable impulses, urges to act in ways we know we shouldn't.
What the theater does is present a safe space where we can watch actors pretend to do the
sorts of things we would like to do, but know we shouldn't.
The play is so engaging, we get so swept up in its pretend world that we are affected
by what we see as if we ourselves did it.
The result is that we can release the impulses to act out.
We're cleansed of our negative desires by having them expressed.
This cleansing is catharsis.
Brewer discussed the case of Anna O. at length with Freud, and the idea that simply talking
could have a curative effect on a patient suffering real symptoms ran completely counter
to the paradigm with which he had been working.
He'd been used to looking at the structure of the brain to explain psychological problems.
If the mind is not working properly, there must be a part of the brain machine that's
functioning, but here was a real patient whose psychological symptoms were made better by
addressing the mind without mechanical changes.
The possibility of effective talk therapy was revolutionary.
It led Freud to look beyond the acceptable topics defined by the paradigm.
He looked around for unusual approaches to the human mind that he might be better able
to incorporate into a broader theory, and it led him to Paris.
In the late 18th century, the German physician Franz Mesmer investigated the effects of magnets
on humans.
He found that if he slowly dangled a magnet in front of a person for long enough, they
would enter a strange mental state.
We now use his name to describe it.
The person was mesmerized.
He later realized that he could do it without the magnet, and assumed it was because he
had some sort of internal magnetism generating the effect.
The physician's claims about animal magnetism were debunked, and mesmerization, or hypnosis,
as it came to be called, was thought to be bunk, parlor tricks at best.
Any scientist who seriously studied it was outside the paradigm and thought to be a quack.
But in the waning years of the 19th century, Jean-Martin Charcot became interested in it.
Now, Charcot was a giant in French medical circles.
His work on psychological illness was groundbreaking.
Indeed, before it was renamed for the Yankee first baseman who died from it, Lou Gehrig's
disease was called Charcot disease because of his work on it.
That sort of standing can allow one to be taken seriously when investigating phenomena
others cannot.
And so it was that he began to investigate hypnosis, both as a psychological occurrence
and as a possible treatment for mental issues.
He found that there were women suffering from hysteria, often with accompanying paralysis,
who were not insane, but experiencing episodes that were disruptive and troubling.
He posited that this sort of hysteria was the result of a traumatic event.
This was a radical proposition.
Instead of seeing brain injury as the cause of mental illness, that is, a physical alteration
of a part of the brain machine, Charcot is suggesting that if a mind injury, a lived
experience of a certain sort, it's believed to be the cause of the problem.
He also contended that there was an anatomical aspect, that certain women had brain-based
issues that made them susceptible to hysteria, but the problem was in part experiential.
Once suffering, these women were capable of being hypnotized and the result of the hypnosis
could be helpful.
The ability to come under hypnosis, Charcot contended, was a result of the hysteria.
Anyone suffering from hysteria had a mental problem, and one manifestation of it is the
possibility of hypnotism.
It was not, according to Charcot, something that could happen to anyone, but rather susceptibility
to hypnosis was itself a symptom of hysteria, albeit one that could have curative powers.
In this way, it was much like Brewer's talk-induced catharsis.
So Freud went to Paris to learn from Charcot.
He returned to Vienna and found hypnosis to be more hit or miss than he expected.
Some women suffering from hysteria could be hypnotized, and some couldn't.
Some were helped by it, others weren't.
He became disillusioned with hypnosis as the basis for therapy, but it was highly suggestive
in terms of a picture of the human mind.
What Freud found most fascinating about hypnosis was that hypnotized subjects would sometimes
recall events that they did not remember when awake and fully conscious.
This meant there's a repository in the mind where memories are stored that we do not usually
have access to.
You thought that hypnotism was just one route to tapping into them.
Others like free association or dream analysis might be more reliable than hypnotism, but
do essentially the same thing.
Hypnotism is not a byproduct of mental illness for Freud conjectured, but rather one path
to part of the human mind that everyone possesses, but which remains out of sight when the mind
works as expected.
Charcot's hypothesis that experienced trauma could lead to mental illness, and Brewer's
observation that talking about certain things could make a patient better, implied that
there was more going on in the mind than we normally see.
Perhaps some mental illnesses are the result of traumatic events stored in this inaccessible
part of the mind, the subconscious, which remain hidden from our minds because they're
too painful to confront, but which we have to work hard to repress.
This struggle for repression remains below the threshold of consciousness, but the mental
strain takes its toll and instantiates itself in other ways, sometimes bizarre and seemingly
unexplainable ways.
Developing this idea over several years, the result was a tripartite theory of mind.
There's the ego, the conscious mind.
So when you stand in the ice cream aisle and you say that you've made up your mind to get
mint chocolate chip, or when you say, I've got a good mind to go home and not get you
any ice cream, this is the part of the mind you're referring to.
Traditionally, we've thought that the ego is the complete self, that it's all there
is to the mind.
It does do a lot.
When we reason, argue, deliberate, organize, plan, make sense of experiences, this is all
the work of the ego.
But Freud argues that there are two other elements.
The id is the repository of our urges and desires.
It's where instinct and primal needs are located.
Id is the Latin word for it, whereas ego is the word for I, the idea being that we identify
ourselves with our reason, but externalize our impulses.
Think of the longstanding tradition of blaming actions designed to satisfy physical wants
as the work of the devil.
We try to move the bodily outside of the self and locate the self in the safe, rational
part of the mind.
Id for the externalized, irrational, ego for the reasoned, rational self.
The id is always there.
Indeed, as a child, before we are socialized and taught how to control ourselves, it's
the only part there.
Freud, during his early years in the hospital doing brain research, focused on cerebral
palsy and other conditions that present themselves in childhood.
So he had thought long and hard about the child's mind.
He contended that it was pure id, something we learned to mitigate later in life when
we become proper, cultured.
But there are times when we engage in the uncultured with great gusto.
Here are the telling of jokes.
Some jokes from your expressions of cleverness, but if you were to list out every joke ever
told and categorize them, the largest category by far would be dirty jokes.
Why do we, as an entire species, so enjoy jokes that involve sexuality?
Because Freud argues there's a natural sexual drive, an active part of the id that we inherit
as the animals we are, that we constantly repress because we're acculturated.
We spend a tremendous amount of energy, Freud argues, keeping these urges down.
But when we hear the punchline to the off-color joke, we've created a safe space to allow
that energy to go.
And it explodes out in laughter as we experience a catharsis, cleansing ourselves of the pent-up
sexual energy, expressing it in a safe way, a culturally accepted way, a way the ego
will allow.
So what does the ego allow, and what does it not?
That's determined by the super ego.
All human beings have parents, and in most cases, those parents raise the children, teaching
them how to properly get along in society.
This means learning right and wrong, the rules of etiquette, how to behave in various situations.
The reason this needs to be taught is that it's unnatural.
The way we're expected to behave are not the ways we normally want to behave, but we learn
to put aside what we want and do what is expected.
And if we do not, then we are reprimanded by the parent, maybe verbally, maybe physically.
Traditionally, the disciplinarian parent is the father.
The father enforces the rules with punishment always looming in the background.
Eventually, the father becomes unnecessary because we not only internalize the rules,
but we also internalize the role of the disciplinary father, that is, the super ego.
It's the conscience.
As with the id, we also externalize the super ego in order to save the common sense picture
of ourselves as purely rational beings with free will.
If the devil is the externalized version of the id, God is the externalized super ego.
God is referred to as the heavenly father, that is, the one who gives rules that must
be followed and who doles out rewards and punishment for failing to abide by his will.
In order to empower the super ego with more authority than it would have as simply the
product of acculturation by our parents, we create a story that gives its rules a special
status as divine commandments that must be followed lest we suffer the worst possible
tortures for all eternity.
So picture the old cartoons, right, with a character trying to decide what to do on
one shoulder is an angel and on the other shoulder is a devil, each whispering into one ear trying
to get the character to decide his way.
That is the model of the Freudian mind.
We think we're free to decide what to do, but there's always conflict beneath the surface
during the time of deliberation.
The id and the super ego are duking it out and the result is wrongly perceived by us
to be a matter of free choice, something we decided on our own.
This is always the case, even with a healthy mind, but in some cases there were traumatic
events that have seeded themselves firmly in the subconscious.
These, according to Freud, are sapping the person's mental resources by having to be
constantly repressed.
They lead the id to urge certain actions that the super ego will not even allow us to consciously
consider, so they squirt out in ways that seem at first random.
One example is Freud's patient he calls Ratman.
In one of his sessions with Freud, he described a weekend trip with his American cousin Richard.
On the trip, there was a woman whom Ratman was interested in dating, but she was paying
more attention to his cousin.
Ratman experienced an overwhelming urge to exercise, overcome with the sense that he
was too fat.
He started running great distances up mountains in the heat and leaving the table before dessert
was served.
He did everything he could to lose weight, something that was never a thought to him before.
He didn't have a weight problem, and this was the first time such feelings popped up.
Turns out that Ratman's cousin Richard went by the standard American nickname, Dick, and
in German the word Dick means fat.
So Freud contended that his desire for the young lady's company was being thwarted by
Dick's presence.
His id urged him to do what he needed to, to rid himself of this competition, to kill
his cousin.
But such a thought is monstrous.
We not only should not act that way, we shouldn't even think it.
So his super ego forced the urge to do away with his cousin to be repressed.
But it fought its way back to the surface in a new, unrecognizable form.
Instead of ridding himself of his cousin, he would rid himself of fat.
What seemed like a random, bizarre behavior, thereby gets a rational explanation when we
posit that the mind is more than the ego.
To cure those who suffer from hysteria as a result of traumatic experiences, those experiences
must be exposed through psychoanalysis.
The analyst has the tools to plumb the depths of the subconscious to bring the repressed
to light in hopes that exposure will allow catharsis.
Failure to do so keeps the psychological injuries buried within the psyche, constantly
wreaking havoc on the person and those around him or her.
Freud's idea here was not completely novel.
The idea that there is a repressed part of the human mind whose lack of expression gives
rise to mental illness is actually present in the 19th century German philosopher Friedrich
Nietzsche.
Nietzsche picks up on an idea from an earlier German thinker, Arthur Schopenhauer, that
inherent in all beings is a will, a spirit.
For Nietzsche, this is the will to power.
We all have an urge, a primal instinct to exert ourselves on the universe, but this
urge is foiled by acculturation.
Social mores train us to ignore our instinctive animal selves, ethical codes thought up by
the weak in order to contain the stronger and forced by threat of law and eternal damnation.
But these false idols do not just keep the puny from getting their milk money stolen.
They cause an illness of the soul for all humanity.
They breed resentment.
We use the French term to differentiate it here from mere resentment and to denote a deeper
kind of mindset, something characteristic of the thought of slaves.
It's a sense of self-hatred that becomes transformed into hatred of the other.
This hatred is poisonous and creates an unhealthy culture in which people fail to be fulfilled,
denying their will.
Now, where Nietzsche and Freud differ is that Freud was a clinical psychologist and Nietzsche
needed one.
Freud's version is designed to help people who are suffering.
And while there are long debates as to whether Freud's theory should be considered as legitimate
science or not, the empirical evidence he and his followers pointed to in justifying
the theory was the improvement in their patience.
The subconscious is unobservable.
Yes, that does seem slimy, but what can be seen are the results.
If this was complete fantasy, then there should be no positive outcomes from psychoanalysis,
and Freud was always sure to chronicle his success stories.
Perhaps his greatest influence, however, is not upon his patients on the couch, but upon
those in the living room watching movies from the couch.
Freud's picture of the human brain and of mental illness has permeated our culture
as a staple of Hollywood horror films.
Now, in other genres, they're bad guys, but they're driven by greed, narcissism, or simply
tagged as evil.
They're bad eggs who simply do wrong because that's just who they are.
But in the case of horror films, there's almost always a Freudian account of what turned
them into mass murderers.
Perhaps the clearest example is also perhaps the greatest horror film ever made, Alfred
Hitchcock's Psycho.
Norman Bates is the manager of the Bates Motel.
This is a job that requires one to be a normal, functioning person capable of interacting
with guests and solving problems, and part of Norman is, but part of him isn't.
When young, his mother forbade him from dating, telling him that his sexuality was sinful,
and that his natural urges were evil.
Women are the source of these urges, and all women, except for his mother, are tentresses
that will lead him to doom.
Well, Norman's father dies, and his mother takes a lover.
In a fit of anger, Norman murders them both, but as a result of the guilt from the horrible
act, and no longer having his mother to keep his urges in check, his personality splits
with one part becoming a murderer of women, and the other taking over the role of his
mother.
What we see here is clearly a plot whose central device assumes the Freudian picture of mind
and psychosis.
Many have followed Hitchcock in taking the Freudian line as the basis for their horror.
In the Halloween films, the insane murderer Michael Myers ends up only killing those
characters who were seen in the course of the movie to be promiscuous, those who allowed
themselves to act on their basic animal urges.
The character of Ghostface in Scream appears in order to punish a young woman whose father
had an affair with his mother, the inner conflict from the rule-giver acting on physical desire.
In Nightmare on Elm Street films, Freddy Krueger is a frightening inhabitant of dreams who
escapes into the real world.
For Freud, dreams are the place where the id expresses itself, and if we suffer trauma,
the result will be terrible acts the id brings to bear in our waking life.
Freddy Krueger, in this way, is excessively Freudian.
Perhaps the most horrifying antagonist of the contemporary horror genre is Hannibal
Lecter.
He's brilliant, he's cultured, he's everything the super ego says we should be, except that
he isn't.
He's a serial-killing cannibal.
Now, in the novels on which the film is based, it comes to light that as a young child in
Lithuania, Lecter watched his sister get murdered by Nazis, who then not only defiled the body,
but ate it.
One of them would later tell him that a part of her ground-up corpse was included in the
food Hannibal was given and unwittingly ate.
The trauma of the murder and the guilt from his action lodged themselves in his unconscious,
and the result was the creation of a complete psychopath from a person who could have been
a great gift to humanity.
The entire genre of horror films is deeply indebted to Sigmund Freud.
For us, though, in these discussions, the interesting aspect is that what we get out
of Freud is a redefinition of reality similar in influence to Newton's theory of gravitation,
where Aristotle had the falling of objects originate in the internal drive.
For Newton, it's the result of gravity, which requires a relation between objects.
With the genetic approach, we are who we are based on our genetic code.
Our identity is derived from something purely internal to ourselves.
But with Freud, we're more than the people we think we are.
We think we're just our ego, just the self we are in our head, but we're more.
The id stores the memories we can't bear to remember.
That part of us is the story of our relationships with others that are deeply painful.
The superego is the result of parenting.
Goals we aspire towards and the values we internalize are not our own creation.
They're the result of a parent-child relationship that, in one form or another, is a part of
every human being.
If I want to understand the reality of a human life, I cannot look at the person atomistically
according to Freud.
People are not individuals, but internalized relations.
Relations between the people in your life.
Relations between the parts of the mind.
Relations with the events in your past.
Like Newtonian masses acting on each other through the invisible force of gravitation,
human beings have an invisible connection between them.
Those relations, Freud argues, are part of reality.
And if we want to see things as they really are, we can not only look at the things, but
we have to take account of the relations between them.
