In the mid-1970s, the television program The Six Million Dollar Man featured the exploits
of an American astronaut who, after an accident, not only had his life saved by medical science,
but became a technologically transcendental individual because of it.
He was not only made stronger and faster, but, according to the program's iconic opening
sequence, he was made better.
Colonel Steve Austin was improved.
He was a new and higher form of human being, a bionic man who was shown weekly to be superior
to his purely biological species mates.
This is the vision that drives the new trans-human movement, a group of people who are trying
to combine new technology with their own biology in order to create a new, hybridized type
of being out of themselves, cyborgs.
These are cyber-organisms who are part-organic and part-constructed.
It may be the case that the human condition places inherent boundaries on what we can
do, limits that are less than we can think, less than we wish we could do, but the trans-humanists
believe that the technologically augmented human body can surpass these constraints.
We can all become like the bionic man.
We can make ourselves not only stronger and faster, we can be better.
Biology may have given us limitations, but our technology can allow us to alter our bodies
to make those constraints obsolete.
It's an accident of evolutionary history that we have the bodies we do, which can do
the things we do with the sense organs we have.
We had no choice in that matter, but what we do with our bodies is our choice.
And there's no reason, according to the trans-humanists, why we should be limited by the accidental
nature of the species to which we belong.
We can create stronger limbs, give ourselves new powers, allow ourselves novel ways of
sensing the world.
We should be able to make ourselves into the beings we choose to be.
Not merely the kind a history of random mutation gave us.
Now, we've had individuals who are human technology hybrids for decades, but traditionally
this was restricted to those who had medical conditions.
Face makers, for example, are inserted into those with heart problems to check the rhythms
of the heart's beating and provide an electrical kick when needed to make sure it remains functioning
properly.
Hearing aids, and more recently, cochlear implants, have been used to restore hearing
to those who are deaf or hard of hearing.
Prosthetics have been developed for those who were born without limbs which function
in the usual way, or for those who lost them as a result of accidents or disease.
In the case of prosthetics, two quite different approaches to design have been developed.
One approach is based on the idea of replacement.
If a human has lost an arm, we need to restore that arm artificially to bring the individual
back as closely as possible to having the bodily experience he or she had before the
accident.
Made with plastic coatings that can be colored to match the person's skin tone, many prosthetic
arms, for example, have included hooks that allow the wearer to pick things up.
The mechanism controlling the hook is engaged by using other functional muscles, say the
shoulder above the limb or the opposite shoulder.
Movements on a mechanical or electrical trigger connected to the artificial limb allow the
wearer to open and close the hook at will.
Advances have led to hand-shaped appendages instead of metallic hooks.
These are much more complex because of the large number of very subtle movements needed
to manipulate things with them.
The development of a better triggering system was required.
In some, a microprocessor can do the thinking.
Especially effective in the knee, the processor can figure out what normal use requires and
adjust the prosthetic automatically to provide proper balance as the wearer walks about.
The optimal trigger for the prosthetic, of course, would be the human brain itself.
The greatest advance in replacement prosthetics is to have them connected in such a fashion
that they are controlled just as a biological limb would be.
Targeted muscle re-inhervation uses the nerves that are designed to control function and
say the hand in order to control the prosthetic.
The nerves are connected to the prosthetic in such a fashion that the electrical signal
from the nerves activate the artificial hand.
In this way, the artificial appendage reacts to thought almost exactly the way the biological
hand would have.
This replacement approach to prosthetic design is based on the idea that the job of medical
technology is to restore functionality in the form of usual human usage.
To be human is to have a human body, and the job of medical science is to restore bodily
functioning as far as possible to all patients.
But there is a second approach to prosthetics that takes a very different view on the matter.
The enhancement approach is based on the view that prosthetics are an opportunity for humans
to augment themselves with superior ability or additional functions.
The replacement approach sees the human body as ideal and the prosthetic wearer as damaged
and needing to be elevated back as close as possible to the ideal.
The enhancement approach, on the other hand, sees the prosthetic wearer as an opportunity
to improve on the human body.
The human body, on the second account, is not ideal or perfect, but rather unnecessarily
limited.
And when we use prosthetics to replace broken parts, we can do it in a way that upgrades
the body.
Like legs, it was long thought, should look like biological legs, an attempt as far as
possible to mirror their structure and be used as biological legs would.
But the American biomedical engineer, Van Phillips, had a different idea.
Why be constrained by the accidental design randomly appearing as a result of evolution?
Why not design something more efficient?
The result was the FlexFoot Cheetah, a spree blade design worn famously by Paralympic athletes.
These are more efficient than biological limbs and allow for running at speeds and jumping
to heights that are beyond the capacity of those without them.
Prosthetics are not only allowing wearers to be normal, but to exceed the nor.
The idea behind Philip's approach is that we need to think of humans as detachable from
our biological given bodies.
Those with prosthetics were long thought to be inferior because they lacked full functionality.
But some suggest that we need to rethink the question of function.
Function requires an aim, a goal, and these we can choose.
The technologized body is not just an attempt to approximate the biological body, it's
an opportunity to move ourselves beyond it, to radically rethink our relationship to our
bodies, to reconceive what it is to be a person, to transcend the biological.
Computer science has long bought into what's termed Moore's Law, named for Gordon Moore,
one of the founders of Intel.
According to Moore's Law, processing speeds for computers doubles roughly every two years.
Increasingly powerful computers have led to increasingly small computers.
If you want signals to move between components faster, make the components smaller and closer
together.
In the digital world, higher speed is generally linked to smaller size.
To become more powerful, you need to become smaller.
The resulting nanotechnologies have opened the door for fascinating applications in human
technology hybrids.
Surgery has become less and less invasive as our technologies have allowed us to see
better and better with small cameras, and to operate remotely using tools that can be
inserted into very small incisions.
Using lasers, for example, we make precise cuts that require significantly less recovery
time and that offer a significantly higher rate of successful treatment.
But what if we didn't need to make incisions at all?
What if the tools could simply be ingested?
Nano sensors have been made the size of grains of sand.
These can be packed into a capsule swallowed by the patient, enter the bloodstream, and
with a small patch the size of a band-aid, transmit details about the person's bodily
function from inside the body.
The body's temperature, blood pressure, and physical activity can all be monitored without
touching the patient.
With our wireless internet technology it can be monitored from the other side of the globe.
Blood chemistry reports from the nano sensors can tell us if someone forgot to take his
or her medication, whether the person is about to suffer a heart attack, or whether the person
has an infection.
We can look for blockages and arteries or polyps and growths in the intestines.
It's fantastic voyage without needing to shrink the people.
These technologies now, in 2015, are just cameras.
They provide information about the need for risky and expensive exploratory surgery.
But the plan is to ultimately develop tiny chips capable of obeying directions.
Cancer cells could be targeted with drugs that would be delivered only to the tumors.
Chemotherapy has been described as poisoning the body in the hope that we kill the cancer
before we kill the patient, because its effect can't always be well-targeted.
We have to expose the healthy tissue to the same harsh chemicals that were sent to the
tumor.
But with these nano chips, we may be able to poison the cancer cells exclusively.
If we can equip these nano chips, say with lasers, they could eventually be used to conduct
surgical procedures from completely inside the body with no need for an incision at all.
In addition to a biological immune system, we could add a technological immune system,
so white blood cells and antibodies could receive some high-tech support in their war
on disease from some micro drones.
Our cars now have computers built into them, so that when we take them into the mechanic,
he gets a readout of the car's use, efficiency, and the status of all of its systems.
These nano chips in the blood could do the same thing for our doctors.
Before coming into the room where you sit nervously on white paper in your underwear,
your doctor could read off all the relevant medical information without time-consuming
blood tests or unreliable patient interviews, our medical records would be more complete
and more easily accessible whenever our body is there.
The British engineer Kevin Warwick took this several steps farther.
Instead of the nanotechnology working independently within the person, his goal was to fully
enmesh it into his own body, making his anatomy seamlessly organic and technological.
At first, he had a silicon chip transponder, a radio frequency transmitter inserted into
his arm.
He programmed objects in his laboratory, the lights, the door, the heater, his computer
to respond to it, allowing him to operate them without touching them.
With gestures in the air, he could turn the lights on, send an email, walk out, turning
off the lights and closing the door without making physical contact with anything.
It's intended to mimic telepathy, taking the notion from the world of magical thinking
and making it technological reality.
We're starting to see this sort of thing employed in commercial contexts.
Some cell phone makers encouraging its customers to get digital tattoos, that is, implanted
chips that eliminate the need for passwords to unlock their phone.
The phone senses the chip and allows the owner, and only the owner, to access its full functionality.
Phones would not be stolen and couldn't be hacked into since only the owner could operate
it.
Some bars in Europe have a deal with a local tattoo shop to implant chips into their customer's
arms.
The chips are in place, the bar programs the customer's identity and credit card information
in the bar's wireless network so that the bar's customers never have to reach for their
wallets.
Their account is automatically charged with each drink they order.
Warwick thought that telepathy with a light switch or a credit card machine was one thing,
but he was interested in something much deeper.
He wanted to be able to directly share physical experiences with other people.
He wanted his brain to be able to connect to more than just his body.
Now, it's often said that husband and wife should share everything.
Many of us get to know each other so well over the years that we know what our spouse
is feeling or thinking without asking.
But Warwick took it to a completely different level.
He and his wife had chips inserted into their forearms connected to the nerves used to sense
touch.
These chips were connected by radio frequency transmitters that communicated with a computer
connected to the internet.
When his wife touched something with her hand at home, Warwick would have the same sensation
in his hand at work, or in India, or wherever he happened to be.
They literally shared sensory experiences of the world from different bodies.
In the future, when your spouse tells you to keep in touch, she might mean it literally.
Warwick then took it a step further.
It's one thing to have new powers over the technology in your office.
It's a completely different thing to have yourself biologically connected to it.
He had chips inserted into his forearm, again connecting them to the nerve endings that
were programmed to respond to outputs from the computer and other electronic devices
in his lab.
When they were on, or when they executed various functions, they would send him a signal that
would register in his brain through the electric signal sent into the nerves from the chips.
He could not only control the machines from afar, but he could feel what they were doing.
They were extensions of his body.
He had given himself a new sense.
We've traditionally taught that humans have five senses, sight, smell, feel, taste and
touch.
But Warwick technologically created in himself a sixth sense, a new way of being connected
to the environment, a new way of sensing it.
Some of the most interesting work in creating cybernetic hybrid biological technological
humans has involved extending the senses we already have.
Those of us who wear eyeglasses already utilize sense-altering technologies.
The eyeglasses appeared in 13th century Italy, used by monks as an aid in reading.
They were handheld.
By the 16th century, the earpieces were added, and in the 18th century, Benjamin Franklin
gave us the bifocal lens.
20th century brought us the contact lens.
The idea was first proposed by Leonardo da Vinci in 1508, who proposed altering the shape
of the cornea with water.
Sadly, his access to thin sheets of hydrophilic polymers in Renaissance Italy was limited,
but the advances in material science have allowed us contact lenses that change eye
color, can be worn for extended periods of time and have multiple focal lengths in one
lens.
Most recently, Laser Institute keratomalusis, or LASIK surgery, allows for vision correction
without wearing an aid.
By using a laser to slice open the cornea, in many cases, the eye can be reshaped to
restore 20-20 vision.
If we want to move from the replacement to the enhancement view, the surgery can be used
to give people superior vision.
Athletes like Tiger Woods, LeBron James, and Greg Maddox had the surgery to not only correct
their vision, but enhance it.
Results can bring the eye to 2015 vision or better.
Now, this may not be Superman's x-ray vision, but it does open the door.
We say seeing is believing, but what we see is actually only a tiny bit of what there
is to be seen.
The human eye collects and interprets only a tiny fraction of the electromagnetic spectrum.
But we've developed tools to interpret the rest.
One relatively simple technology that makes use of this are night vision goggles, which
use the same techniques cats do for seeing in very low light.
These techniques increase the amount of light brought into the eye, and increase the range
of viable wavelengths into the ultraviolet or the infrared, which is usually invisible
to humans.
These capabilities can be built into wearable glasses that allow people to see normally
in relative darkness, to see normally even when bright light is directed into their eyes,
and to see heat signatures.
For example, wearing these glasses, one could see which of two empty chairs had most recently
been occupied.
We could choose to wear glasses that would let us see like an insect, or wear artificial
ears that could allow us to hear radio waves.
The human brain is incredibly plastic.
Not long after wearing these sensory enhancers, we will probably develop the brain structure
for interpreting them as naturally as the way we connect with our surroundings now.
Perhaps the most radical advance in our senses would be computer augmentation.
When we see, light passes through the cornea and lens of our eye, it's focused on the
retina and gets converted into an electrical signal set through the optic nerve to the
brain.
There, it's processed by several areas which separate objects, place them in geometric relations,
scan them for humans and other recognized objects, compare them with past visual experiences,
and store the image and memory.
But the memory is flawed.
It's limited in how much detail it stores.
And we're limited by only having access to our own stores.
On top of this, it regularly makes mistakes.
How often do we fail to recognize things we've seen before, or think we see someone we know
only to embarrass ourselves by approaching a complete stranger?
Sometimes the parts of the brain that store visual memory disagree with each other.
One part believes that you've been in that place before, where another part sees it as
completely new.
The brain goes back and forth on the matter, and the result is that strange feeling we
call deja vu.
All of this could be helped if the internal brain worked in concert with an external brain
to help it interpret what we see.
Digital glasses function in two ways.
First, as glasses to see the world, these glasses also act as a monitor for a computer
which is built into them.
The computer is connected to a camera which projects content from the computer onto the
monitor in the glasses.
You could search for directions that have a map of street names and directions imposed
on the streetscape ahead of you.
Seeing is believing.
We can now have control over how we see what we see.
But believing is becoming still more tricky.
We know what we experience, and we've experienced because we remember it.
But we're arriving at a place where memories themselves can be constructed and implanted,
or erased completely.
Memories have recently done both with mice.
In order to remember something, several different parts of the brain are used.
If we find a way to interfere with the processes that connect the parts of the brain during
remembering, the memory disappears.
We've long known that this sort of thing is possible from observing people who have
had brain injuries and suffer from amnesia as a result.
We know where memory is stored, we know how the process works, and we know that there
are blunt ways of impairing the memory.
What's new here is the ability to erase specific memories.
A couple of lectures ago, we talked about DNA insertion.
Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology used this technique to take DNA
from animals whose cells are photosensory, that is, cells that take light and turn it
into electricity, and splice that DNA into neurons in mice.
The researchers could then trigger those specific cells by shining light on them.
This made it possible to manipulate specific neuronal function in the mice.
For example, memories, because the light shone into the brain, would trigger those,
and only those, photosensory cells.
The researchers could have the mice experience something in a certain context, say, getting
a painful shock immediately after seeing a specific thing or doing a specific thing.
For example, a flash of red light.
The mouse remembers the painful shock when it sees the red light and exhibits behavior
associated with fear.
This is just operant conditioning that goes back to Pavlov, Watson, Skinner, and the other
behaviors.
The thing is, that by getting the right neurons to be photosensitive, the researchers could
now trigger them, flash the red light, and have the mouse behave with no fear response.
The mouse will have forgotten the shock it experienced.
That specific memory could be turned on or turned off based on the flashing or non-flashing
of the light influencing those brain cells.
A specific memory will have been deleted.
Similarly, and perhaps more frighteningly, researchers have been able to go in the other
direction and implant a memory in a mouse's brain.
Now, the idea of creating false memories, in one sense, is nothing new.
Psychologists have known for decades that it's possible and actually straightforwardly
easy to get people to create false memories.
If we hear something often enough, especially something detailed enough to visualize it,
we'll eventually store that mental image in memory as though we were present for it.
We can be made to believe that we remember an event we did not observe.
There are hundreds of studies supporting this, it's called false memory.
Historians who work with oral histories have to contend with this as a matter of course.
Stories we tell many times get embedded in our minds in ways that we remember things differently
than they actually happened, or indeed will recount memories, equally as vivid as those
events we were present to observe that we did not see, or that did not happen.
We know the brain can be fooled in this way.
What researchers have done now, however, is to physically insert a memory into a mouse's
brain.
Mice were created with certain neurons that could be activated with light signals.
These optogenetic mice were put into a black room and allowed to explore.
They behaved normally in room throughout the room, then the mice were taken and put
in a red room where they were given a shock.
This created the conditioning that led them to be afraid of the red room when placed there.
The mice were later placed back in the black room.
Again, they behaved normally and inquisitively until the neurons associated with the conditioned
fear response to the red room were activated.
Again, the mice behaved exactly as they did in the red room with a conditioned fear response.
The researchers had created in these mice a false memory of having been shocked in the
black room.
The researchers were able to implant this false memory in their brain, which caused them
to behave exactly as they do with authentic memories.
The hope is that these insights could lead to treatment for people who have undergone
traumatic experiences, post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD, can leave severe emotional
scars on those who have been victimized.
The brain changes as a result of the terrible experience.
The hope is that research like this could help seal off the memories that continue to
haunt sufferers long after they occur.
One line of studies is a series of drugs that can target the proteins the brain uses
in remembering.
We wrongly think of memories like old photographs we keep in a box.
We label the box and when we want a particular memory we locate the right box and then search
through it.
We even say colloquially, well, let me search my memory.
But it turns out that the act of remembering is active.
Every time we recall a memory, we re-remember it.
That is, we build a new memory out of what we're recalling.
The process of creating the new memory from the old one involves particular proteins which
can be chemically blocked, keeping us from having the ability to remember that particular
event.
The hope is that this specific protein blocking chemical could be made into a medicine that
would allow people to forget specific memories that the brain will not let go without harming
the broader ability to remember.
A different route of study is electronic.
Neuroprosthetics are chips inserted into the brain to stimulate brain function or to augment
it.
We know that chips inserted into the right place can deliver an extra boost to improve
memory or inhibit it.
Direct brain recording could be done by implanting neuroprosthetic chips in the brain.
These neuroprosthetics would then be able to send extremely detailed outputs about brain
function wirelessly to a computer.
Scientists envision so-called neural dust that would be made up of tiny, tiny chips
that could be spread throughout the brain to record and transmit what happens across
all of the brain's different areas.
If we're able to collect and transmit sufficient data from the structure and functioning of
the brain, will we someday be able to do with our full brains of Professor Warwick
and his wife did with the nerves in their hand?
Will we be able to share minds, that is, to share direct access to one another's thoughts
and do it across vast distances in space?
If we can put our minds into a machine, would it then mean that machines themselves have
minds?
Could a machine have a mind?
That's not the question of cyborgs, where a human is made into a machine, but rather
artificial intelligence, where a machine is made into a human.
