We've seen that the combination of a grand unified theory with a quantized account of
gravitation is called a theory of everything by physicists.
In this conversation, we want to see how seriously to take the word everything in this phrase.
If researchers succeed in the ultimate goal of physics, a single coherent theory that
unifies the working of all four known forces in the universe, what does this mean for our
picture of reality?
Would it mean that we not only completed physics, but also completed our inventory of the furniture
of existence?
The theory that explains how all matter, energy, and interactions among and between
them in terms of field values and symmetries give us an exhaustive account of all we should
consider to be real.
This view hinges on what we've discussed as the doctrine called reductionism.
That is, that everything studied in every science reduces ultimately the physics.
This reductionist position is committed to two claims.
First, everything that exists is made up of nothing more than the elements of physics.
There are no extra physical entities in the world.
And two, the laws and vocabulary of each science are just shorthand for a more complicated
set of laws that can be set out fully in the vocabulary of physics.
We'll discuss the first of these at length here and touch on the second just a little
because the second proposition will be investigated in more detail later in the course.
Reductionists contend that everything in the universe is made up of atoms and energy.
The long-standing resistance to this claim points to the existence of life as a metaphysically
different kind of thing.
Okay, if we take a living being immediately before and then the instant after death, all
the atoms that were there beforehand are thereafter.
But the thing is fundamentally different.
We differentiate linguistically between a person and a corpse.
We think intuitively that the two are different.
Another word we use for corpse in ordinary language is body.
When we say somebody has died, we say that his or her body is here, but that he or she,
that is the person, is gone.
We equate being a person with not just having a body, but also something else.
Traditionally, this something else is a soul.
This two-part picture of reality, that there are two separate sorts of things in reality,
physical bodies and non-physical souls, is what philosophers call metaphysical dualism.
The great name attached to dualism is Rene Descartes, who's already come up in a number
of our conversations.
All Descartes' evil demon thought experiment we talked about in the very first lecture.
Descartes said, consider the possibility that we are being fooled by an evil demon who's
putting false ideas in our minds.
He's not saying it's true, but argues that it's conceivable, merely possible.
And if it were true, then any given thing I think, any proposition I believe could be
false, put into my brain by the demon.
Hence, I could believe nothing about the material world, not even that it exists, since it
all may be an illusion, the result of a complex hallucination created in my mind by the demon.
Seems like I could believe nothing about reality, but he realizes there is one thing even the
evil demon could not wrongly convince me of, that I exist.
The demon could not fool me into wrongly believing that I exist, because I would have to exist
in order to be fooled.
The demon would have to create the thought of existence, but the thought requires a thinker,
and thinking is doing, and doing requires a doer.
If I'm thinking, I must exist, and to be fooled, I must first think.
So I can't be wrong about my belief that I exist, but what am I?
I'm not the person I think I am with the body I think I have in the world I think I inhabit.
All those beliefs could be the result of the demon's handiwork.
The only thing I have the right to believe with absolute certainty is that I am a thinking
thing, a thing that thinks, a mind.
And so Descartes concludes, the mind exists separate from the body.
A layer goes on to try to prove with mathematical certainty that the body exists, and that there
are absolute laws of mechanics that the body has to obey.
But these laws are the laws of matter, not those of the mind.
Mind and body are completely different things, different kinds of substances.
Reality is comprised of two separate realms, the material world, governed by the immutable
laws of physics, and the world of minds that's governed by logic, or psychological rules,
or ethical rules, or no rules at all.
The human mind seems to be a different sort of thing endowed with a very important property,
free will.
We choose to do what we want.
The problem for Descartes is that what we want is not just mental, but often physical.
We want things.
We want to do things.
This means that these two separate realms, the world of matter and the world of mind,
must interact with each other.
This is problematic.
On the one hand, we know that matter influences mind.
In the classroom, I'll demonstrate this by walking up to the big desk that's in the
front of the classroom, which is often a laminated plywood top with metal sides, and I'll kick
the side of the desk really hard and the result is a huge reverberating metallic bang.
I'll then limp around the front of the room pretending to be injured.
I asked what just happened, and we see that there was a physical interaction, body to
body, when my toes hit the desk and rapidly contracted from the force.
But this rapid contraction of my toes had a seemingly non-material effect.
It gave rise to an idea, a mental experience.
At first, pain, then the thought, don't kick solid things, you idiot.
So we have body to body interactions, giving rise to a mental event, an idea, an experience.
In the other direction, we have a sense that the mind influences matter.
What I'll do then is I'll ask one of my students to please write the word guacamole on the
top of his page-class notes.
When completed, I ask the student why the name of this zesty avocado dip is scrawled
in his notebook, and the response is usually, because you asked me to.
I then ask the student to stand up and flap his arms while clucking like a chicken.
Invariably, the student declines.
When I ask why, he says that he doesn't want to.
So the reason the word guacamole appears in the notes is not because I made you do it,
but because you wanted to write it.
Wanting, desiring, willing is a mental state, and somehow the idea in your head caused your
hand to move in a very particular way that gave rise to exactly what you wanted to happen.
We do not often go to write a word and have a completely different word show up.
Our minds seem to control our hand.
So it looks like we have two completely different things, material objects and ideas, and they
are different sort of entities.
I can have a basketball, and I can have the idea of a basketball.
The two are not the same.
One is material, the other is mental.
One has size, shape, weight, location, the other doesn't.
The basketball is orange and round.
The idea of a basketball is the idea of a round orange thing, but it's not an orange
idea or a round idea.
The properties of material and mental entities seem completely different, yet the material
seems to give rise to the mental through perception and the mental appears to give rise to the
physical through acts of will.
We seem to have interaction between them, but how?
It's the size, shape, and mass of one object that lets it act on another.
If ideas have no physical properties, how can they give rise to physical movements like
the hand moving the pen across the paper?
This problem of interaction seems to plague the move to include non-material things in
the universe, to add a completely new category of stuff to reality.
Descartes tried to solve this problem anatomically.
He knew that the brain was the bodily organ responsible for action, so the mechanism by
which the mind interacted with the world must reside there.
He also knew that there's a network of nerves through the body that are in part responsible
for taking data about the interaction of the world and the body back to the brain, where
they somehow gave rise to observation and were responsible for the movement of the muscles
by the mind.
So he figured that these nerves would be tubes, much like the veins and arteries also criss-crossing
the body.
When veins and arteries carry blood pumped by the heart, these nerve tubes would carry
a different fluid, animal spirits.
That is, spirits in the sense of a liquid, not spirit in the sense of a soul, although
for Descartes, soul, mind, and spirit would all have the same sense.
It's through disturbances in the flow of the animal spirits that the mind would receive
news of the physical world send out its commands to the body.
And to date, Descartes' hypothesis, the part of the brain responsible for this is the pineal
gland, a small part of the brain that had the twin virtues of being centrally located
and Descartes not having any idea what else it might be doing.
It's through the manipulation of the animal spirits by the pineal gland that the mind
connects with the body, that we have the interaction between these two distinct parts of reality.
Now, turns out, of course, that this theory fails.
We know that the nerves don't carry a subtle fluid and that the pineal gland is responsible
for producing melatonin, a hormone that plays a crucial role in sleep and our bodily rhythms.
But the central metaphysical question is still with us.
Is there a single sort of thing in reality, just material, or is there some other sort
of entity?
For Descartes, this other sort of entity was a soul, and particularly humans, animals he
thought for theological reasons, cannot have minds or souls.
Clearly, Descartes did not have pets.
At Descartes' time, throughout Paris, appeared hydraulic statues, fountains that didn't just
shoot out water, but used the water pressure to move parts of the statues making up the
fountain and so also making sounds like a calliope.
So, from a distance, Parisians would see human-shaped figures moving and playing music.
They were animated like persons even though they had no mind.
Descartes thought this is what animals were, complicated automata, complex organic robots.
Over time, the theology was weaned from the dullest view, and living things were simply
held to possess what French philosopher Henri Bergson called an illan vital, a vital force
or vital impulse, what the German thinker Arthur Schopenhauer called the will to be.
Living things have a will that non-living things do not.
It's this will, this power to desire and cause to happen through internal means that
separates the living in the universe from the non-living.
The brain is relevant here.
It's necessary, but it's not sufficient.
We could take a CAT scan and see that when we have certain kinds of thoughts, a certain
area of the brain is active, right?
When we have a certain sort of desire, a different section is engaged.
When we have a certain sort of sensory experience, a completely different region lights up.
We can absolutely conclude that there's a correlation between the state of the brain
and a human experience, but the dualist will say that this correlation is a relation between
two different things.
The materialist, someone who denies dualism, someone who contends that there's only one
sort of metaphysical entity and that reality is strictly and solely material, must hold
that brain states and mind states are the same thing, that they're different descriptions
of the same occurrence.
The dualist on the other hand holds that brain states and mind states are fundamentally different.
We can point to the spot in the brain that's active when I feel pain in my stubbed toe,
but the pain I feel, the experience of pain is not the same thing as the neural activity.
The two are linked, but they're different according to the dualist.
They are one and the same according to the materialist, but consciousness for the dualist
is completely different.
It's non-material.
One physicist who made this case was Eugene Wigner.
He was concerned with what we've seen in quantum mechanics as the measurement problem.
Okay, recall that the equation governing the development of quantum systems is the Schrödinger
equation.
When a quantum system is not observed, it occupies a state of superposition.
That is, it's a combination of every possible state it could occupy.
The Schrödinger equation describes how the superposition develops according to the potential
energy in the environment of the system.
But the instant we observe the system, it fails to be in the superposed state, but instead
appears in one and only one of the possible states.
We can never predict which one it will be.
The Schrödinger equation gives us the odds that we'll find it in each of the possibilities,
but the best we get is this probability.
The problem here is that we have a physical law in the Schrödinger equation that always
holds except when we look.
Physicists were bothered by three aspects.
One, how can you have a universal law of the universe that can be violated?
Two, why is the violation subject to randomness?
This was Einstein's problem.
And three, what is it about us looking at something that causes the violation?
It's this third question that Eugene Wittner tried to answer.
One interesting thing about quantum systems is that they become entangled.
We talked about this earlier with respect to the identity of particles.
If two electrons bounce off one another, we may be able to label them as Bob and Carol
coming in, but we can't say which one is Bob and which one is Carol coming out.
The best we could do is say one is now Ted and one is now Alice.
The two electrons cease to be independent things in the world that subsist and persist,
but rather are just disturbances of a particular sort in the underlying field.
When we talk about the behavior of the field, the reality of things themselves is lost.
We say in this way that the parts of the system have become entangled, and we can only describe
the system as a whole.
This is what makes the thought experiment called Schrodinger's Cat so troubling.
The idea is that we can easily create what are called spin-correlated particles.
Electrons, for example, have a property called spin.
Not that they're little ping-pong balls actually spinning, but the effect is much like what
physicists recognize in angular momentum of a rotating charged object.
A thing can be said to spin clockwise or counterclockwise, and there are different effects for each.
Now we can create pairs of electrons such that when we don't look at them, both are
in superposed states of clockwise and counterclockwise, but as soon as we observe one, both collapse
into a single state of clockwise or counterclockwise such that one is always the opposite of the
other.
But we never know which will be which.
It's the equivalent of a quantum coin flip.
So attach the apparatus that creates these pairs to a spin detector that will observe
the spin of one of these particles.
Now attach the detector to a circuit connected to a poison gas canister, such that if the
detected particle is spinning clockwise, the circuit does nothing.
If the detected particle is spinning counterclockwise, the canister is opened, allowing the gas to
escape.
Finally, place the canister in a closed box containing a cat.
Now we push the button.
A correlated pair of electrons is emitted.
The detector determines the spin of one.
If the electron collapsed from its superposed state into a clockwise spin, nothing happens
and the cat lives.
If the electron collapsed from its superposed state into the counterclockwise spin, then
the detector sends the signal through the circuit, the gas escapes, the cat dies.
But suppose we push the button and don't look in the box.
The detector is made up of atoms.
It's a physical thing, subject to the laws of quantum mechanics.
If we've not observed the detector, its atoms will be in their superposed state, which is
now entangled with that of the emitted electron.
The circuit likewise, just more atoms, which are unobserved, and so they obey Schrodinger's
equation in a way that has them entangled with the state of the larger system.
And it's with the canister of gas and the cat, assuming a picture of the cat like that
at Descartes, in which the cat has no mind capable of making observations, right?
All of these are just atoms, all of these unobserved, and therefore all of these in superposed states
in a grand entangled system.
When we don't observe the system, it's in one big superposed state, meaning the cat
is in the superposed state of alive and dead.
It's not half-dead.
It's not in the process of dying, but rather it's in the superposed state of being both
alive and dead.
But the instant we open the door and look inside the cage, we see either a dead or alive cat.
The way function collapses into just one state.
But wait a minute, we're just atoms too, right?
We too should be part of the system as should the rest of the universe.
There should be no collapsing from the two superposed states into a single property state.
Schrodinger's equation should always hold in violent.
Wigner is the only place in the process that a different sort of entity could be active.
Wigner concluded that the only place is in the making of the observation.
An observation is when we learn of the result, when our consciousness becomes involved.
Other than our consciousness, there's nothing but atoms here, and nothing that should affect
the system to cause the collapse.
It's only our consciousness, or perhaps that of the cat, which we can find as fundamentally
different here.
Maybe like Descartes, we need to hold that there's matter and there's mind and the
two are completely different, but they interact.
If this were true, it would allow us to make sense of one of the most troubling aspects
of quantum theory.
But what sense do we then make of a non-material consciousness?
And how does it cause the collapse of the wave function?
It may answer one question, but it raises several others.
Interestingly, quantum theory has been used in the opposite direction as well, that is,
in support of materialism, to give us a proposed material theory of consciousness.
Sir Roger Penrose, the British mathematician and theoretical physicist, has argued that
it's quantum effects that give rise to the sense we have of free will.
Dualism, that there's more to reality than just matter and energy, has to solve the problem
of interaction.
How do these two different sorts of things work with each other if they're completely
different?
Materialism has no such problem because there's only one kind of thing, but it has its own
challenge, free will.
If the universe is just matter and energy, and these behave according to well-behaved,
mathematically expressed laws of nature, then we are just automata.
We have no ability to do other than we do.
We do not make choices.
We have no ethical responsibility.
We don't live the lives we think we live.
There are two possible approaches for materialists to take.
First, they can try to save some sense of non-determinism and human action based on the laws of nature.
They can try to argue that the universe is a well-behaved place, but that doesn't mean
that human actions are a deterministic product of history and environment.
The second approach is to give in on the question of free will, to accept that human actions
are not the result of conscious deliberation, but to explain why they seem so much like
they are.
They have to explain away our sense of free will.
Now, Penrose takes the former line.
He starts with the simple proposition that our actions are controlled by the brain which
is made up of cells called neurons.
All human actions, even the simplest movement, require an incredibly intricate choreography
of neuronal activity.
Neurons throughout the brain form intricate networks.
Neurons work together by the release of chemicals called neurotransmitters that allow for the
flow of electrical charge between them.
When one neuron releases a particular chemical into the gap between the cells, it will either
facilitate or stop an exchange of electrical signals.
And it's the propagation of these electrical signals through the brain that result in the
bodily movement.
Now, one part of the neuron that aids in the delivery of neurotransmitters are what we
call microtubules.
These are small, thin tubes of a protein called tubulin.
Their shape, being long tubes and their presence in all neurons, has led Penrose to consider
that they may be more than just pipes.
It may be that the structure of the inside of the microtubules is such that it creates
within the cell and then between cells an entangled quantum system.
Being inside of a tube, this structure may be sufficiently isolated from the effects
of the environment outside the body on the brain to remain, at least for a while, in
a superposed state.
This superposed state eventually is acted upon by the chemical environment of the brain,
causing the superposed state to collapse and the firing of a particular constellation
of neurons.
Because this process involves a necessarily quantum level process, there will be in this
fully material system an element which is necessarily non-computable.
In other words, the brain is nothing but a physical system, working according to physical
laws, but because the structure of the brain is so fine, there may be a quantum level effect
that makes our actions not determinable.
We're governed by the laws of physics completely, but that does not mean that our actions or
our intentions are uniquely determined by the environment and the absolute laws of the universe.
Further, since the quantum states of these microtubules are coherent, that is, entwined
into a single system, it means that this sort of quantum consciousness involves the structure
of the entire brain the way we would expect it to.
Well, free will does not look like what we think it looks.
It's not that we have a rational agency that has no dependence on the physical universe,
but we're not robots acting at the whim of absolute physical rules either.
There's a controversy over this theory and whether findings in neuroanatomy are supporting
or undermining the theory.
However, the idea that quantum effects might be responsible for introducing indeterministic
elements into the functioning of a material brain are one significant approach to trying
to maintain the reductivist claim that what physics says there is, is all there is.
But, one can hold that they're only material elements to reality and also hold that the
mind is not completely describable by the laws of physics.
Recall that reductionism buys into two different presuppositions.
First, that everything in reality is made up of atoms, energy, and the stuff of physics.
And second, that the laws of physics are all that's needed to explain the behavior of these
physical systems.
Some thinkers accept the first, but deny the second.
That is, they hold that the ultimate constituents of the world are only things in the vocabulary
of particle physicists, but that when you put them together in intricate ways, something
new emerges from the structure.
And that it's greater than the sum of its parts in such a fashion that physics is insufficient
to account for it.
Mind, consciousness, and life are emergent properties.
That is, they involve nothing more than bits of physics, but become more than that when
put together properly.
This view was championed in the first half of the 20th century by the Austrian sociologist,
economist, and philosopher Otto Neuerath.
Neuerath was quite the character.
A huge, hulking man with flaming red hair.
He had a loud voice, a booming laugh, and a presence that announced him in any room he
entered.
Instead of a signatory, he signed his letters with a cartoon elephant, usually holding a
flower on the trunk.
Neuerath was not only a powerful figure in early 20th century social science, but a deep
thinker about the place and power of science.
He believed that science education was essential to social advancement and good governance,
but worried that the language of science, mathematics, would be difficult for those who
had to work and couldn't receive higher education.
He thought that science could be communicated to the masses, but it would require a new
way of expressing mathematical relationships, a new language which was visually evocative
instead of using equations.
The result was isotype, a picture language.
Now, we all encounter isotype symbols every day.
Walk to a public restroom and figure out which is the men's room and which is the women's
room by looking at the symbol.
That was Neuerath.
Go to an intersection and know when to cross and when to wait.
Those are isotype symbols flashing at the crosswalk.
In theorizing about science, Neuerath disagreed with his fellow thinkers in Vienna who were
arguing the strict reductionist line.
He was a sociologist and they were largely physicists.
Of course, they thought they held the key to all human knowledge, but physics, he thought,
would never completely account for complex social interactions.
Not that it was irrelevant, but that they're needed to be more at higher levels.
Scientific fields, he thought, were like balloons placed next to each other.
Squeeze one and it expands, pressing into the ones next to them and reshaping them causing
them to push against those next to them.
Physics and chemistry share a boundary and it's a squishy one that's influenced by pressures
from both fields.
But while one may help reshape the other, they are in the end separate balloons with
their own subject matters, their own vocabularies and methods to study phenomena that happen
at different levels.
Chemical reactions are, underneath, nothing but the interplay of atoms with their various
subatomic parts.
But the complexity is in part due to the chemical structures that require a fundamentally chemical
explanation with chemical concepts and chemical methods.
And so it is for biology, psychology, sociology and economics.
According to this view, the physicists may have given us all the furniture of the universe,
but we can't have a complete understanding of reality if we don't pay close attention
to how the interior decorator functions.
It's not just the pieces we need to understand, but we'll redefine reality further if we understand
what emerges from those pieces.
And of all the aspects of the universe that emerge, perhaps none is more intricate, more
fascinating and more complicated than life.
