As soon as physicists had started discovering the structure of the atom, they started noticing
some problems.
They knew that the atom had to have almost all of its mass focused in the central nucleus,
which held the positive charge.
The equal amount of the negative charge was held by the electrons, which were not part
of the nucleus, but were somewhere in the larger, mostly empty volume of the atom.
The positive charge of the protons in the nucleus should be attracting the negatively
charged light electrons and pulling them in.
But they don't.
Something keeps them outside loosely bound.
A central mass that attracts the smaller bits, which do not collapse in, was reminiscent
of the solar system.
So the idea was that the electrons orbited the atom in the way the planets orbit the
Sun.
Maybe the energy of motion balanced out the electrical attraction between the protons
and the electrons the way it balanced out the gravitational attraction of the Sun and
planets.
The problem is that when an electrically charged object moves, it creates a magnetic field,
and that would sap the energy that kept the electrons orbiting, causing all atoms to quickly
collapse, making atoms unstable and matter impossible.
But the universe is filled with stuff, so the theory had to be wrong.
What was going on?
A clue came from work done by the German physicist Max Planck in 1900.
Now, Planck was thinking about an anomaly, what was called black body radiation.
The question was this, take a hollow black metal sphere and heat it up.
We know that metal glows when it gets hot, that is it gives off light electromagnetic
radiation.
Since it's hollow, some of the light would be given off inside.
Because the walls are black, that light would then be completely absorbed by the inside
walls of the sphere, giving them more energy, which would mean the walls would give off
light.
That light would then be absorbed by the walls, which would then have more energy, and the
process would continue and continue.
The higher the frequency of light, the more energy it would contain.
Look at higher and higher frequencies, and the way the energy gets bigger and bigger,
going off to infinity.
The classical theory thus predicted that the amount of energy inside would become infinite.
If we took a heated metal sphere and poked a hole in it, we should get out an incredible
blast of energy, a beam that would destroy everything in its direction.
Of course, this doesn't happen.
We could do the experiment, and we knew that for a given temperature, the energy peaked
and then dropped off to zero when we moved towards the ultraviolet end of the spectrum.
Where the classical theory said it should be going off to infinity.
This discrepancy became known as the ultraviolet catastrophe.
Planck was thinking about the catastrophe and trying to find a fix.
Now, the last thing he wanted to do was start a revolution.
Recall that Thomas Kuhn, the historian and philosopher of science, said that normal scientists
work within a paradigm, and are more than reticent to change it.
In this way, Max Planck was the most normal of normal scientists.
He was not one to try to topple the apple cart in any aspect of his life.
Planck and Einstein were dear friends, indeed its Planck statue and influence that introduced
Einstein as a legitimate member of the scientific community.
Planck was, in important ways, his patron and mentor, but the two could not be more
different in personality.
Where Einstein despised authority and hated the rote memorization of the German schools,
Planck thrived under it.
Planck was a stiff man who had his day scheduled to the minute, including his daily constitutional
walk, his piano practice, and his physics, which he pursued standing at a tall accountant's
desk.
Planck's voice was soft, and his words carefully chosen, so neither time nor sentiment was
wasted.
His clothing and his politics were distinctly conservative, as was his approach to physics.
At least, he tried to make it so.
Planck approached the ultraviolet catastrophe in reverse.
The approach had generally been to try to develop a theory and then see if its predictions
matched the observation.
Planck figured that since we had such good data, let's try it the other way and figure
out what sort of mathematical account would generate the empirically generated curve.
When he did, he realized that the problem could be solved if we treat emitted and absorbed
light as if it came in packets.
He called these packets quanta.
To quantify something is to make a numerical representation of it.
To quantize something would be to give it a numerical relation where there are only
whole number of amounts.
So butter, for example, is smooth.
You can buy any amount of butter you want.
No matter how small the pat, you can cut it in half.
Eggs, on the other hand, are quantized.
You can't buy half an egg.
They come in ones.
You can buy any number of eggs you want, but the amount of eggs is always a whole number.
Planck's equation forced us to treat emitted and absorbed light like eggs instead of butter.
Now, Planck did not believe this.
Planck was committed to a picture of the world that was completely continuous.
Everything from energy to matter was smooth.
He was reticent to buy into a world of atoms because matter should be infinitely divisible.
In fact, he was so bothered by any quantity that was not smooth, he refused to buy chunky
peanut butter.
No, not really.
But the point is that Planck pictured reality as completely continuous.
Yet, the solution to the ultraviolet catastrophe was to treat light as if it came in clumps,
packets, quanta.
Planck wanted to think of light emissions as having a dimmer switch where it can make
things as bright or as faint as you choose.
But his equation was saying that reality had a click switch where there were only discrete
settings, where light came out in indivisible packets.
We solved the problem if we thought of light as if it were eggs, not butter.
Einstein, in the year he developed the special theory of relativity, also solved another problem,
accounting for what was called the photoelectric effect.
Now, if you take ultraviolet light, think purple bulbs and fuzzy glowing posters from
the 1970s, take that light, shine it on metal.
Electrons are kicked out.
Now, this wasn't strange since we know that electrons and metal were only weakly bound
to the atoms.
And if we thought of light as smooth waves the way Planck hoped they were, then the waves
would cause the metal surface to vibrate.
Think back to elementary school in the demonstration with the two tuning forks.
You strike one tuning fork, bring it near the second, and then what happens?
Both of them are now vibrating.
If light is a wave, then the same sort of thing should happen when the light hits the
metal.
Those vibrations could shake lose some of the electrons.
No problem.
We make the light brighter, then we would make the wave bigger.
What would be the effect of the metal?
Well, think of kids holding a bed sheet with ping pong balls on top.
If they start to wave the sheet, the ping pong balls are tossed up.
These are the electrons emitted from the surface of the vibrating metal.
Now, if the kids make bigger waves, then the ping pong balls should go higher.
That is, they should leave the sheet with more velocity, more energy.
Similarly, if we make the ultraviolet light brighter, we should see faster moving electrons
emitted from the metal.
But that ain't what happens.
We get more electrons kicked out, but not faster ones.
Oh.
Einstein picked up on Planck's work and saw what would happen if we treat light as packets,
particles instead of waves.
Now, if we turn up the light, what's the picture?
We don't have the light moving faster.
Remember, this is Einstein who has light moving at a constant speed.
So if we make the light brighter, what we get are more packets of light coming out.
Think of the light source as a pitcher who has only one pitch, a fastball that he always
throws at the same speed.
Making the light brighter is like making the pitcher throw more pitches, not faster ones.
But more pitches will mean that more electrons will get kicked out, and since the speed always
remains the same, the emitted electrons should come out with the same energy.
Einstein took Planck's claim that light acts as if it were quantized and says, it really
is.
What Planck took as a mere way of thinking, Einstein says, was actually a part of reality.
Light is like eggs, not butter.
Sometimes, here's what was tricky.
Light only behaves like a particle when it's emitted or absorbed.
When it travels, it exhibits perfect wave behavior.
So is it really a particle or a wave?
These are two completely different modes of being.
A particle is an independent thing.
Think of a baseball.
It's its own entity.
It has a size, a shape, a location, right?
Put a baseball in an empty box, and the box is an empty.
There's something in the box that's not the box, it's the baseball.
Waves on the other hand are something completely different.
To have a stadium full of fans do the wave, you need a stadium full of fans.
No fans, no wave.
Waves are a disturbance in a medium.
There has to be something to do the waving.
A wave doesn't have independent existence, but is a regular disturbance moving through
the crowd, right?
Some members being more disturbed than others.
When the wave is done, everything that was there before is still there, even though the
wave is not.
The wave is not an independent thing.
So to say that life is sometimes a wave and sometimes a particle makes no sense.
It's to say that it's sometimes a thing and sometimes not a thing.
Well, what does reality really look like?
We didn't know, but the Danish physicist Niels Bohr knew a useful concept when he saw one.
He took Planck's notion of quantization and applied it to the atom.
Even with the simplest case, the hydrogen atom, which has just a single proton in its
nucleus and a single electron, he's supposed that the orbits of the electron were quantized.
That the electron could not be orbiting at just any old distance away from the nucleus,
but that there were fixed tracks, and the electron had to be found only in these tracks.
The electron could jump from track to track, but, and this is a really weird part, it would
never exist in the area between the tracks.
It would instantaneously absorb exactly the right amount of energy and appear in a track
farther out.
Similarly, the electron could give up energy, but only in exactly the amount which accounted
for the difference between an outer and an inner track.
This is what we call a quantum leap.
The term doesn't refer to a big jump, the way we often misuse the term in popular discourse,
but rather an instantaneous jump instead of a smooth transition.
Interestingly, this solved a long-standing problem.
Remember when we were talking about the red shift of stars, how the light coming from
stars was like a fingerprint which got shifted when the star was moving towards or away from
us by the Doppler effect?
The question was, where does this fingerprint come from?
Why does each element, each type of atom, have a unique set of light frequencies it
gives off when you excite it with an electrical current?
The classical picture of the atom couldn't explain this, but for its quantized version
gave classical physicists the finger from which the fingerprint emerged.
It was the orbitals, the quantized tracks of the electron.
There are fixed tracks, so the electrons have to occupy, and each requires a particular
amount of energy to be absorbed to get from an electron in that track.
When an electron surrenders some of that energy, it would have to jump from a higher to a lower
track and give up exactly the difference in energy between them.
There would therefore be light energy coming out of the atoms in only the quantities defined
by the difference in energy of the tracks of that particular element.
By quantizing the atom, Bohr made it stable and accounted for the fingerprint light signature
of different elements.
Problem solved, but reality made strange.
There were two main problems.
The first is the particle wave issue.
Light can be only one, which is it?
The second is the quantum leap.
How could something go from A to B without ever having been in the middle?
Bohr was obsessed with these problems.
He worked tirelessly on them, much to the chagrin of his assistant, Werner Heisenberg.
Bohr and Heisenberg would discuss, argue, and try new hypotheses all day long.
Bohr would go over the conversations obsessively in his head, thinking through the suggestions
and possibilities.
If he had an idea or thought that Heisenberg had misunderstood him, he would bang on the
door of Heisenberg's attic room any time, night or morning, to clarify his point, clarifications
that would often take hours.
Bohr treated Heisenberg like a son.
Heisenberg wished dad kept more regular hours.
Eventually, Heisenberg figured out a way to mathematically account for the strange
quantum behavior of the atom.
The problem was, it required, in some cases, infinite dimensional matrices.
Now, a matrix is an array of numbers.
Think of a spreadsheet with numbers in the columns and rows.
This is a two-dimensional matrix.
Add sheets in front of it and sheets in back, and you have a three-dimensional matrix.
Heisenberg's account needed to be able to perform mathematical operations on infinite
dimensional matrices.
To say this is hard to work in is an understatement.
Now, that didn't bother Heisenberg too much.
It was hard to discover.
It ought to be hard to do.
Geniuses could keep control of the theory.
But it came with a really weird feature, what were technically called non-commuting observables.
Because of the mathematical form of the theory, there would be pairs of observable properties
take position and momentum, for example, such that you could observe the value for one,
and then the other ceases to have a value.
This came to be known as the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
It says, for these pairs of measurable quantities, there's a limit to how precisely you can
know the values of both.
The more exactly you measure one, the more uncertain you are about the other.
It turns out, in quantum mechanics, this is not a feature of our knowledge or lack of
knowledge, but a feature of the universe itself.
When an object has a well-defined position, it no longer has a well-defined velocity.
Not just that we don't know it, it ceases to have a single value for that property.
Okay, suppose we're flipping a coin, right?
When the coin's in the air, you call heads.
The coin hits the floor, starts to spin on its edge.
I then step on it with my foot, knocking it flat.
When the coin was spinning, it was neither heads nor tails.
When I stepped on it, it took on a value, that is, it became either heads or tails.
But because my foot's on top of it, we just don't know which it is.
Many people wrongly believe that the Heisenberg uncertainty principle puts us in a case like
the shoe on the coin.
It is heads or it is tails, we just don't know which.
But it's actually more like the spinning coin.
When we observed one of the pair of non-commuting observables, the coin does not have a value
of heads or tails, it's indeterminate.
This was more than weird, it had to be wrong.
Why would us checking on one thing change reality for something else?
It got worse.
The Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger figured out a way to do everything that Heisenberg's
infinite dimensional matrices did with a simple equation that looked like the good old equation
for conservation of energy that physicists have been using for centuries.
It was now easy to calculate the behavior of a system over time, but there was a problem.
Every physical theory has what are called state variables, okay?
These are the important measurable quantities that the theory connects.
So in Newton's theory, if you give me the position, the mass, the velocity and acceleration
of each ball on a pool table, I can tell you exactly the values for where each one will
be at any future point.
For a thermodynamic system, if you tell me the pressure, temperature, or volume, I can
tell you the values at any point in the future.
These are the state variables, and what the theories do is determine how they change over
time.
With quantum mechanics, according to Schrödinger's formulation, the state variable is this
thing represented by the Greek letter psi, what we call the wave function.
What is the wave function?
What does it represent?
Yeah, that's the problem.
It can be expressed in terms of any given observable, but when you do, according to the theory,
it's a combination of every possible state the system could be in.
The term used by the physicists is a superposed state.
So if we express psi in terms of position, then according to Schrödinger's equation,
the object will simultaneously be in every place it could be.
But of course, things are not spread out through space.
Things are where they are.
Everything we see is in a place.
And here's the real strangeness at quantum mechanics.
When we don't look at a system, when we don't observe it in any way, it obeys Schrödinger's
equation and the system is in its superposed state.
But the moment we observe it, it collapses into one of its states, and we see it there.
And this is the part that bothered Einstein.
We can't tell which value it will take.
If we had a quantum coin, it would be both heads and tails until we looked at it.
But even if we had all the knowledge in the world about how things were just before the
observation, we could never predict with certainty whether it would be heads or tails.
But once we look, it instantly and randomly becomes just one.
This superposition plays into the question we had earlier about light being a particle
or a wave.
Which is it?
It depends how you observe.
If we take a light source and turn it down, down, down, down, down, until we have just
one packet of light, what we call a photon, come out at a time, we can shoot it at a wall.
Now we take that wall, we cut two slits in it.
Now if light is a wave, then it should go through both slits at the same time.
Think of water waves hitting the slits.
The waves would go through, and the other side, the slits would have identical waves emanating
out of them.
Now, waves add and subtract.
Think about sitting at the beach.
If you have a wave coming in, meaning a wave going out, what happens?
If both waves were peaking, the combined wave becomes twice as big.
If one was at the peak, while the other was at a trough, they cancel each other out, right?
Light does this too.
This means that if light hits a screen, then midway between the slits, the waves from the
slits would be in phase.
They'd be in peak and trough at the same time, because they traveled the same distance at
the same speed, making the resulting wave twice as big.
This means a bright spot, but move a bit to the side, and one gets there before the other
because it travels a shorter distance.
Move just enough, and the two will be completely out of phase.
One is up when the other is down, and the other is down when the other is up.
These cancel each other out, leaving a dark spot.
So if light is a wave, then we ought to see on the screen a series of alternating light
and dark bands.
Now if light were a particle, then the particles hitting the slit would go through.
The slits would act like shotguns, spewing light particles at random angles.
There would be no spot unavailable to a spit out photon.
Unlike the wave case, there would be no dark spots, no light bands, just random flashes
about the screen.
Remember the difference between waves and particles.
Waves are spread out in space, particles are at particular places.
We could test whether light is a wave or a particle in two different ways.
One would be to look to see if the light-dark alternating pattern shows up.
If so, we know that light is a wave.
Then it went through both slits, and added and subtracted itself.
The other would be to put a photo detector at the slits to see if a photon went through
the left slit, the right slit, or both.
So if we take the first approach, let's test to see whether light is a wave.
Lo and behold, it is.
We get exactly the light-dark bands we expect.
And if we then turn on the photo detectors, the bands disappear.
The random flashes show up, and the detectors tell us that the photon went through one or
the other slit, but never both.
When we check to see if it's a particle, it is.
When we check to see if it's a wave, it is.
If we were checking to see if it were a particle using the photo detector and
our laboratory assistants, say unknown cluts, tripped over the core and unplugging them,
the instant the photo detector stopped working, the bands would immediately reappear.
The light knows when we're looking.
It knows what we're looking for, and it responds accordingly.
If we don't have the photo detectors on, then we're not testing for position.
The result, exactly as Schrodinger's equation gives us, a superposed state of both possible
positions.
But when we plug them in, now we're observing the position, left or right.
The effect is the observation is to collapse the wave function into one value to give the
light a definite position.
But that value is random, not predictable.
So the Schrodinger equation is a description of reality when we're not looking at it,
but fails whenever we check.
What is the picture this gives us of reality?
To be honest, that's not clear.
Einstein thought that the theory couldn't give us a picture of reality because it was
incomplete.
Okay, it was right as far as it went, but it didn't go far enough.
The universe he contended had well-defined values for every property all the time.
The fact that quantum mechanics didn't give us these values and couldn't uniquely determine
them at all times just showed that the theory needed to be augmented.
And once it was, then, and only then, could we get a sense of reality from it.
Turns out, it's wrong for reasons the Irish physicist John Bell worked out in the 1960s.
As a result, there are three pictures of reality that are suggested.
One comes from the Hungarian-born physicist John von Neumann.
He contends that the superposed state is real, that things are spread out without well-defined
values until we measure.
The act of measuring causes a disturbance that collapses the wave function into a single
value.
Measurement is a physical act which changes the system, and this is what causes the change
of the results from what we get from the Schrodinger's equation to the random results
we see.
The second, proposed by the Hungarian Nobel Laureate Eugene Wigner, is that the collapse
occurs when the system interacts with the human mind.
It's our consciousness that affects the system.
How could a physical thing cause a violation of a physical law?
The observation is not the action of the meter, it's the observing of the scientists.
The conscious seeing of the value.
Now, this struck a lot of scientists as strange, giving a physical role to human consciousness.
But it was not as weird as the possibility proposed by Hugh Everett.
According to this picture, when a system is not observed, it's simultaneously in every
possible state.
But once it's observed, reality splits, and new sub-realities, parallel universes,
are created.
In each one, one of those possibilities is instantiated.
Every time we observe a system, we don't collapse the wave function, rather, we divide reality
creating multiple worlds.
One in which the coin is heads, and one in which the coin is tails.
These interpretations come into play when we try to understand the greatest piece of
art to be directly influenced by quantum mechanics.
Michael Frayn's stage play, Copenhagen.
The play is based on an uncertainty in history during World War II.
Now, we know for a fact that Heisenberg was recruited by the Nazis to run their atomic
weapons program.
We know for a fact that he was stuck.
We know for a fact that he traveled during the war to Denmark to meet with Bohr.
We know for a fact that afterwards they never spoke again.
We know for a fact that there was a very subtle error in his work that kept him from being
able to create a nuclear weapon for Hitler.
We do not know what was said in the meeting.
Historians have put forward three hypotheses.
In one, Heisenberg was legitimately working on the development of atomic weaponry for
Germany.
When Bohr found out, he was furious and refused to help.
The two had a falling out over the affair and never spoke again.
Bohr refusing to help Heisenberg avoid the error that stopped him.
Another possibility is that Heisenberg was conflicted.
He didn't know what to do.
Given the irrationality of the Nazis, he couldn't just refuse, but he didn't know what to do.
So he went to his old mentor Bohr for fatherly advice.
The talk was about politics and the course of action, not about physics.
Third line is that Heisenberg was only pretending to work on an atomic bomb for the Nazis.
That he had no intention of ever building such a thing, but he needed Bohr's help to
find an error that would completely sabotage the effort and yet be so subtle that no other
scientist in Germany would be able to find it.
So, which of these three was the case?
We'd only know if we were there, if we could observe the conversation.
But we weren't.
So according to quantum mechanics, since the system is unobserved, it's in a superposed
state.
There is no reality about which one is the case.
What Frayn does in the play is to trace out each of these possibilities in the three acts
of the play.
Since we didn't observe it, all three are brought to life.
Is there one that really occurred, or as ever it would have it, are there three worlds?
In each, a different possibility being the real one, that seems too strange to posit.
But if you think that's strange, where do you see where physics went from there?
