The first step in establishing sociology as a science was to see its subject, society,
as a part of reality, that is, as a real thing in and of itself.
We can talk about the individuals that make up society from a biological and psychological
perspective, but for sociology to exist as a science unto itself, cultural reality must
be an emergent property.
The society must have an independent reality, and it must behave in a predictable, law-like
way.
Emil Durkheim's work on suicide gave us some reason to believe that this is so.
But there are sociological effects that cannot be reduced to psychological effects or biological
effects.
Cultural-level influences are their own thing, and require their own field of study next
to biology and psychology.
The study of the functioning of human groups, that is, sociology, is an independent science.
So, what are the tools and methods of this new science?
We can take a biological organism, look inside with a CAT scan, and MRIs to see the
different organs, the different systems, see their functions, and find the principles
by which they work.
Can we do the same thing for our culture?
What is the fundamental essence of a society?
This question took on critical importance in the first half of the 20th century, with
the dawn of what was called modernity.
Now, before the end of the 19th century, human experience across the centuries differed
little.
There was some social change, some technological advancement, but by and large, the day-to-day
life of people was not terribly different from that of their great-great-grandparents.
Monarchies kept political power in the hands of a few.
There were some cities, but life was largely rural.
Beliefs and rituals were handed down through generations.
Craftsmen trained apprentices in the standard way of doing things.
But then, in the middle of the 19th century, technology spurred the industrial revolution,
and everything began to change.
Factories sprung up, creating great wealth for entrepreneurs, the sort of affluence that
had previously been reserved for the landed gentry.
This meant that you had a new class of rich and powerful individuals who were not those
of the traditional families who had been living in that position for all of living memory.
A sense of class mobility appeared, which challenged the traditional picture of social
reality in which you were born into a place.
Now, you could make a place for yourself, something that could not even have occurred
to people beforehand.
The factories needed workers, and lots of them.
The result was a mass migration from the countryside to the cities.
Life had been hard, working the land, physical labor in elements, surrounded by the same
family who had populated your rural village for generations.
Everyone knew everyone, and everyone's business.
But now, people lived in small flats, in large buildings, in urban settings, removed from
the sun by walls and pollution, surrounded with others but knowing no one.
Life was lived in a way in which people were both alone and never alone.
Workers were not apprentices, trained by masters, developing a deep relationship between them
and a sense of connection to their trade or craft.
Now, they simply sold their labor to whenever factory would hire them, doing work in which
they weren't really connected to the product they were creating.
The farmer would feed his family first and sell the surplus.
Factory worker created a good that was not of his or her own design, his or her own choosing,
which he or she might not even be able to afford.
The baker's family was never without bread, but the factory worker's family often never
considered acquiring what the worker created, day in and day out.
Life was different.
Society was different.
The change was everywhere and incredibly profound.
Recording history itself had changed in a fashion that seemed, if not unique, certainly
pivotal.
The reality of lived lives had been fairly constant for all of recorded history, but
now, looking around, things had changed and perhaps changed forever.
If you look at books written in this period, one of the most popular words for titles was
crisis.
There was a sense that humanity itself was at a crossroads.
Maybe one path led to flourishing fulfillment.
Maybe both led to ruin.
Things were different.
There was no denying that.
How could we make sense of this new social reality?
This was the question that sociology in the first half of the 20th century was created
to explain.
Durkheim showed that to make sense of it, we needed to work not from the individual psychological
level, but looking at a society itself as the thing to be studied.
Following Durkheim was the great German thinker, Max Weber.
Weber disagreed with Durkheim when it came to the sociological method.
Durkheim sought a sort of social physics, a science which is data driven, where we can
find mathematical regularities as the foundation of our studies, and then find theories which
could account for these regularities and predict more.
Weber, on the other hand, thought that while data is necessary and a wonderful thing, interpretation
is the hallmark of sociology.
Sociology should work less like physics and more like history.
Now, historians use data.
They have artifact and text switch established basic truths, but their job is not just to
catalog these truths, names, dates, events, but to make sense of them.
Researchers create narratives that explain why what happened happened as it did.
This is not a matter of anything goes.
There are better and worse historical accounts, but there is no single account that completely
explains reality.
Reality is multifaceted, so we need to look at its complex happenings using a number of
ideological tools, a number of different lenses, in order to gain insight into its range of
interrelated elements.
These tools are what Weber called ideal types.
The way we use them is like Plato in reverse.
Let's revisit the famous allegory of the cave from the Republic, where Plato tells a story
of people chained in a cave, looking only at the back of the cave all their lives.
Between them and the back of the cave is a low wall.
Behind the wall is a fire, and people walking with objects over their heads.
The light of the fire causes the objects to cast shadows on the wall.
Since, the people in the cave have seen nothing their whole lives with these shadows.
They believe that the shadows are what's real.
After a while, one man figures out how to unchain himself.
He sees the low wall and peeks around, discovering the truth that there are objects making the
shadows.
He discovers that the objects are what's real.
The shadows are imperfect representations of them.
Now this story is an allegory, an extended metaphor.
The shadows represent material objects.
Recall that the Greeks bought into the idea of teleology, right?
That all things strive for a goal.
To Plato, this meant that what's real is only what's perfect.
And that which is perfect has reached its goal, and will therefore never change.
All material objects can be changed, with a large enough sledgehammer.
So the material world is not real.
Material objects are imperfect representation of that which is real, the forms.
Forms for Plato are idealized essences of things, which we see not with our eyes, but
with the eye of the mind.
It's through philosophical contemplation that we reach truth, not observation.
What's real is what's perfect, and we can use the imperfect to start ourselves thinking
about what's really real, but the observable is not really it.
We need to transcend beyond the material to get to truth.
Weber flips the prescription.
For Weber, the material world is the real world.
The real world is the world we see and live in.
But where Plato argues that we use our acquaintance with the material to get to the real truth
in the ideal or perfect realm, Weber argues that the perfect is never real.
But we need to use it to get us to what is really real, our messy, complicated material
world.
According to Weber, the world is so complex that the only way to make sense of it is to
oversimplify.
To cut out real elements, real parts of the story, and focus on some finite subset of
what's left, we do this through the use of ideal types, forms in Plato's vocabulary,
which are uncluttered and neat concepts which we use for the workings of society.
One example of an ideal type, which we'll discuss later in the course, is the notion
of economic man, used in classical economics.
Human beings are, for the sake of the theory, considered to be perfectly rational and perfectly
self-interested.
If a seller wants nothing more than to maximize his profits in selling his wares, and a buyer
wants nothing more than to purchase the goods he needs at the lowest possible cost, then
we can develop a scheme by which there will be a natural price for that object, one that
balances these interests.
Given this model, we can figure out how increasing the demand for a good will affect the price,
or what effect an additional competitor in the market would have.
Now, no one believes that humans are perfectly rational, and no one believes that we're purely
self-interested, but by making this oversimplification, we're able to create an idealized version
of the situation where the observed effects are approximated by the ideal ones.
Weber's ideal types are spherical chickens for the social scientist.
Ideal types let us give explanations, and we can judge how good the explanation is based
on how well the ideal type matches up with the messy reality.
It will never match perfectly, but the tighter the fit, the better the ideal type, and the
better it is as an explanatory tool.
So, when we look at society, what's the ideal type we should use to explain its most basic
dynamics?
That is, the single most important underlying motivating element.
Everyone believed that culture is a good thing, that a stable and functional society is necessary
to create the preconditions for human flourishing, but what's the internal principle by which
this stability is achieved?
The answers proposed at the end of the 19th and into the first half of the 20th century
were strongly tied to pre-existing economic and political beliefs.
On one side, there were those who thought society was designed to create harmony, but
required competition.
Society must pit interests against interests.
Everyone wants everything, but only some can have it, and some will always have more than
others.
Society is comprised of inherently unequal elements.
People are not just different, some are superior.
Society ought to create a stage where those who are superior can lead, and those who are
inferior can follow.
A stable society is not a static society.
Society can improve itself, can adapt and grow, wealth can increase, standards of living
and technological development can be fueled, but in order for this to happen, the internal
arrangements must be properly arranged to foster fair and ongoing competition.
In his essay, The Gospel of Wealth, American industrialist Andrew Carnegie explicitly claims
that as culture advances, when progress is made, human society loses homogeneity.
The idea, the ideal type that Carnegie makes use of is the law of competition.
People are pitted against people, and there are winners and losers.
There are rich and poor.
There are powerful and powerless.
That is how things are, and how things must be, and to try to change that would be to
undermine the working and successes of society.
In Carnegie's words, individualism, private property, the law of accumulation of wealth,
and the law of competition, for these are the highest results of human experience.
The soil in which society has so far produced the best fruit, unequally or unjustly, perhaps,
as these laws may sometimes operate, and imperfect as they appear to the idealist, they are nevertheless,
like the highest type of man, the best and most valuable of all humanity has yet accomplished.
This comprised of individuals with unequal abilities and unequal ambition.
Create a fair playing field, let the winners emerge, because those winners are the ones
who will drive the culture to a better future, both by creating more wealth and through philanthropic
works.
This view of human groups as essentially competitive, derived much of its support through an analogy
with evolution.
Adaptation is the result of competition for scarce means of survival and ecosystems.
And in human society, there are scarce resources as well.
If adaptation is healthy for biological species, the same should hold true for cultures.
This social Darwinism differs from biological Darwinism, and that evolution for Darwin is
non-teleological.
There is no goal, no end that evolution is seeking.
Adaptation is not progress.
Because they are not getting better, they are merely changing.
Some of these changes will be selected for by their current context, some won't.
But no value is attached to one biological adaptation or another.
However, the social Darwinists like Carnegie Spencer and others like H. L. Menken did see
a social version of survival of the fittest as advancing society and leading to social
progress.
They held a teleological view that's non-Darwinian, but used Darwinian ideas to support it.
Now, while some saw competition as the basis of human social structures, others see us
as fundamentally cooperative.
Human society brings people together, and the whole becomes greater than the sum of its
parts because those parts support and build on each other.
You see segmentation in division of labor.
You get different people doing different things, all contributing to a greater whole
in the best way they can.
Those who held the view that human reality was primarily competitive had to take great
pains to explain how their rather dark and nasty view of humanity in the end would create
better conditions for all, that the pain induced was not really evil, but merely necessary.
The contrary view that we are primarily cooperative beings who work together to make life better
for everyone had a much more optimistic view of the world.
Modernity may have created low-wage jobs and pollution that caused public health nightmares,
but really, underneath it all, the human heart connects us all and will ultimately lead us
to a good place.
The name most strongly linked to this view is the Russian Peter Kropotkin, whose book
Mutual Aid shows that we are not the only political animals, as Aristotle believed,
that is, not only are we necessarily social beings, but even more, we lean on each other,
holding each other up, and helping all to advance.
Those who favored humanity motivated by competition claimed it was aligned with Darwin's theory,
giving their view a patina of scientific support.
If they can apply biological-sounding notions to the study of culture, those views must be
more scientific and therefore more likely to be true.
According to those in this camp, life is an ecosystem.
It's forever competitive.
It's survival of the fittest out there, and that's a good thing.
Sparking adaptation, which, in the human context, inspires ingenuity.
In cooperation, as the motivating force of humanity, Kropotkin felt compelled to play
the game on this scientific or Darwinian turf.
Yes, it may be true that resources are scarce, that survival is difficult, but this challenge
is not really faced by individual organisms on their own.
Look at real animals, Kropotkin said.
Very few are loners.
They tend to live in groups.
Lions have prides.
Baboons have troops.
Bats have colonies.
Fish have schools.
Birds have flocks.
Insects have swarms.
Wolves have packs.
And hedgehogs live in prickles.
Animals largely survive in the dangers of nature by working together, relying on each
other, creating cooperative situations that are good for the group.
And the same is true, he argues, of people.
We live together.
This is a general truth, not some strange new element of modernity.
If we look across the world and across the centuries, this is what you see.
The cave paintings in France, our best evidence of what life was like for our prehistoric
ancestors, shows cooperative hunting parties and evidence of significant social interaction.
In Egypt, Greece, Rome, medieval Europe, wherever we look, we see cultural institutions
of great complexity designed to mediate among us and elevate all.
In isolated tribes in the farthest corner of the world today, we see complex structures
of government and culture.
We see ritual feasts and systems of justice that organically emerge to maintain the group
as a whole.
Everywhere we look, we see mutual aid for mutual benefit.
So it should not be a surprise to us, Kropotkin contends, if we see the rise of labor unions,
biking and hiking clubs, associations of every sort, leading ultimately to the weakening
of traditional political boundaries.
We're steadily moving towards an embrace of all humans as a single family, a single
race, a global village.
Contemporary invocation of Kropotkin's worldview are the lyrics of the John Lennon song
Imagine, wherein we're asked to envision a world without religion, nation-states and
private property, all of the things that divide us.
In such a world, we would then also have to imagine an end to hunger, greed and the emergence
of a brotherhood of man.
We see with both Lennon and Kropotkin a progressive picture of human reality.
Society advances, progresses over time.
Like its pessimistic counterpart, the competition camp, it's a teleological view.
That is, a view that supports a real goal or purpose.
In this view, we're moving towards a perfect state of human culture, but the driving mechanism
is quite different.
Interestingly, this dichotomy is still with us in popular literature and film.
We have two competing themes.
On the one hand, we have stories in which the hero rises up against incredible odds
to achieve the unexpected, to achieve greatness, taking competition to bring out the best in
this individual.
On the other hand, it takes a village theme in which obstacles befall someone and it's
the combined effort of the community that overcomes them.
The competitive approach is the basic plot device for many contemporary action films
in which the protagonist is forced to take on the bad guys against insurmountable odds
and assert himself by rising to the challenge.
Think of Bruce Willis' character in the Die Hard series of films, Matt Damon's Bourne
films, or virtually anything starring Harrison Ford.
Often the character in these stories will be retired, removed from the world of action,
and then forced by circumstance out of their passive being and into the realm of action
where they become more than they were.
We see it in sport-based dramas like Rocky, in which the no-name boxer transcends his
position in order to be able to step in the ring with the champ, or Rudy, where the undersized
young man plays Notre Dame football on impossible feet that he achieves by the sheer act of
his will.
In many cases, the debate between cooperative and competitive social realities is directly
addressed.
The main character begins with the optimistic cooperative stance, only to see how ugly and
brutal life is, and ultimately to cynically abandon the view for the competitive approach.
Or the protagonist is appropriately pessimistic, but forced to overcome the obstacles created
by those who naively see humanity as cooperative.
Think of Charles Bronson's Death Wish, where his idealism is shattered by violence against
his family.
Or Clint Eastwood's Dirty Harry, who has to break the rules put in his way by touchy
feely politicians and administrators who think they're doing good, but really they're
just making life better for bad guys.
Consider the television series 24's Jack Bauer, who has to overcome social condemnation of
hardball tactics like torture in order to save millions of lives.
This television program was cited by Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia as providing
legitimate grounds for the constitutionality of so-called enhanced interrogation techniques
that were used after the terrorist acts of September 11th, 2001.
On the other hand, there are films in which we see innocent victims saved only when people
come together, putting aside individual interests and contributing to the general cause.
This theme can be seen in films, including war movies like The Dirty Dozen, in which
a group of hardened criminals, each clearly self-centered and undisciplined, are united
into a single unit that works together.
Make-up films like Jaws, where characters who are in conflict, both ideologically and
personally, eventually come together to save the day.
In comedies like The Longest Yard or The Three Amigos, where groups that seem to be oppressed
by those in power come together to unexpectedly find how they can join together to be bigger
than that which was holding them down individually.
Perhaps most famously, we see this approach in films with Mickey Rooney and Judy Garland
in babes in arms.
The teenagers come together to put on a show that will raise enough money to make things
right.
In Judy Garland's most famous role, Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz, it's not Dorothy alone,
but with the contributions from her friends that the wicked witches defeated and the world
is set right.
So we see the continuation of this debate of the nature of social reality.
Are we at heart competitive or cooperative?
Which is really the foundational principle on which human culture is built and developed.
Third option was put forward by the German sociologist, Ferdinand Turnes, in his most
famous work, Community and Society.
The debate as we framed it, pitched two different approaches against each other.
Either we're competitive and the winners push us forward or we're cooperative and we pick
each other up, standing on each other's shoulders to reach higher than we could ourselves.
Turnes considers this a false dilemma.
He distinguishes between two ways of being for a group.
Communities are collections of people who are bound together by commonalities.
Communities exist because of a defining homogeneity.
Think of a religious congregation.
What makes that congregation into a thing unto itself is the tie that the members feel
in terms of a shared theology.
It's the common beliefs that make them one.
In a community there are shared values, shared beliefs, a shared history.
Members have a sense of belonging.
A society is a group defined by a heterogeneous nature.
In a society there are formal roles and formal roles.
Structures are artificially created for a goal and the members share a goal, but only
by virtue of being in the same society.
There's a sense of individuality among the members, which comes before identity as a
part of the society.
Think of a corporation.
Everyone has a job, but they see themselves as more than just a job.
They're coworkers of the people they happen to have been hired with.
Maybe they have things in common, maybe they don't, but they interact in structured ways
according to the employee handbook and orders from the managers.
Tony's points out that the industrialized world has moved from a social structure that
was primarily organized in rural communities to one that is becoming largely urban societies.
Now, some may be concerned that this is a step backwards.
Tony's does not romanticize communities in the way many did and continue to do so.
Think of stories in which the naive young person leaves the nurturing and protective
farming community that cared for him or her only to find ruin in the big bad city with
its mean streets and ruthless criminals.
Tony's does not buy into this picture.
He's a scientist and does not attach value judgments to these states, but points out
their differences and the different way of being in each.
But then he takes it one step further.
Tony's argues that there's a reciprocal relation between them, like the wave particle duality
that would be formulated by the physicists.
He contends that human groups will always and inevitably oscillate between society and
community.
When we have a community bound together by commonality, we will always find some dividing
line, some difference between us, no matter how small, to separate us into factions.
No group is completely homogenous and the distribution of power in the group will lead
to what we will later call an in-group and an out-group.
As long as there's more than one person in a community, we will find some way to set
ourselves against each other, divide ourselves up into subgroups, find differences, making
us a society.
We look for ways to recognize or create diversity and segregate ourselves as a result.
On the other hand, societies will also become communities.
No matter how different we are, we always find some external threat, real or perceived,
to unify us against it.
The city may have rich and poor, black and white, educated and uneducated, but when your
team is going to the playoffs, everyone comes together as fans and supporters.
The rallying effect of war is often used in this way to create enforced uniformity at
a time of crisis.
We may be different as can be, but at least we aren't them.
In Turney's view, the debate between cultural optimists and pessimists, those who think culture
is based on competition and those who think it's based on cooperation, is a non-debate.
Both are present all the time.
Indeed, they're flip sides of the same social coin.
One always gives rise to the other.
But before we take Turney's calling for a big group hug, hold on a second.
The cultural optimists and pessimists disagreed on the underlying motor of social change,
but they agreed that things were getting better, that society was advancing.
They both bought into the idea of human progress.
But Turney's view just has things moving back and forth between community and society.
There is no engine driving forward, just two forces rocking us back and forth.
Does society advance?
Is the history of humanity moving toward an end goal?
Are we progressing?
Good question.
