The
early 20th century threw into doubt what it meant to be a human.
Advancing evolutionary biology reduced us to just another animal, not formed in the image
of God, but the result of random mutations.
Aerogenetics reduced us to a string of A's, T's, C's and G's.
Freud's tripartite theory of mind seemed to take away our agency, reducing us to our
childhood interactions and traumas.
That's a lot of reducing for a species that thought itself the dividing line on the great
chain of being between beasts and the divine.
Needless to say, the conversation did not stop there.
The questions about the nature of human nature, what humans really are, and what it means
for our view of the universe has been an ongoing question approached in literature, drama,
philosophy and politics, as long as humans have had the culture to frame the issue.
The scientific advances in the 20th century psychology following Freud continued to fuel
the fire.
I want to consider next, in our discussion about redefining reality, two important developments
in the 20th century, one political and one technological.
The first is World War II, between the hards of the Holocaust and the ongoing fear of global
annihilation from nuclear weapons, a new light was cast on humanity following the end of
the Second World War.
The other is the invention of the computer.
Coming out of the work of Alan Turing, the British mathematician whose work on code-cracking
machines turned the tide in the World War II, the development of computers as models
and parts of imaging tools radically changed how we view the human mind.
We'll focus now on the divergent direction psychology took in the period after Freud,
but before World War II.
More on computers in another lecture.
Freud's psychoanalytic approach became a powerhouse in the world of psychology.
Freud found himself an international intellectual superstar on the level of Einstein, indeed
the two were brought together under the auspices of the League of Nations, the forerunner
of the United Nations to write a series of letters about humanity and the possibility
of abolishing war.
Their correspondences were published under the title, Why War?
Freud had recently finished one of his great works, Civilization and its Discontents, in
which he moves the fundamental tension in the discussion about the nature of a human
from a purely individualistic position to one in which the larger culture plays a role.
In his original formulation, the individual strives to emancipate him or herself from
the rules of the father.
The contents of the subconscious are purely a matter of experiences between the self and
the particular individuals in the person's life, but in civilization and its discontents,
Freud places the state, the culture, the larger social structure in the role of the father.
There is in the human an inherent tension, a struggle between the urge to be a self,
an individual free from constraint, and the urge to be a good citizen of the culture that
demands conformity, uniformity and control.
Discontrol leads to laws and rules of etiquette, which are enforced from outside and become
internalized, thereby becoming a source of repression of basic urges.
Thus, we find ourselves once again at the place where we have an unhappy subconscious.
Now, instead of merely being Oedipus, who wants to kill his father and marry his mother, we
become closeted anarchic revolutionaries, who find themselves distressed about the state
of things because deep down underneath, we resent the power of the state.
But the state is not the only cultural institution that plays the role of the father.
That is, that becomes a collective super ego.
Organized religion does so as well.
In observing those who are deeply connected to organized religion, Freud sees the same
types of behaviors that he observed in his patients who suffered from obsessive compulsive
disorder.
Both needed to repeat certain activities exactly the same way over and over again.
Both felt a sense of peace once these rituals were completed, but a sense of anxiety if
they were kept from completing them.
And both were motivated by a sense of guilt to undertake the continued performance of
their respective rituals.
The big difference between obsessive compulsive individuals and those involved in organized
religion is that the former are indeed individuals.
They do not have a community who share their neurotic behaviors or enforce and reinforce
the need to perform them.
As such, Freud labeled organized religion as a collective neurosis.
This moves to see the possibility of a collective super ego, and thereby to create collective
neuroses, opens up the possibility that other parts of the Freudian scheme could be collective
as well.
This was the line taken by Freud's star student, Carl Jung.
Jung was a Swiss psychiatrist who became Freud's closest disciple.
Freud referred to him as his adopted son, and saw him as the heir to Freud as the head
of the psychoanalytic movement.
This was in part because Jung was brilliant, and in part because he was Christian.
Freud was worried that at a time of rising anti-Semitism, his work was being dismissed
as Jewish psychology.
Jung did not share Freud's rejection of organized religion, and thought that the religious impulse
was a natural and universal part of the human consciousness.
It's this idea of universality in the consciousness that distinguishes Jung from Freud.
Indeed, these differences would cause a permanent rift between the two, as Freud demanded absolute
conformity to his theories.
But Jung saw things differently.
He bought into Freud's notion of the subconscious as a well for primal urges and desires, and
also agreed that inner conflict between the conscious and unconscious mind and the resulting
repression were the cause of many neuroses.
But Jung expanded the id to include what he thought was a crucial element Freud had missed,
the collective unconscious.
We not only had a place to store experiences we had long forgotten, and those we try to
keep from remembering as individuals, but as human beings, we were heir to another part
of the subconscious mind, one that we share with every other human being, alive and dead,
the collective unconscious.
There is, Jung contends, a part of our mind which contains memories and experiences that
are not our own, that predate us, that come from our ancestors.
This collective unconscious is a part of the structure we use to make sense of the world,
to give meaning to the world.
Jung pointed out that we find in contemporary and ancient cultures all around the globe the
same sort of images and characters and events popping up in myths, religions and cultural
beliefs.
We see the wise old man, the trickster, a great flood, the dangerous shadow, and others
playing strangely similar roles in the central stories of cultures that could not have been
in contact with each other.
Jung calls these basic ideas archetypes, and their repeated appearance in isolated cultural
systems that could not have influenced each other's synchronicities.
The collective unconscious does not provide us with specific details of human history,
but rather a set of vague patterns, the archetypes.
We use the archetypes as building blocks of meaning.
Meaningfulness comes from interpretation by the mind, but the human mind does not start
from scratch.
It begins with these basic archetypal patterns, and uses them as the basis for developing a
sense of significance that gets attached to events, objects, and people.
Each culture applies the shared archetypes to their own geographical and historical
context, thereby creating the differences we see in the specific places in the central
mythologies of the culture, but when we look at what gets valued, we see a peculiar amount
of commonality, more than we could possibly expect if the cultures developed purely autonomously.
These patterns, Jung holds, are not only present in the human mind, but also in the world.
The collective unconscious is for Jung, numinal.
Now the 18th century German philosopher Immanuel Kant drew a distinction between what he termed
the phenomena, that is, the human experience of a thing, and the numina, the actual thing
itself.
If I look at a pen, I acquire an image of it, and I think I know something about the
pen.
But where's the image?
It's not out here, but rather in the mind.
How do I know that what's in my mind is in any way similar to the thing causing idea?
Does it really have the shape, the color, the size, or just doesn't make me think of
something with this shape, color, and size?
The idea is the phenomena, and the thing itself is the numina.
Kant contended that metaphysics was useless, because all we have access to is the phenomena.
We can never get outside our own mind, and so we can't make conclusive claims about
reality itself.
But for Jung, the collective unconscious is the bridge between the mind and the world.
The collective unconscious is how we can get to reality itself, and we are all as a species
connected to it.
We can see this connection through synchronicities.
Impressed by relativity, theory, and quantum mechanics, Jung realized that modern physics
mandated that there were certain events that were causally isolated from one another, events
where neither could be the cause of the other, and they couldn't share a common cause.
Yet, among these events, we can still find a collective meaning.
That meaning must come from somewhere, namely, the collective unconscious and its connection
to the universe.
Jung collected stories of these peculiar coincidences and strange meetings and commonalities that
appear out of nowhere, and yet could not, it often seemed to us, be completely random.
These are the happenings we take to be signs of something bigger.
Their occurrences so uncanny that we think the universe is sending us some sort of signal.
The synchronicities we experience in life he contended are a mark of being connected
to each other through this collective unconscious.
Notice that Jung's extension of Freud's work follows the larger pattern we've discussed
elsewhere in this course.
We start with the human mind as a thing, an object unto itself to be studied in a vacuum.
If you want to know what it is to be a human, you need to look very closely at individual
humans.
The move then is made to considering humans in terms of relationships.
With Freud, if you want to understand what it is to be human, you need to look at father
and child.
Reality contains relations that could not be found in even the most careful examination
of the individual.
Reality is bigger than the set of objects it contains.
It also contains the relations between those objects.
The final step is to do away with the objects as individuals at all, and only posit a sort
of unified field.
With the move from Freud's individual id to the collective unconscious, Jung has followed
the pattern.
What is really real is not the object, but the whole, and the object is just a mode of
the larger collective reality.
This aspect made Jung's views deeply influential in the middle of the 20th century, with the
rising of 1960s counterculture in America.
The hippie movement combined back to the land sentiment with a deep commitment to equality
that was coming out of the political liberation movements that were prominent at the time,
the civil rights movement, and the women's rights movement.
The cultural revolution was set out in terms of expanding one's consciousness, which not
only referred to being more open-minded about violating long-standing social mores, but
affecting one's psychology through meditation or through drug use.
Bisergic acid diethylamide, or LSD, was plentiful in the counterculture and the strange psychological
effects tripping as it was called, fascinated both amateurs and psychologists.
Harvard psychologist Timothy Leary posited that the use of hallucinogenic substances
was a path to freeing oneself from the ego of getting in touch with the Jungian collective
unconscious and thereby a path to enlightenment and wisdom.
A decade earlier, the British author Aldous Huxley had made the same claim about his use
of the drug mescaline.
His book, The Doors of Perception, is titled from a quotation from Blake.
If the doors of perception were cleansed, everything would appear to man as it is, infinite.
The idea is these substances cleared away the ego, the self, the particular, and left
one in a position to connect directly to the collective subconscious, thereby accessing
the commonality of all humans and our interconnectedness with the cosmos itself.
The combination of the use of LSD as the door to reality and the notion of synchronicities
as indicators of that connection found their way to the West Coast, where American writer
Ken Keezy convened what he termed the acid tests, to bring together large groups of people
to consume LSD at the same time and see what sort of synchronicities and wisdom would emerge.
Finding that music enhanced the atmosphere, he invited an experimental San Francisco rock
band, The Warlocks, to partake and play at these events.
The Warlocks changed their name to The Grateful Dead when they allowed synchronicity to guide
the selection of a band name, opening the Britannica World Language Dictionary to a
random page.
But, it was not merely their name that they left to synchronicity, their entire approach
to music was based on the Jungian picture of the collective unconscious.
Songs would include extended stretches of improvisation that would allow the musicians
and the audience to mutually influence each other, with the expectation that the openness
to the collective unconscious would guide their creativity and allow for spontaneous
composition.
The music that was played would not be the result of any single consciousness, but the
result of the connection among all who were part of the collective.
With no one member in charge of the music, it would spring from the collective spirit
of all minds present at the moment.
This sort of popularization of unobservable elements of Freudian and post-Freudian psychology
were exactly what concerned mainstream psychologists who worried that this sort of approach to
understanding the human mind would do to psychology what alchemy had done to chemistry.
They wanted to inoculate psychology from the mystical, the magical, the seemingly non-scientific
direction it was taking.
Freud's unconscious and Jung's collective unconscious are not empirically accessible.
We can't see them or measure them.
For those who wanted a rigorous science of the mind, these sorts of entities were an
embarrassment.
A new approach was sought, and the result was behaviorism.
Behaviorism was an attempt to make psychology a completely rigorous science, and to do that,
unobservable entities would need to be purged.
First and foremost, the mind.
According to the behaviorists, we cannot speak of the mind at all, much less unconscious,
empirically unavailable regions in it.
We can talk only about what we can see, what we can measure, that is, stimulus and response.
This movement didn't come out of nowhere.
There was in philosophy a movement at the same time called logical positivism, which
developed out of considerations of the philosophical ramifications of relativity theory, and, like
Einstein, they were also influenced by the late 19th century physicist and philosopher
Ernst Mach, who held that all science must rely only on that which can be observed.
If Newton wants to talk about absolute space, and Maxwell wants to talk about a luminiferous
ether, but we can't find any measurable aspect of them, then reject them from our scientific
vocabulary.
The logical positivists tried to formulate what they called a criterion of cognitive
significance.
Such a criterion would be a principle.
Only entities for which we have evidence would be allowed to be considered meaningful.
Well, what is evidence?
It's a sense perception that gives you good reason to believe it exists.
Seeing is not only believing, but essential for our having any meaningful beliefs whatsoever.
If the physicist had to give up absolute space in the luminiferous ether, then psychology
would have to give up the mind, the id, the collective unconscious, and other such fluffy
terms.
Psychology has always had the reputation of being softer, squishier in its foundations.
Could the human mind really be studied like inanimate particles?
Were there actual laws about human behavior?
As long as psychology dealt with feelings and vague memories, it would be relegated to
second class status as a science, or worse, be considered utterly unscientific.
The Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov had won the Nobel Prize for his work showing that
he could teach dogs to salivate at the sound of a bell.
There was one thing to teach them to sit down, but this was a purely anatomical response
which could be trained into the animals.
Such operant conditioning opened the door for this new psychology, in which the rigorous
connections of stimulus and response could be measured and associated.
We can measure the stimulus, we can observe the response.
There was no mediation from some immaterial, non-empirical mind, there was simply the determination
of the relation between human and environment.
John Watson, the American psychologist, first clearly enunciated the doctrine or criterion
of cognitive significance as an explicit affront to the expanding view that psychology was
the study of consciousness.
Consciousness is inaccessible if it even exists at all, therefore the study of psychology
should be merely the study of human behavior.
Watson's work was picked up by B.F. Skinner at Harvard, who was heavily influenced by
the ideas of the logical positivists.
Skinner, like the positivists in Watson, limited psychology to the study of how people behave
when confronted with particular stimuli.
I can measure the temperature of the room and I can check my watch to see how long it
takes you to take a drink of water.
I can increase the temperature and see the length of time before your drink shortens.
I can do this a number of times and see if there is a mathematical correlation between
the stimulus and the response.
Skinner was indeed able to find such correlations.
He closely studied not only how various environmental factors affected the subjects, but how positive
and negative reinforcement could predictably change the mathematical relationship between
the stimulus and response.
I not only see how long it takes you to go for a bottle of water at a certain temperature,
but how reward and punishment can alter that behavior, and how I could make it so that
your actions take on a different pattern, a pattern of my choosing.
This ability to use psychological research, not only for pure purposes of gaining knowledge
about the structure of reality, but also to manipulate people had deep ramifications.
Skinner wrote Beyond Freedom and Dignity, a book whose title was meant to conjure up
the work Beyond Good and Evil, written 85 years earlier by Friedrich Nietzsche.
Nietzsche argued that our moral notions of good and evil are not features of the world,
but artificial concepts dreamed up by the weak to constrain the strong, and have thereby
retarded human progress by allowing the weak to flourish and keeping the strong from advancing.
Skinner similarly argues that our moral notions of freedom and dignity are not features of
the world, but also dreamed up in an attempt to glorify the individual, like Nietzsche's
good and evil, and have likewise retarded human development.
People are not autonomous agents, rationally deliberating on hard questions and coming up
with creative answers. We're creatures of habit, habits that could be shaped randomly
and lead us nowhere, habits that could be shaped to limit human growth, or habits that
could be properly shaped to further human advancement.
Like Pavlov's Dogs, we're malleable, and the best course of action is to design the
culture we find to be suited to human development, and set up conditions, the positive and negative
consequences that will shape people into the form we want. Then, and only then, will true
human happiness be achievable. The myth of free will is a barrier to human advancement
and satisfaction. This is exactly the notion behind the plotline of the Anthony Burgess
novel and Stanley Kubrick film, A Clockwork Orange. Set in a dystopian near future, Alex
Delarge and a group of thuggish droogs are in possession of free will. They determine
their actions, and they choose to maim, steal, and rape.
When apprehended by the authorities, Alex is subjected to operant conditioning, designed
to make him physically ill at thoughts of violence or sexuality, and it works until
his droogs try to lure him out with them by playing the classical music that had been
used as a trigger to commence a crime spree. But the conditioning is taken hold, and the
association of the music with the forbidden activities drives Alex to unsuccessfully commit
suicide. He jumps from a window, shattering bones, but surviving. The association of pain
is now made with the results of the conditioning, and thereby reverses the effects reverting
Alex back to the violent hoodlum he was before.
The question that adding operant conditioning to social engineering immediately raises.
It's not only its efficacy and permanence, but of course, who gets to determine what
the goals are and what human success looks like? How do we know the star chamber will
really have everyone's best interest in mind, and not that of a few, that of the powerful,
that of the wealthy? Or perhaps, this is the idea.
When the founder of behaviorism, John Watson, was fired from his academic post at Johns
Hopkins University, he took a position at the J. Walter Thompson Advertising Agency.
The expertise he developed could be used not for human flourishing, but for the enrichment
of business owners by the manipulation of the masses. Holding the secret to the mechanics
of the human mind is the commercial equivalent of the alchemist philosopher's stone. Both
create gold.
Watson called psychology a powerful genie for the advertiser. The key is to find in
his words, the secret and hidden springs of action. Take your potential customer, and
these are his words. Tell him something that will tie him up with fear, something that
will stir up a mild rage, that will call out an affectionate or love response, or strike
at a deep psychological habit or need.
Behaviorism gave not only knowledge, but power. Power to shape individuals and the culture
at large. Testimonials from normal people like you who use the product. Watson, celebrity
spokespeople who draw in customers because of hero worship. Watson. And he wasn't the
only one. Edward Bernays, the nephew of Sigmund Freud, also came to realize in a fashion similar
to Skinner and Watson, the power that could be attached to this sort of psychological research.
After a stint with the government, he opened up an advertising firm himself. Indeed, it's
Bernays who coined the term public relations, by which he meant propaganda. He knew the
word propaganda was toxic because of its association with the military, especially with the Nazis.
But the phrase public relations was just a propagandistic term to cover up the fact that
public relations was fully intended to be propaganda.
Indeed, propaganda is the title of one of Bernays' books in which he sets out the recipes
that would become the basis for modern public relations, the keys to manufacturing public
opinion. With the fall of monarchies and the rise of democracies throughout parts of the
world, in his word, power had been taken from the king and given to the people. So now,
in this new definition of political reality, in order to reclaim the power, the behavior
of the people must be harnessed. Mines were not to be made up, but to be controlled for
profit and authority. Psychology, which had begun as a search for the nature of the reality
of the human mind, which had become a field which was used to create false realities within
the mind for the sole purpose of enriching business owners and electing public officials.
This notion was not lost on the artistic community, which responded by shining a light on the practice.
In the nineteen teens, Marcel Duchamp began a series of works he termed ready-mades.
Duchamp would take a mass-manufactured good and simply set it in a gallery as a piece
of art. A urinal was one of his ready-mades. A snow shovel was another. We had been conditioned
to see these objects in certain ways by their marketers. Now, they were being taken and
placed in an incongruous context, forcing us to see these things anew, forcing us to
question why we see them the way we normally see them.
This was also the case with Andy Warhol's paintings of a Campbell soup can and bottles
of Coca-Cola or a sculpture comprised of just several stack boxes of Brillo pads, which
again took the objects out of a commercialized culture and forced us to re-see them, like
Alex DeLarge being reprogrammed in a Clockwork Orange. Duchamp and Warhol were pointing out
that we had become the white mouse in the psychologist's maze. We had been conditioned, manipulated,
and the hope was that, like DeLarge, after the Ludovico technique, perhaps we too could
at least be reconditioned, given, as Skinner argued, that it is not possible for us to
regain our freedom and dignity as autonomous individuals.
This picture of reality that came from the psychological sciences before World War II
ought to be worrisome. It certainly was to some in the psychological world, but they
had bigger concerns about human behavior, those that came out of the horrors of World
War II.
