Our view of reality, when it comes to the nature of life, followed the same path that
we saw in terms of our views of reality concerning the physical world.
We began with an atomistic conception, realities comprised of individual entities, and if we
want to understand their nature, we need to look at them closely.
We then moved to a relational picture in which we came to understand that reality was more
than the sum of the parts, that to really understand what's real, we needed to make
sense of the ways in which the individuals were interrelated.
The relations become an additional element in reality.
Finally, we make the holistic step of having to see that the complete system is the real
thing, and that the parts are just modes of this greater, fuller, integrative reality.
We went from living beings to genetic lines to ecosystems.
With respect to people, we went from the view of them as blank slates with free will who
make their own decisions for rational reasons to social beings whose childhood traumas, whose
nurturing parents, and whose brain development were a function of those with whom they interacted.
We then saw that our actions were not only the result of one-on-one interactions, but
that we needed to see society with its cultural and economic elements as an entity with enormous
influence.
Ecosystems and cultures, species and communities, these are emergent entities, things that are
made up of other things, but which are still things unto themselves, entities in their
own rights independent of who made them up.
But just as we do with the universe itself, even when we see it as a single integrated
whole, we learn about the nature of reality when we consider its origins.
With the physical world, we trace it back to the Big Bang, but what of life?
Where did life come from, and what does this origin tell us about its nature?
Life comes from stars.
Hydrogen is simple enough that once the universe cooled down sufficiently from the Big Bang,
simple atoms could form.
Stars convert hydrogen into helium through nuclear fusion.
The idea here is that energy is the currency of the physical world.
It takes less energy to maintain a helium atom than it does to maintain two hydrogen
atoms.
Think of two people living alone.
Each has to pay rent, electricity and phone bills.
Now, if they move in together as roommates, they'll need a bigger place, but the additional
rent won't be twice as much as either was paying a loan and they catch a further break
on being able to split the other bills.
It's cheaper to live with a roommate.
In the same way, it's cheaper in terms of energy to maintain a helium atom with two
protons in the nucleus than two one-bedroom nuclei as hydrogen atoms.
The energy that the hydrogen atoms save by moving in together and becoming helium is
given off in the forms of light and heat, and that's why stars shine.
Now in the bellies of these stars, these helium nuclei find it energy advantageous to join
together fusing into larger and larger atoms, with more and more protons saving energy by
sharing a single nucleus, nuclear communes as it were.
Now, eventually, the nuclei get so big that adding more protons costs energy.
The elemental point of diminishing returns is iron.
Atoms larger than iron are more expensive to maintain than smaller combinations of atoms.
So, within the hearts of these stars, you get elements up to iron being created.
If the star is big enough, when it runs out of fuel, when it doesn't have enough hydrogen
to convert into helium to keep the whole enterprise running, it collapses on itself,
imploding.
Now, if the star is large enough, this can cause an explosion, a supernova.
In this case, the result is that the heavier elements made inside the star are kicked out
in the space.
Those become the basis for the formation of planets, including the Earth, when large clouds
of cosmic debris warmed by a star experience sufficient gravitational attraction of its
contents to form into a single mass.
So, now we have planets, including the Earth, but the next step is the big one.
Where does the life come from?
That's the tough one.
Maybe there's a hint to be found in seeing where life on Earth is located now.
Where it is might tell us something about where it came from.
Now, we find virtually all life on land masses and in the relatively shallow waters around
the land masses.
Sailors who sailed out into the hearts of the ocean found vast deserts, water, water,
and more water, but no life.
All of the life forms we were acquainted with needed water, but while it was necessary,
it didn't seem sufficient.
We know from the fossil record that life existed in the sea before it appeared on land.
Simple one-celled animals eventually gave rise to multicellular life, which eventually
developed into everything we see now, but how did those simple one-celled beings come
to be?
Now, if life is found only on land and in the shallow surrounding waters, that seems
to be a clue.
What do these share in common?
The answer?
Sunlight.
Life seems to require a very finicky set of conditions.
Too cold?
No life.
Too hot?
No life.
Too dry?
No life.
It seemed that in the Arctic ice at the bottom of the ocean, it was dark and cold.
Conditions we believed were impossible to sustain life, so it was only in the sunlit
regions that we looked for the source of life.
But maybe the sunlight does more.
It's a source of energy, and energy is essential for life.
Life as we find it is comprised of an intricate collection of amino acids formed in proteins,
which are then able to self-regulate and reproduce, but these functions require energy.
If the life form is not fed, it can't live.
Life is organization, and organization requires energy.
The infamous second law of thermodynamics holds that entropy increases.
Entropy is a measure of disorder, and life is perhaps the most order-bound phenomenon
in the universe.
If the second law of thermodynamics holds true, why do we have life at all?
Now what the second law says when we formulate it more carefully is that in a closed system,
entropy tends to increase.
By a closed system, we mean a system into which no energy is added, a system closed off from
the rest of the universe.
We should say more about what we mean by entropy as a measure of disorder.
Now this does not mean that order is impossible.
Just that the range of possible arrangements the system could be found in is large.
So consider a deck of cards.
You buy it new, take it out of the pack, fan it out, and you see the cards are in order.
Ace of spades, two of spades, three of spades, right?
This is a deck with very low entropy.
It's highly ordered.
Now shuffle it once, and you increase the entropy.
That is, the number of possible arrangements the cards could be in.
The entropy is still pretty low, because you know after one shuffle, you know the ace
of spades for example is still somewhere near the top.
You know the two of spades, somewhere just beneath it, maybe the next card, maybe one
or two cards in between, but they're still relatively ordered at least for a little
way into the deck.
The number of possible arrangements of the cards has increased, but it's still limited.
There are a whole bunch of ways the cards could be arranged that you know would never
follow from one shuffle of a fresh deck.
But if you shuffle the deck multiple times, each new shuffle increases the number of possible
arrangements that the deck could have.
We think of it as randomizing the cards, because the number of possible arrangements gets larger
and larger, and we have no idea which one of these is the actual order.
This does not mean that there could be no order in the deck of the possible arrangements
of the deck.
There are some that are quite ordered, and the odds of it being found in that particular
one is no less than it being found in any other one that we might think of as disordered.
Shuffle the cards enough, and you'll eventually get alternating red and black cards, or runs
of threes, then fours, then fives.
He does not mean disorder, but a large number of possible arrangements.
Some highly ordered, some less ordered, some with no recognizable order, but all possible
arrangements the system could be in.
This is why we have to include the word tens in the formulation of the second law of thermodynamics.
There's always the chance that the monkeys banging on the typewriters will produce a
draft of Hamlet.
Not likely?
Possible.
If we shuffle the deck long enough, there's the chance the cards could happen to pop into
an order.
This would be a low entropy state.
Then further shuffles will be needed to break the order.
To enlarge the number of possible states the deck could be in.
While there's always a slim chance that the systems will become accidentally well ordered
because the number of possible states get larger and larger with each shuffle, the cards
more likely get mixed up in a way that we don't recognize.
That after all is why we shuffle the cards.
But now, if after shuffling we count them and suppose we find we only have 51 cards,
we want to know what card we're missing.
So what do we do?
We put them back in order.
We can intentionally decrease the entropy of the system, but doing that requires energy.
We need to use energy to sort the cards.
The same way with any thermodynamic system.
If we want to drop the entropy, that is, if we want to add order to the system, we just
have to add energy in the right way.
This is why the second law of thermodynamics only holds for closed systems.
Open systems, systems in which energy is pumped in, could be set up to use that new energy
in order to make the system work, to keep order and accomplish tasks.
This is exactly what life does.
When we look to see where the life on Earth is located, we found it on land and in the
shallow waters close by.
There's something that these locations have in common that the rest of the planet is lacking,
access to sunlight.
The sun is always adding energy.
Ecosystems are based on this fact.
Have the ability to take this energy and store it for use in creating and maintaining order.
Think about how solar panels on a house work.
The sun shines on them.
This sunlight triggers a chemical reaction that creates electricity.
That electricity is then stored in a battery in the house until it's needed to run the
washing machine and then it gets used.
Same thing in plants.
Plants take water, H2O, and carbon dioxide, CO2.
They collect the sunlight and they use the extra energy to break up the molecules of
these chemical compounds into the components hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen atoms in such
a way that they then form a new molecule, glucose, which uses all the hydrogen, all
the carbon, but not all of the oxygen, gives off the extra oxygen and then stores the glucose.
The glucose is the battery.
It stores some of the energy that was used to create it, and when broken down, it can
release that energy for use in the cell to overcome the effects of the second law of
thermodynamics.
This is photosynthesis.
Photo for light and synthesis for creating energy created from light.
The plant uses the energy to fuel its internal processes, or if the plant is eaten, then
the herbivore uses it for its internal processes, or it's used by the carnivore that eats
the herbivore, or maybe both if you're having beef and broccoli.
So the fixing of the sun's energy by photosynthesis is the process that allows the ecosystems
we observe on Earth to function.
Without an energy source, life is impossible.
The sun is an energy source, and so the sun is needed for life.
No sunlight, no charging of the organic batteries, and so we thought life is only possible in
a very slim number of possibilities, where you have a planet the right distance from
its sun, the right carbon and water availability.
We happened to have that, and so life began in the shallow oceans and made its way onto
land.
And that was the sort of life that we could imagine.
And then in 1977, researchers from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute sent Alvin, its
human-operated deep-submergence vehicle, to the bottom of the Galapagos Rift on a dive
led by noted undersea explorer Robert Ballard, the man who discovered the Titanic, and our
definition of life was radically altered.
Let's get a story.
The Galapagos Rift is interesting for two reasons.
First, it's deep.
Really deep.
About a mile and a half down.
Second, it lies at the intersection of three tectonic plates, so geologically it's very
active.
Recall that Einstein considered the cosmological constant to be his greatest mistake.
He thought the universe had to be stable on a large scale.
He believed that, as we see it now, so the universe has always been.
And then we realized, it's not like that at all.
It's a dynamic system, constantly moving and changing.
Same thing happened to the Earth scientists.
We have continents, large land masses separated by wide oceans.
Continents are massive.
Surely nothing is moving them.
The Earth is, as it always was, stable.
But then there were these strange anomalies.
Land fossils were found at the tops of mountains.
Land animals on different continents seemed to share common ancestors without any way
for them to migrate from one place to the other.
The coastlines of certain land masses separated by great distances not only fit together geometrically
as if they had been connected, but the rocks making up the shorelines show eerie similarities
that would be uncanny if they didn't share a common origin.
Back activity is not randomly spread across the globe, but set out like the points in
a Child's Connect to Dots activity book on the map.
Oh, and by the way, it's correlated with the place where we tend to see earthquakes.
So the German scientist, Alfred Wegener, hypothesized in his famous 1915 book, The Origins of Continents
and Oceans, that the Earth is not stable.
But there are great tectonic plates which are shifting around, causing global changes
in geography.
At one point, all the continents were part of a single great continent, Pangea, but
over time the plates had drifted apart.
Where they meet, they either pushed up against each other, lifting up the land-creating mountains,
or one curls under the other.
Wegener's hypothesis was ridiculed by a few and ignored by most.
He wasn't a geophysicist.
He was a mere meteorologist, a guy who researched polar air flow and spent his time hiking
around the frozen backcountry of Greenland.
He was a nobody, making a stunningly provocative claim, a claim that would completely reshape
all of our beliefs about the nature of the planet we call home.
Who did he think he was, a patent clerk?
But of course, over time, the view was supported, and supported, and supported by evidence of
radically different types.
And eventually, after his death, Wegener was vindicated.
We came to realize that the Earth is dynamic, that there are plates that are shifting.
At three of these plates, the Cocos Plate, the Nazca Plate, and the Pacific Plate met
at the Galapagos Rift, about 250 miles from the Galapagos Islands.
So, in 1977, the submersible Alvin, not named for the chipmunk, but Alan Vine, a geophysicist
who championed the exploration of the deepest depths of the ocean using submarines, Alvin
was sent down to see what could be seen at the Rift.
There was great hope that a discovery of some geophysical significance would be made.
They had no clue what was about to happen.
What they found did not rewrite our theory of the physical structure of the Earth.
Although it did find some interesting volcanic vents called black smokers, for the billows
of mineral-rich hot fluids that were spewing into the ocean.
Like geysers on Earth, these hydrothermal vents were shafts to a deeper layer of the
Earth's core.
Because the plates needed a joint, the magma underneath, the molten rock on which the plates
float, can pull closer to the surface.
This causes heat and metals from deeper in the Earth to come up closer to the surface
of the bottom of the ocean, and if there's a weak spot or a hole, then you can get movement
upward.
The water coming out can reach 750 degrees Fahrenheit, that's 400 degrees centigrade.
It doesn't boil because the weight of the ocean water increases the pressure tremendously.
Instead, it comes spewing out in dark clouds of what appears to be acidic smoke.
This would have been fascinating enough.
This is the sort of discovery that makes waves in the scientific community and produces great
National Geographic television specials.
But then, there was something else.
Something that you don't usually see on National Geographic, only in bad science fiction movies.
They found clams that were two feet long.
Tube worms that are usually a couple inches long where we see them.
When they're closer to the surface, closer to sunlight, here in the dark, in the cold,
they were growing up to seven feet tall.
Yes, two worms that could start at the center for the Boston Celtics.
The crew of the Alvin was expecting to observe temperature differences, salinity increases.
But instead, they heard one of the great quotations of discovery in the history of science.
We have Archimedes shouting Eureka, Neil Armstrong's one small step for a man, a giant step for
mankind, and now Robert Ballads and mortal, hey, there's clams out here.
They discovered what they called the Garden of Eden.
It was a lush, thriving ecosystem with thousands of eyeless shrimp, mussels, sea life of an
amazing variety, crabs, limpets, barnacles, and miniature lobsters all happily living where
we previously thought life could not possibly exist.
Well, where most of us thought life could not possibly exist, almost exactly a century
before the crew of Alvin made its discovery, it was imagined by Jules Verne.
In his masterpiece, 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, his characters leave their submerged
vehicle, the Nautilus, for a walk on the bottom of the ocean.
The story's narrator, marine biologist Pierre Aranex, describes it this way.
As kinds of isis, clusters of pure, tough coral, prickly fungi, and anemones, formed
a brilliant garden of flowers, decked with their colorettes of blue tentacles, sea stars
studying the sandy bottom.
It was a real grief to me to crush them under my feet, the brilliant specimens of mollusks,
which strewn the ground by thousands of hammerheads, donachae, veritable bounding shells of stair
cases, and red helmet shells, angel wings, and many others produced by this inexhaustible
ocean.
But we were bound to walk, so we went on, whilst above our heads waved Medusae, whose
umbrellas of opal, or rose-pink, escaloped with a band of blue sheltered us from the
rays of the sun and the fiery pelage, which, in the darkness, would have strewn our path
with phosphorescent light.
It would take a hundred and seven years for humans to find almost exactly the garden that
Jules Verne imagined was at the bottom of the sea.
For much of the time, in between the writing of 20,000 Leagues and the mission that sent
Alvin to the Galapagos Rifts, scientists had been certain that there was no life there.
There could be no life there.
But there was life, lots of it.
But there was no sunlight.
There could be no photosynthesis.
Instead there was chemo-synthesis, a similar process that used the heat and chemical energy
coming out of the thermal vents on the ocean floor.
It was not just that they found new life forms we had never seen.
It was not just that they found life in a place we didn't know it existed.
Either of these would be amazing discoveries.
This was a discovery that forced us to redefine reality.
This was a discovery of life that functioned on a completely different basis.
We thought life needed the sun.
We were wrong.
Someone, or something, took life on Earth and put it where the sun don't shine.
How did it get there?
Did life arise spontaneously in different places, both in the deep and the shallows?
Given the genetic similarities of the life forms in the deep and the life forms in the
shallow, surely the two are related.
In the 1940s, Thomas Gold formulated the steady state theory of cosmology, the competitor
to the Big Bang Theory, with his friends Hermann Bondi and Fred Hoyle.
Having lost in the competition to figure out the science behind the origin of the universe,
in the late 1990s, he turned to the other big question, the science behind the origin
of life on Earth.
He argues in his book, The Deep Hot Biosphere, that the crew of Alvin were correct to call
their find the Garden of Eden, but in ways they hadn't realized.
He contends that the deep undersea life we see is showing us where all life on Earth
began.
The shallow and land-based ecosystems rely on photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis, he points out, is an incredibly intricate process that relies on a string
of chemical reactions, some powered by energy from the sun, and others that must follow
in order in an appropriate environment within the cell.
It's not something you would expect to develop spontaneously on its own, especially where
the sunlight is not incredibly strong.
It is something, however, that one could easily see is adapted from organisms that already
had the ability to use hydrocarbons as fuel.
Recall how photosynthesis works.
You take carbon dioxide and water from the environment, you use the sunlight to break
them apart and then reform them into a new complex hydrocarbon molecule, the sugar glucose.
This glucose then works as an energy store, as a battery that you can keep in the drawer
until you need it, at which point you add oxygen to it, break it back down and release
some of the energy it kept from the sunlight, energy that the cell could now use for its
functioning.
But what if the cell didn't need to generate its own hydrocarbon to use as a battery?
What if it existed in a world in which the batteries were just floating around, ready
to be taken in and used?
These cells would develop one part of the process, that is, the burning of hydrocarbons
for energy and the cellular elements that make use of it.
Having half the structure, some of these one-celled beings could then adapt to a different environment,
one where the hydrocarbons weren't readily available, but energy was present to synthesize
those hydrocarbons for themselves.
But what environment on earth is there that could produce temperatures in the range needed
for life, and free hydrocarbons that could be used to develop simple pre-photosynthetic
life forms?
Life forms that could begin the process of launching an ecosystem?
The answer, of course, is the deep ocean system of geothermal vents.
Given the genetic similarities of the deep, shallow and land-based life forms, we know
they're of a single origin.
This is more complex than chemosynthesis, so there's some reason to think it developed
later as an adaptation.
Further, the sun's light both give it and take it away.
The sun's energy can be stored by living things, but it's ionizing energy as well,
and it can damage life.
Think back to our discussion of race, and the way the sun's rays are used by our skin
to produce vitamin D, but how the same rays destroy vitamin D9, folate.
The sun is tough on life.
Life forms would have to develop a defense against the sun.
It would be easier for life to start elsewhere, away from the sun.
The deep oceans would also provide a more stable environment.
The young earth was hot, and it took a while before its properties would be suitable to
sustain life, much less give rise to it.
The oceans, with the thermal vents, provided stable and constant flows of energy.
The stability would make it more likely a spot for simpler life forms to begin.
For all these reasons, Thomas Gold argues, there's good reason to think that life on
earth began in the deep hot biosphere.
Life comes from the bottom of the ocean, if it came from earth at all.
What?
A competing hypothesis called panspermia, and championed by Gold's friend and former
steady state advocate Fred Hoyle, is that basic life is spread throughout the universe
and arrived here from cosmic dust carried by comets or asteroids.
The interplanetary visitors are astronomical Johnny apple seeds, planting the seeds wherever
they fall.
Gold's hot deep biosphere theory allows for the possibility of life forming in places
we had thought inhospitable to life.
Life could begin without a surface temperature like that of the earth.
That would mean that life, like what we see on earth, could exist in other places than
earth.
Hoyle's panspermia already posits life elsewhere in the cosmos.
So are we alone?
Is life purely an earthly phenomenon?
Huh, good question.
