We've talked about the view, championed by Ferdinand Turnies, who distinguish between
communities and societies.
A community is bound together by commonalities, and the homogeneity is celebrated.
We're proud to be us.
A society, on the other hand, is characterized by diversity, people of different stripes
sharing a common space.
Think of the cities we call cosmopolitan, London, New York, Berlin, places where you
feel like you're surrounded by the entire world.
You hear languages from everywhere.
You can eat Indian, Thai, French, or Peruvian whenever you choose, or find an innovative
fusion of different cuisine.
The mark of modernism Turnies contended was the creation of robust societies and the relocation
of the mass of peoples from communities of the rural countryside to the societies of
the industrialized cities.
The urban migration had great importance for the way human life was lived.
But while early 20th century urban inhabitants found themselves removed from the close communities
of their grandparents, Turnies didn't think that community was vanishing.
He argues that societies become communities.
The community members live close together, and this leads to common experiences.
Having the same weather, cheering for the same local sports teams, these common experiences
allow societies to draw lines which bind them together, thereby becoming something of a
unified community.
Similarly, communities give rise to societies.
No matter how alike we may be, we will always find some differences, no matter how slight,
and use them to separate ourselves.
Think of Dr. Seuss' children tale about the star-bellied sneeches.
They were the same sort of being, but some had stars on their bellies and others did
not.
This small difference was used to split the sneech community and create a hierarchical
class structure.
Humans are like sneeches.
We always find a way to factionalize ourselves, to divide ourselves up.
Now, some of these dividing lines are real.
There are actual differences between people.
It may or may not be a good idea to use these markers to create in-groups and out-groups
based on context, but we do it.
For example, we designate special parking places for those with physical limitations.
To be in the group allowed to make use of these spots, there's a bureaucracy, which
gives markers of membership to some, but not all.
I had a special license plate or hang tag to be displayed.
If someone not in the group parks in the designated spot, there are sanctions, ranging from a
ticket with a fine to social condemnation.
But while we find these real differences to be good in drawing defining lines among us
for certain purposes, we also recognize that sometimes the lines we draw are illegitimate
and should be erased.
For example, we have non-discrimination laws to try to make sure that these lines aren't
used to hinder employment opportunities.
But while these divisions can be good or bad, sometimes we fracture our communities into
societies where the boundary is admittedly arbitrary.
Not something that's actually a part of the real world itself, but a fiction we create.
So I live in Maryland and I work in Pennsylvania.
Therefore, I regularly cross the Mason-Dixon line, the border between these two states,
which also traditionally marked the split between the northern and southern states among
the original 13 American colonies.
The boundary is named for Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon, the 18th century surveyors
who marked the line.
Their work didn't discover the boundary, rather it created it.
Now the idea of the line existed because of land grants and charters, but regional disputes
and questions of taxation led to a need to clearly demarcate it on the land itself.
This was a creative act.
It created a distinction between neighbors, one now a Marylander and the other a Pennsylvania.
This line is in a sense capricious, it could just as well be a mile north or south.
There's nothing actually different about the land on either side of the line, nor is
there anything different about the people who live on one side or the other.
The distinction is what we now call a social construction.
It isn't metaphysical, it doesn't reflect a difference in reality.
So some of the dividing lines we place between people are based on differences that are real,
whereas others are merely socially constructed.
Among the most contentious are racial lines.
Now we've used racial differences to justify slavery, depriving individuals of membership
in the species itself.
We've used race to justify war.
In the source of discrimination and in different rates of capital punishment, race makes a
real difference in real people's lives, sometimes a life or death difference.
But is it real?
Is race a part of reality or simply a social construct?
Is race any more or less real of a construct in the Mason-Dixon line?
Much science was done in the 20th century to answer this question.
Now there was no doubt before the 20th century that race was real.
So Immanuel Kant in his 1775 essay of the different human races, for example, divided
us into four categories based on skin color.
He had the noble blonde of Northern Europe, the copper red of the Americas in South Asia,
the black of Africa, and the yellow olive of East Asia in the Middle East.
Skin color may be the easiest way to recognize the different races, but there were deeper
elements contained in this division, aspects of mind and moral character that could be
ranked.
According to Kant, European whites were the highest on the great chain of human being,
followed by the Asian Mongol, then the red-skinned Hindu statics, and finally the African Negroes.
As one proceeds down the list, Kant argued, the races become less and less intellectually
endowed.
Indeed we can even draw finer distinctions within groups on this point.
We may talk about sub-races along national boundaries.
In a different work, Kant argues that the French have minds that appreciate the beautiful,
that which affects the senses.
The British mind, on the other hand, is in touch with the sublime, that which transports
us beyond ourselves.
The Dutch mind prizes neither, only the utilitarian elements of the world, but the German mind
is superior in being able to access both the beautiful and the sublime.
Kant, of course, was German, what a surprise.
In the two centuries following Kant, we see this notion of geography tied to visible biological
features, which then is tied to invisible biological features, which is then tied to
elements of character, which was all bound up together in one big package called race
that was used to justify beliefs about human worth.
So note that there are three connections here.
One, geography determines visible biological markers.
Two, the visible biological markers are flags for a collection of more subtle biological
differences.
And three, the subtle biological differences have effects that influence character, behavior,
intellectual ability, human worth.
Science in the 20th century tried to document and cement all three of these steps.
The first step is a generalization from observation.
As we travel the world, people do look different.
Most obvious is skin color, but hair color, hair texture, eye color, eye lip and nose
shape all seem to vary across the globe in ways that lead to grouping.
Now Darwin's theory of evolution led to an interest in variations.
Naturalists were cataloging the different non-human species and subspecies that could
be found with different anatomical properties in different regions.
As humans were now thought of as animals, though of a slightly higher order, it's
deemed reasonable to do the same with us.
There are observable differences among populations, and these differences can fit a Darwinian
explanation.
Take skin color, for example.
At the equator, indigenous populations tend to have the darkest skin.
As we move northward, skin pales with the northernmost populations being the most pale.
Why is this?
The reason is that the sun is both a help and a harm to us.
On the one hand, we need sunlight on our skin to synthesize vitamin D.
One form of cholesterol that we take in from our foods is called 7-dehydrocholesterol, and
it interacts with the ultraviolet light from the sun in such a way that it changes into
vitamin D3.
Vitamin D3 helps in the absorption of calcium and therefore prevents osteoporosis.
It's vital in a functional brain, and deficiencies have been linked to cognitive problems and
depression.
It may prevent strokes, heart disease, certain forms of cancer.
Now, from an evolutionary standpoint, these aren't that important because they often occur
after the period of peak procreation.
At that point, the genes have been passed and evolution can't do too much, but a lack
of vitamin D is also correlated with birth defects.
In a couple of ways, a lack of vitamin D can keep the genes from being passed to the offspring
who then would have offspring.
So, more sunlight is better, right?
Not so fast.
The ultraviolet light aids in the synthesis of vitamin D, but it also destroys folate,
better known as vitamin B9.
Now, unlike D, our bodies can't make B9.
We get it from our food, but once we do, the sunlight can destroy it.
B9 deficiencies have been correlated with stroke, heart disease and cancer, but again,
for us, thinking about the evolutionary implications, the important thing is that folate is crucial
for reproduction.
If we don't have enough, we become infertile.
If pregnant women have too little, serious birth defects occur.
So, too little UV energy from the sun and there are problems passing on the genes.
Too much UV energy from the sun and there are problems passing on the genes.
Like Goldilocks, we need to find how much is just right.
Now, there's a crucial difference between Goldilocks and those three bears.
The bears have hair all over, Goldie only has her locks.
When we evolved to be upright with a larger brain, we lost our hair.
Well, most of it anyway, yes, some of us more than others.
With exposed skin, we now have a UV light absorber, but we needed to make sure we got
the right amount.
Melanin is a skin pigment that only darkens the skin, but blocks UV rays.
The more melanin, the darker the skin, the fewer the UV rays get in.
The more melanin, the less vitamin D gets made, but the less folate gets destroyed.
Since the sun's energy is strongest at the equator, living there means that vitamin D
is less of a concern.
But folate protection becomes a serious worry.
At the poles, where the sun's energy is the weakest per unit area, folate destruction
less of a concern.
But adequate vitamin D is.
So, there's an adaptive pressure creating darker skin farther south, lighter skin farther
north.
Over thousands of years, the result is the differences we see.
Using this difference in skin color and other observable traits, anthropologists divided
the human race into four races based on geographical region, similar to those of Kant.
Caucasoids, white Europeans, Mongoloids, Asians, Negroids, Africans, and Australoids, Australian
Aboriginals.
Much work was done trying to track the distribution of various physical traits, what we call clines,
in various human populations.
The subfield of anthropometry tried to quantify and correlate these clinal variations.
Two main results arose from the clinal mapping by the anthropometrists.
First, when you look at any given characteristic, you never see sharp cutoffs, but rather smooth
transitions as you move between populations observing in two distinct areas.
We may try to characterize one race by one version of a property and another race by
a different instantiation of that attribute, but we never see a sharp dividing line between
them.
Rather, we always see a spectrum.
If we're trying to sharply categorize races, then the idea that the defining properties
are a matter of degree undermines the effort.
Second, the clinal maps for different properties are all different.
If you map the change in skin color, you get different maps from where you observe differences
in hair texture, and yet another map for eye shape, and a completely different map for
average weight.
Yes, it is true that different combinations among different populations are there, but
if we're trying to draw sharp boundaries between races that have real significance, we need
to assign more reality to one of these seemingly arbitrary properties than the other.
Well, which one and why?
There seem to be no good candidates for the one and only important factor, unless we can
find that one of them is linked to some other deeper characteristic.
That's our second step, right?
That visible biological differences are markers for deeper, more subtle and important differences
between the races.
So the first step in the argument that races a legitimate scientific concept was that we
could use visually obvious markers to draw sharp lines that petition all humans into
groups.
This has serious problems.
The same holds for the second step, that these observable markers, like skin color, point
to further real and deeper dissimilarities that distinguish the races.
The second step in the argument that tried to make race into a legitimate scientific
concept, the assertion that observable markers like skin, color, point to real and deeper
dissimilarities that distinguish races is as problematic as the first, if not more so.
You see, in 1972, the American geneticist Richard Lewinton published a paper in the prestigious
journal Evolutionary Biology called The Apportionment of Human Diversity.
Lewinton argues that it's undeniable that there are differences in physical appearance
and other properties in different groups.
But he worries that sociopolitical biases derived from human social experience are being carried
over into scientific realms.
If we want to have facts and not biases determine our belief in whether observable differences
and appearance have deeper ramifications, we need to see if the variation on the micro
level is in any way correlated with the standard division of race.
We need to look closely at human variability within and across the different groups to
see if there are patterns.
Now, Lewinton wasn't the first to take up this line.
Under Hitler, German race scientists closely examined blood samples from different populations.
The Nazi scientists looked and looked and looked for observable differences in the blood
of Aryans and non-Aryans, but to their shock, found nothing that would stand to test a science.
Their failure led them to deeper and deeper examinations.
Ironically, this research program, grounded in a completely racially biased worldview,
gave rise to major legitimate advances in hematology, the study of blood.
Lewinton, for his research, also had to divide the human race into subgroups.
He then examined blood samples for evidence of genetic variability.
What he found was also shocking to those who held the accepted belief in the biological
basis of racial division.
There is significant genetic variability among people, but the greatest degree of difference
occurred within groups, not across them.
When we look at the differences between races, we could only account for about 6.3% of the
differences between individuals.
Race, if it means anything, accounts for almost no difference.
93.7%, almost all the variability we see in the entire human race, occurs within races.
This held true when he broke races down into subgroups, looking not only at the comparison
of Europeans to Asians, but in looking at Brits and Armenians.
Draw the lines between us and them however you want, and it always turns out we are
more different from us than we are from them.
If the biologists were failing to find race in reality, maybe racial realities are psychological.
Perhaps the difference isn't in the genes, but in the functioning of the brain.
Maybe Kant was at least correct with his last step, that we find the real variability pointed
out by skin color or global origin in the working of the mind.
So at the turn of the 20th century, craniologists and phrenologists tried to determine intelligence
from the size and characteristic bumps on the skull.
They tried to generalize their findings to race, showing that certain groups had larger
heads because they were smarter and therefore superior.
Unfortunately, the measurements didn't turn out like they thought.
Their own culture didn't have larger brains than others, and the most revered members
of their societies didn't have the largest brains among them.
Indeed, Joseph Gull, one of the founders of phrenology, was found to have a much smaller
than average brain, an embarrassment to them on their own terms.
So phrenologists and craniologists moved from simple brain size to the relative size of
brain parts.
Okay, since higher functions are located in the frontal lobe, and more primitive elements
in the center, maybe it isn't the overall size that's important, maybe instead we need
to compare the relative size of these parts of the brain.
Yeah, it didn't work either.
But some of the differences that were supposed to be found, weren't.
But once psychologists moved away from behaviorism and the mind returned to psychology, we also
saw a change in how the science of race proceeded.
The French psychologist Alfred Benet developed the IQ test.
Now, for Benet, the intelligence quotient isn't what we now think it is.
Benet's assumption was that all human beings could be equally well educated.
It would just take some longer than others.
There was variability in cognitive skills between individuals, but this difference was
not significant in terms of how far a student could go, just how fast he or she would get
there.
So an IQ test would tell us how much more in terms of resources we would need to get
lower IQ individuals to the same place as those with the highest.
In the end, everyone could be equally smart.
But then H.H. Goddard brought the idea to America, and everything changed.
The presumption of equality was eliminated, and IQ became a judgment of innate intelligence,
of the worth of an individual.
Goddard developed tests to show that immigrant groups contained significantly higher rates
of feeble-minded individuals who were given the technical name morons.
These inferior people would require greater amount of cultural resources and give back
much less to society.
Immigration, he argued, must be stopped for the good of the country.
This sort of argument, that there are inherent differences in intelligence in different races,
and that this ought to have ramifications for politics and the resources we dedicate to
the well-being of different segments of the population, isn't restricted to the early
part of the 20th century.
In 1994, the psychologist Richard Hernstein and political scientist Charles Murray published
the book The Bell Cur, in which they argue that intelligent tests have not proven but
strongly suggest that there are genetic differences in intelligence between races.
They argue that the data shows that Asians have on average higher IQs than whites, that
whites have on average higher IQs than African Americans, while a slight narrowing of the
gap between white and black Americans over time shows that this may be something that
can be affected by social context.
The significance of the gap itself is that Benet's hope that everyone could be equally
well educated if only the resources were provided is false.
Blacks and Latinos, Hernstein and Murray argued, are in general hopelessly behind white Americans
and Asians because of their genetics.
Pouring money into better schools, better teachers, smaller classes, school lunches,
head start and after school activities would never correct the disparity.
As such, we should forget about helping the poor, it won't really help them and will only
needlessly bankrupt the rich.
This view hinges on the meaningfulness of race as a scientific concept.
But at every one of the three steps in the argument, the concept of race failed to hold
up as legitimately scientific.
It wasn't found in biology, it wasn't found in psychology, where then is it?
So much of how we see the world, so much of our history is based on race, surely it must
be somewhere, perhaps it is what Durkheim called a social fact.
Now remember that for Durkheim, social facts have two elements.
First, a social fact is a way of acting, thinking or feeling which doesn't originate within
the individual.
Second, a social fact has coercive power attached to it, right?
It's a part of us that we acquire from the society and if we resist it, we pay a price.
Now perhaps race has reality as a social fact, even if it isn't a biological or psychological
one.
Western culture is comprised of societies, the sort of turnies pointed out.
There cities, towns and states are heterogeneous mixtures of different socioeconomic classes
and communities of different skin colors and ancestral origins.
This isn't accidental.
Homogeneous groups largely live clustered together, right?
We find neighborhoods easily identifiable with one community or another, right?
There's little Italy, there's China town, we know who goes where.
Oftentimes, the boundaries are explicitly marked by streets or landmarks.
It may be that there are informal means of enforcing the boundaries.
People feel more comfortable living around people who are like them.
But it's just as likely that there were formal means at work, Jim Crow laws or redlining,
the practice of only selling homes in certain neighborhoods to certain groups of people in
order to force certain ethnic groups to remain in their part of town.
We have a legacy of discriminatory practices that separated us.
These boundaries became internalized and so they now seem natural to us.
There are two important effects of this segregation.
First, it meant that social customs and expectations developed in different social contexts.
Second, there are psychological effects that make the lines between us darker and deeper.
Now, when a culture is left to its own, it's customs adapt to its context, right?
There are needs that have to be met within a community and if the larger culture determines
that one community will be awash in resources while it minimizes the resources available
to another, the resulting expectations for behavior, the institutions created and the
way of living will diverge, even if these two communities share a boundary.
The more rigid the boundary, the greater the isolation and the more the two will create
distinct subcultures.
The division that's splitting the society in the separate communities is fortified
by two phenomena observed by social scientists, in-group chauvinism and the fundamental attribution
error.
Now, we are programmed to be optimistic, irrationally so.
Humans have the strange ability to imagine a positive future for themselves, to have
hopes and dreams.
We fill out these fantasies in amazing detail in our minds and once we do, our familiarity
with them makes them seem as real to us as the world that actually surrounds us.
The result is that we will believe that they represent an actual future with a probability
much higher than it actually is.
This for example is why we play the lottery.
We imagine ourselves to be millionaires and almost expect it to happen even though we
rationally know the odds of our number being picked are virtually zero.
We create a perfect world in our mind starring a happy version of ourselves and we expect
it to be the case even when we know it won't likely be.
We transfer this happy projection to those whom we think are like us.
We can recognize aspects of ourselves and others and the more like us we think they
are, the more our brains react to them.
We can see the mirror neurons fire more for people with whom we identify.
This process of identification has a sociological element.
We are taught to recognize certain people as being more like us than others and once
we internalize that, there are neurological results.
We are wired to prefer people whom we are taught to think of as like us.
This generates what is termed in group chauvinism.
We are more likely to hire people like us, to make major purchases from people like us,
to sell things to people like us, more likely to give them better evaluations when they work
under us, more likely to be friendlier and form relationships with them, more likely
to trust them and thereby to be trusted by them.
We have a bias towards people like us and the social divisions that result from this
in group chauvinism only reinforce these divisions by keeping us around those like us more than
we are around those unlike us.
The individual bias leads to cultural barriers which further insulate us from each other.
Now, in the other direction, there is the fundamental attribution error.
When someone who is like us acts in a fashion we deem unacceptable, when they misbehave,
commit a crime or violate social norms, we think to ourselves, what a terrible person
he or she is.
We place the blame for the action on the personality of the individual.
But when the person is unlike us, when they are a member of them and we see the exact
same misbehavior, the same crime, the same violation of social norms, the result is not
to place the blame on his or her personality.
No, we tend instead to attribute it to the type, to the kind, to the members of that
community as a whole.
You see, that's what they're all like.
Our minds look for generalizations and when we see the actions of a person we've been
taught is unlike us, we generalize and fill in a stereotype we spend our lives building.
So, if the in-group chauvinism leads us to have a rosier than rational view of us and
those like us, and a darker than rational view of those we've been taught are unlike
us, then it seems rational to build a higher and higher wall between us, right?
Society isn't static, advances are made, walls are broken down, attempts are made
to fight discrimination.
What happens when these two cultures, which have developed from their own norms and ways
of being, are brought together?
What happens when the separate communities are brought into a single society?
The answer, sadly, is often conflict, mistrust, uneasy sharing of space and resources.
Perhaps the most insightful representation of this sort of situation is the American
situational comedy that ran for almost an entire stretch of the 1970s, all in the family.
The story of the family of blue-collar Archie Bunker, all in the family chronicled his painful
adjustment to having to live in a more diverse community.
Now, Archie's son-in-law Michael, whom Archie calls Meathead, is pursuing graduate work in
sociology.
Archie's wife Edith and his daughter Gloria are traditional women who are beginning to
think in different ways about their role in society.
All of them, in different ways, confront Archie's in-group chauvinism, his bigotry and his sexism.
Archie loves his family, and he lives with them.
There's no wall for Archie to hide behind, and Archie pushes back against all of them
with his rosy picture of the good old days, and of course, insults for the Meathead.
Archie has a coherent view of the world, one that was shaped in the period before the society
was integrated, when it was a community and out of society, and therefore simpler with
fewer categories.
His neighbor, George Jefferson, is African American, and a business owner who makes
better money than Archie, who works on the loading dock doing menial labor for somebody
else.
Now, given his supposed place in the cultural hierarchy, this creates cognitive dissonance
for Archie.
Something is wrong, he believes, not wrong with his worldview, but wrong with the times.
But, as Bob Dylan sang seven years before the first show aired, the times they were
are changing.
The walls that divided the society into separate communities were beginning to be taken down.
In the civil rights struggle, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. famously said, the moral arc of the
universe bends towards justice.
He saw the changes in the culture as an inevitable result of a fixed social trajectory.
He believed human progress is real, an undeniable aspect of social reality itself.
But is it?
Is there really social development?
Are we necessarily growing, improving?
