You
You
Your lecture is Dr. Steven Gimbal. Dr. Gimbal received his PhD from Johns Hopkins University
before joining the faculty at Gettysburg College where he is a professor of philosophy. His research
focuses on the philosophy of science, exploring the nature of scientific reasoning and the ways in which
science and culture interact. Dr. Gimbal has published numerous articles and four books,
Defending Einstein, Hans Reichenbach's Writings on Space, Time and Motion, Exploring the Scientific Method,
Cases and Questions, Einstein's Jewish Science, Physics at the Intersection of Politics and Religion,
and Einstein, His Space and Times.
Music
When we talk about redefining reality, it presumes first that there is a reality and that it's something we define.
Philosophers since the 1700s have been fascinated by this question of knowing reality. It's what philosophers call
metaphysics. Sadly, we often associate the word metaphysics with occult beliefs like ESP or telekinesis,
but what it really means is the study of reality itself. What exists, that is, to borrow a phrase from Isaac Newton,
what is the furniture of the universe? What are its properties? And what are the relations among these various elements?
That is what metaphysics is about.
René Descartes, known as the father of modern philosophy as well as the father of analytic geometry and the
framework of our first modern theory of gravitation, a generation before Newton, began his entire intellectual
philosophy with this question. How do we know there is a reality outside our own mind? We know that we have experiences.
We see things, we hear things, smell, taste, touch things. Each of us can be sure of our own experiences having experienced them.
And therefore, you can be sure that you exist. This is the meaning of this famous dictum, I think therefore I am.
My thoughts prove that there must be, at least one thing in the universe, the thing thinking my thoughts. That is, me.
But, and here's the big question, how do we know that the internal experiences we have correspond to objects outside our minds?
I can look at a loaf of bread. I can smell it fresh out of the oven. I can touch it and hear the crunch of the crust when I poke it.
I can taste it. But where is this vision, this feeling, this hearing, this tasting? Not out in the world, but in my mind?
How then do I even know that there is a world out there? And if there is, how do I know that it resembles the world of my internal experiences?
If all my experiences are in my mind, how do I know that the thing giving me the bread-type experiences is, in fact, bread?
Perhaps, Descartes considers, I'm dreaming. Or there's an evil demon, or in modern terms a supercomputer, feeding my experiences into my mind,
creating a false universe with bread that I wrongly believe is real. Descartes, and everyone else, ultimately rejects this hypothesis,
in part because there are surprising regularities in our experiences that are beyond our ability to control or create.
When we keep careful track of our observations, surprisingly intricate patterns emerge that can be generalized to systems we had never previously known or imagined.
What do we call the study of these patterns of observations? Science.
We take these patterns and we create theories to explain their appearance. These theories, in turn, posit mechanisms, which are supposed to be in the world and responsible for creating the patterns.
But we can use these theories not only to explain what we've already seen, more excitingly, we can use them to predict new observations we've yet to make.
If these predictions come true, we take it as evidence that the mechanism in the theory is likely an actual part of the real world.
In this way, we use our best scientific theories to define reality and then redefine it as new theories emerge, each time giving us a new picture of what there really is and how it works.
When we have new theories replaced old ones, we not only gain new understandings about how observations relate to each other, but we conceive of the entire world itself in new and strange ways.
This is where science and philosophy meet.
Scientists give us the new accounts of how the universe works, and philosophers then unpack those theories to see what they tell us about what is real.
Descartes' thought experiment, in which our experiences are fed into our mind by an evil demon, is now called the brain and a vat problem.
That is, how do we know we're the people we think we are living the lives we think we're living, and not just brains and vats being lied to by a computer?
Now, you might recognize this as the plot of a popular movie from the 1990s, The Matrix.
Yes, The Matrix is a dramatization of the metaphysical work of Renee Descartes, although trust me, as someone who's taught it many times in the classroom, Keanu Reeves is nowhere in Descartes' original.
The point is that science gives us pictures of reality, and those pictures then show up in art, film, literature, music, even architecture.
Sometimes, the cause and effect relation is in the other direction.
Scientists may also look to the world of arts and letters for new and imaginative ideas to create the lenses they go on to use to envision the world in new and exciting ways.
Sometimes, the fictional worlds of the artist change how scientists tell us the world really is.
What we will do is look at the ways we were forced to re-understand reality in the face of science in the 20th and 21st centuries, and how that relates to our other intellectual endeavors.
One example is how we think of the human body.
According to Descartes, we're made up of two parts, body and mind.
The body is mechanical and runs according to the laws of physics.
The mind is non-material and where the will resides.
At the time, the concept of mind and soul were the same.
Its theological commitments required that only humans are a combination of body and mind because only humans have souls.
This view was ridiculed in the early 20th century by Oxford philosopher Gilbert Ryle, who called it Descartes' ghost in a machine view,
where the immaterial and immortal soul is the ghost part and the perishable physical body is the machine.
Far from science and religion being opposed to each other, the metaphysical view attached to our best scientific theories at the time were explicitly tied to a religious picture of reality.
But this concept of human body as machine is not just a philosophical or theological construct.
It long formed the basis for our view of ourselves.
For centuries, medical science was based entirely on this picture and challenging it in any way was difficult,
even by well-respected medical researchers with the strongest evidence.
Ignaz Zemelweis was an Austrian doctor working at the First Maternity Ward in Vienna General Hospital in the 1840s.
Now, at the time, childbirth was a dangerous matter and women frequently died giving birth from a number of different causes.
One of these was childbed or perperal fever, an illness that caused fever, terrible pain,
and ultimately shut down the body's organs leading to a prolonged and horrible death.
While this condition affected mothers everywhere, Zemelweis noted that it was rampant in his ward.
Not just in his hospital where about two out of every hundred women contracted it,
but in his ward where anywhere from eight to twelve women out of a hundred would die from it.
A six hundred percent increase in a terrible disease, that's not something a doctor could ignore,
especially the rates were even lower in mothers who gave birth away from the hospital,
even among those who gave birth in the street en route to the hospital.
The Hippocratic Oath tells doctors they should do no harm, and yet it seemed here that's exactly what was happening,
what was causing it, and how could it be changed?
Zemelweis was schooled in the human as a ghost in a machine picture,
and as a result he was initially convinced that any problem with the body meant that a part of the machine was malfunctioning.
But which part? He tried hypothesis after hypothesis.
He considered diet, he considered having the women deliver on their sides instead of their backs.
No mechanical change altered the rate of contagion.
But when a colleague, another surgeon, died after being accidentally stabbed with a scalpel
wielded by a medical student during an autopsy,
Zemelweis considered the possibility that the doctors themselves were a vehicle for the ailment.
See, his was a teaching ward, and the doctors would frequently go straight to the birthing room
from the dissection table where they were showing students the parts of the machine using cadavers as models.
For such doctors, dirty smocks and dirty hands were a sign of hard work.
The dirtier you were, the more industrious you were being.
Childbirth, hardly a clean endeavor.
Thus, the thought of cleaning up before getting dirtier just seemed absurd.
But this is what Zemelweis demanded of his people.
They would clean up and wash their hands with a chlorine solution before assisting with a birth.
Childbed fever cases then fell to the same rate seen everywhere else.
Zemelweis had found the cause.
It turned out to be a type of bacteria present in both dead and infected tissue.
This idea was widely rejected.
The human was thought to be a machine, and all problems with the machine could only be caused by parts of the machine malfunctioning.
Removing or fixing those parts, that's what surgeons do.
The idea that there were tiny little animals inside of us making us sick, that seemed silly.
The Dutch scientist, Anthony van Luwenhoek, had discovered the existence of what would come to be called bacteria
with his microscope in the 1670s, about 200 years earlier, but they were just a curiosity.
Scientists at the time thought there's no way that things so small could affect the functioning of human bodies.
Machines so much bigger and stronger, but that is exactly what was happening.
After Frenchman Louis Pasteur's work soon after, the germ theory of illness became accepted,
and we had to change our picture of reality.
Suddenly, we were not ghosts in a machine, but something completely different.
We were now castles, surrounded by hostile forces.
Danger surrounds us in the form of inferior one-cell barbarians at the gates of our bodily temples.
Blood was no longer thought as oil or hydraulic fluid flowing through the tubes of our veins,
but when examined closely, the white blood cells were now thought of as our sentries and armed guards
doing battle with the invaders whenever they broke through the walls into our corporeal citadel.
This was a new and completely different foundation from which to understand human physiology and health.
In the century that followed some advice, this standpoint led to vaccines that eradicated diseases from smallpox to polio.
It led to a new way of life. Now, cleanliness was not just next to godliness.
It was the source of continued life itself.
The dangers of nature were not lions and tigers and bears or my.
They were streptococcus, stephalococcus, and E. coli, oy vey.
The word sterile didn't mean devoid of life anymore, but rather it now meant safe for life.
We had to hide from nature in order to be helpful.
Think of Fantastic Voyage, the Isaac Asimov book in the film from the mid-1960s.
The film with Stephen Boyd and Raquel Welch focuses on a scientist
who has perfected a miniaturization process while under the control of the Soviets.
The Americans smuggle him out, but an assassination attempt has left him on the verge of death.
A team of Americans is temporarily shrunk along with a vehicle to travel through his bloodstream
and destroy the life-threatening blood clot with their lasers.
The battles raging inside the body are shown to be as dangerous as the Cold War outside.
The team is threatened by aspects of the machine.
The violent beating of the heart could crush them, but also by the normal state of war inside the body.
They see bacteria and antibodies locked in a deadly struggle.
As the team finds itself in the middle, they could wind up as collateral damage from either one of them.
Not only the bacterial invaders, but the body's own defenses could be turned against them.
The image of the human body itself became an appropriate setting for an adventure story.
Not long after Samuel Weiss's work, and at the same time his pastor was showing
as the world was full of bacteria doing various things to us,
we find the writings of Jules Verne and H.G. Wells, the original science fiction writers,
who were positing new worlds at the bottom of the ocean, on the moon, and back in time.
It was a period of great discoveries, and the uncertainty associated with seeing the world
contains things we had never seen before. That uncertainty is jarring.
Fantastic Voyage is clearly designed to be a 1960s version of Jules Verne,
whose collected stories are entitled Voyages Extraordinaire.
The entire genre of science fiction comes out of, and is informed by,
the need to redefine reality with our scientific advances.
Scientific writers envision a future with new scientific and technological advancements,
then challenge us to figure out which of our contemporary concepts, ideas,
and foundational beliefs still remain, and which will require either tweaking or complete replacement.
Thomas Kuhn thought very carefully about this process of redefining reality as a process of scientific change.
Kuhn was an American physicist trained at Harvard in the 1940s, and he thought it strange
that when he had to teach the introductory physics class that all physics professors have to teach,
what students are made to learn is Newtonian mechanics, the physics of the 17th century.
This is the science that had been overthrown. Albert Einstein's theory of relativity
and the subsequent development of quantum mechanics led to a revolution in physics,
and he took this notion of revolution quite seriously.
As in a political revolution, the old concepts, the reality they defined,
had been completely replaced with a new structure.
Yet, we were teaching our science students as if the old ideas were still defining our view of reality.
We don't teach them what scientists are doing now, and we don't teach our students
why the scientists back then believed the things they did.
We just teach them how to use Newton's toolbox to solve types of problems.
We have been tests on which they're challenged to solve problems,
but what we're really assessing is their ability to use the tools we have given them properly.
But we never tell them where those tools came from or what tools were used by earlier scientists,
or why those earlier tools fell out of favor.
We don't tell them until much later on that we've replaced those tools
with even newer ones that scientists currently use.
Kuhn thought about what that meant and why that was done.
The result was his groundbreaking work, The Structure of Scientific Revolution, which came out in 1962.
The book shook the basis of what we thought science was and how it affected the way we see the world.
Kuhn argues that when we think of the archetype of the scientist,
what comes to mind are Newton, Darwin, Einstein, the big names.
But this is a false picture of real science.
Science as it's done day in and day out by working scientists
is done at all like what these towering figures were doing.
These are revolutionary scientists whose work is different in kind from what Kuhn calls normal scientists.
Normal scientists do normal science and normal science is not revolutionary, quite the opposite.
Normal scientists work within what Kuhn calls a paradigm.
Paradigms are powerful.
They give us the definitions of our scientific terms.
That is, they tell us what we need to believe are the basic elements of reality.
Paradigms tell us what counts as a legitimate question,
what tools we can use to answer those questions, and what counts as a legitimate answer.
Normal science occurs when someone takes a question deemed meaningful by the paradigm,
uses the tools prescribed by the paradigm to find an acceptable answer within the paradigm.
This solution is then published in a journal whose editors and referees are senior members of the community
that are most dependent upon the paradigm.
Indeed, whose most powerful members are the senior people who helped establish the paradigm.
Now, that publication can help one get recognized in the community.
It can help you get tenure at your institution and keep your job.
If you want to feed your children, you need to play according to the rules dictated by the paradigm
and enforced by the community.
Do not question the paradigm.
They teach their students how to act according to it,
but challenging it is to challenge rationality itself.
Rationality, Kuhn argues, only exists within the paradigm.
Since the paradigm tells us what's real and how it works,
to question the paradigm is to question the structure of the world itself.
And that leads to nonsense according to those within the paradigm.
To think about the paradigm instead of through the paradigm is to engage not in science, but in philosophy.
So, scientists, this is a complete waste of time.
There are real problems to be solved inside the paradigm.
Questioning the foundation accomplishes nothing.
But occasionally, anomalies pop up.
There will be questions that the paradigm accepts as legitimate,
but when the proper tools are applied, the answer fails to be one the paradigm recognizes.
The reaction is first to blame the normal scientist.
You made a mistake.
Check your calculations.
Check your equipment.
Recalibrate your meters.
You did something wrong.
Sometimes it was a problem with the meter,
or someone forgot to carry the wand,
or something that's easily explained.
The paradigm's preserved.
Everyone breathes a little easier.
But sometimes it isn't.
These anomalies are set aside for particularly clever people to come along and figure out.
A rising star may come up with a nifty twist or a new tool that could sort it all out.
And sometimes they do.
But sometimes they don't.
What happens then?
According to Kuhn, the unanswered anomalies are swept under the rug,
ignored as long as possible until there are enough of them or anomalies so significant
that they cannot be hidden from view.
At this point, the community is thrust into what Kuhn calls crisis.
A scientific community in crisis is forced to do something they despise, philosophy.
They have to consider the paradigm.
If the crisis is severe enough, some will start thinking the unthinkable.
Maybe we need to utilize a different paradigm, a new set of basic concepts,
a new structure to reality itself.
These people are seen as non-scientific by those in the community
because scientific thought is defined by the paradigm.
But if the normal science within the new paradigm starts to look good,
some will jump ship, leaving the old for new ways of seeing things.
According to Kuhn, there's never a good reason to move from one paradigm to another.
Indeed, there could never be because the very concept of good reason
requires rationality, which only exists within the paradigm.
Now, there may be pragmatic reasons or personal reasons,
but the move is equivalent, Kuhn contends, to a religious conversion
in that it trades living in one sort of reality for another.
Paradigms, he says, are not to be treated lightly.
If a critical mass of scientists adopts the new paradigm,
so it becomes the more widely accepted approach, then we have a scientific revolution.
In the same way that a political revolution completely changes the system of government,
that is, the legislative reality on the ground is replaced with another,
so too with a scientific revolution do we replace one reality with another.
Scientific revolutions, according to Kuhn, force us to redefine reality.
So where do the concepts within the new paradigm come from?
Sometimes thin air, sometimes inside of young rebellious scientists,
sometimes from outside the sciences, sometimes from the culture, sometimes from the arts,
sometimes from chance events and happenings.
In this way, if we really want to understand why we have the view of reality we do,
we must first understand the science that gives it to us,
the evidence on which it stands, and the meaning of the ideas within it.
But this meaning often comes from the cultural and historical contexts
within which the scientists were working.
The culture shapes the science.
The science shapes how we see reality, and how we see reality shapes the culture.
That circle is what we will be examining in these conversations.
And the beauty of a circle is that it has no end.
It's continuing.
The revolution that Zemmophis began seems to have triumphed.
Bacteria are outside invaders whose penetration into the interlocked systems of the body
must be stopped.
We will use antibacterial soaps to create a metaphorical mode around us
that keeps the bacteria from entering.
If some force their way in, our medication will be antibiotic,
wiping out the bacteria and thereby sterilizing our innards and returning us to health.
The war is difficult because these one-celled aggressors are tricky,
developing resistances to our weapons and forcing us to come up with new antibiotics to attack them with.
But as superior multicellular beings, we will surely triumph in the end.
This has been the way we see the world, the human body, and human health.
But things are changing.
There's a new paradigm out there.
One in which our bodies are no longer seen as metaphorical castles with bacteria as the bad guys.
When we move from the Cartesian body as a machine view to Zemmophis' body as a castle view,
there were still some remnant concepts that were carried over.
The castle was self-contained.
The body is a set of interlocking systems that, when working properly,
are sufficient for the full functioning of human life.
Yes, we need some things from outside the body.
Food is needed for energy in the building blocks like proteins to grow and maintain the body.
Oxygen is needed in the air we breathe.
Sunlight for making vitamin D.
But all of these needs are met by the digestive system, the respiratory system, and the skin.
We have specially designed organs whose jobs are well-defined
and keep the whole body capable of doing what it needs to do.
This view gave us medicines that are incredibly effective.
Antibiotics make sick people healthy.
Diseases that were once death sentences are now easily and quickly treatable.
But, strangely, some people were getting other illnesses as a result of these treatments.
Scientists started looking at the interaction between these medications and our digestive system,
and they found some interesting things.
About a hundred trillion of them.
Bacteria that naturally live in our gut and play crucial roles in our body's ability to function properly.
These are not our cells, not parts of our body, but their own beings.
Bacteria for whom we are their home.
For every one cell that belongs to us, there are ten cells subletting inside of us,
and they pay their rent in a whole range of biologically desirable ways.
Some of these bacteria worked hand in hand with our digestive system,
breaking down certain chemicals in our food to new forms that our body can take up and use.
They create an environment that allows for our immune system to work properly.
This ecosystem inside our bodies, what we now call the microbiome, is essential to our being healthy.
Bacteria are not evil invaders, some of them are our partners and our best friends.
Some bacteria are harmful and they need to be stopped to cure some ailments.
But our weapons were taking out the bacteria populating our microbiome with friendly fire.
We were harming ourselves by not realizing that we aren't just ourselves, we are not individuals,
rather we're walking communities.
The good bacteria inside our gut are essential to our body doing what it needs to do.
Researchers are now seeing relations between microbiome imbalance and all sorts of diseases
like Crohn's, asthma, even forms of cancer.
There's reason to think the increase in obesity may be linked to the harm we're doing to our microbiome.
Farmers are using antibiotics to make their animals grow faster and fatter.
Why would this happen?
Turns out that some of the good bacteria in the gut use up calories.
Wiping out the good bacteria leaves these calories to be used in generating body mass.
For the farmers, this means more weight and thus more money for their cows and chickens
with less feed put in, a bonanza.
But those antibiotics are then ingested by us when we eat the meat and when we take them as medicine.
If they have that effect on animals whose bodies are related to ours, perhaps they're doing the same thing to us.
The old approach to obesity based on body as machine would focus on the fact that we spend so much time sitting
in front of computers at work, at home in front of the TV, we're now largely sedentary.
Our diet is high in processed foods.
These would be seen as explanatory factors and surely they are part of the puzzle.
But when we have a new picture of reality, one in which we're not individuals with interlocking fully contained systems,
but rather dynamic walking ecologies, the approach becomes different.
New possibilities present themselves for explaining what we see.
This means that everything changes.
We speak of having a gut feeling.
It turns out the microbiome is sensitive to what we see.
There appears to be an incredibly sensitive feedback system, according to which very subtle reactions in the brain
to what we observe quickly manifests itself in the gut biome, which then has multiple pathways into the nervous system.
Our gut does literally affect our reactions to our immediate surroundings in real time.
How our brains develop, how our brains function and how we behave can depend in part on the bacteria in our gut.
There are now things we can investigate and explain that would not have even been conceivable using the old paradigm.
This doesn't mean we just have more tools in our toolbox.
It means that we see reality differently.
We've redefined what it is to be a person.
We're no longer atomic individuals, but each of us is a community.
When you walk into a restaurant alone and the hostess says, party of one, you can now say, no, party of a hundred trillion,
and we'd like a table with one chair, please.
Who we are is not who we thought we were.
Our own reality has been redefined.
What's interesting is that the story we've traced here follows a pattern we'll see repeated again and again.
We begin with a scientific theory that sees things as atomic individuals.
These independent entities are studied sometimes literally and sometimes metaphorically under the microscope.
Knowledge about them is found by investigating them closely and carefully.
The human body was a machine.
To understand it, we looked at its parts and its systems.
Soon we came to realize that we can't understand reality by looking at the pieces.
Rather, we need to see them in relation.
And so we began to look at a more complicated reality in which there's interaction between elements.
We find bacteria and learn how they, as individual things, affect us.
A completely different thing.
Eventually, we find that what we have is not a set of individual atomic entities,
but a complex interrelated system, a web of interdependence.
We as humans become the host of a huge microbial community.
This pattern will be seen not only in medical advances,
but in our discussions of the physical sciences, the human sciences, and the social sciences.
The universe, people, and society will move through these different metaphysical states in our best scientific approaches.
Human science affects what we think is real.
Examining how we've changed our picture of reality will help us understand ourselves and the universe around us,
as well as that within us.
