On Valentine's Day, it's far from unusual to send your beloved chocolates.
This is a social construct.
February 14th is the feast day of St. Valentine, the Catholic, Patriot, Saint of Love, who
lived in the 3rd century AD.
We've turned this into a cultural holiday where we express our affection for our beloveds
with the exchange of cards and gifts.
This is a custom that was created by people, caught on with other people, and has been
perpetuated for both romantic and financial reasons by various further other people.
There are iconic symbols we make use of, roses, hearts, the colors red and pink.
All of these acquire their symbolic meaning culturally, but chocolate, that goes deeper.
Yes, chocolate candies are also a culturally embedded symbol, but our love for it has biological
roots.
We love food that is high in sugar and high in fat.
We crave them.
Why?
Our brains are wired that way.
This seems strange when we know they're correlated with obesity and numerous health concerns.
But this, of course, was not always the case in human history.
We've created a food supply system which caters to our desires, but before the time
when we could decide whether we wanted to go out for Italian, Indian, or Thai for dinner,
we had to forage and hunt.
Life was dangerous, and pickings were not only thin, but required considerable effort
to secure.
Fatty and sugary foods are calorie dense, meaning that you get a bigger bang for the
energy buck, leaving you time to focus on other matters of survival.
From an evolutionary perspective, there's a reason why our ancestors would have been
drawn to them, and as we are their progeny, we have inherited it from them.
If taste preferences have a biological basis and can, at least in part, be accounted for
in terms of evolutionary explanations, might other aspects of our humanity also follow
in this way.
The sociobiological perspective that has come to prominence in psychology gives explanations
for our actions in terms of neurological structure, function, and chemistry.
The question then follows, why do we have these structures, functions, and chemistry?
The brain did not pop, formed into the heads of humans, like Athena, who popped fully formed
out of the head of Zeus.
The human brain is the result of a long evolutionary process.
Surely the complexity of behavior that comes with a human brain placed our ancestors at
some competitive advantage in terms of survival, avoiding danger, making better tools for hunting,
or mating, the smart ones figured out that flowers and early versions of chocolate could
be particularly effective.
These advantages could perhaps offer an explanation for non-cognitive behaviors we exhibit.
Maybe they were selected for evolutionarily.
That there is such behavioral remnants of our historical journey as a species is the
central claim of a new field, evolutionary psychology.
Evolutionary psychologists begin by noting three facts.
First, is there are certain human behaviors, desires, and reactions that are universal
across the globe, regardless of culture.
They're recurring regularities that would be extremely unexpected if we thought they
developed accidentally from completely social contexts.
The odds of every society just happening to come up with the same reinforced behavior
on their own, beyond unlikely.
For example, people everywhere in the world gossip.
This is just something people do.
All people.
It's not something the Greeks discovered and then through contact via trade routes spread
across the globe.
It's an aspect of all human cultures.
How did that happen if it isn't a natural part of us evolutionary psychology advocates
ask?
The second fact is that there are dedicated elements in the brain that are context specific.
That is, they're designed to do very particular things, and while they do them quite successfully
in that context, they do not do other very similar things well at all.
The standard example involves what psychologists call Wasson cards.
In the late 1960s, the British psychologist Peter Cathcart Wasson developed a logic problem
with cards and tested people to see how well they could solve it.
We pride ourselves on being rational animals as being walking intellects.
Wasson wanted to see how justified our pride is.
So the problem is simple enough.
Take four cards which have numbers on one side, letters on the other.
Place them on a table so that one of the cards is showing an even number, one of the cards
is showing an odd number, one is showing a vowel, and one is showing a consonant.
Now consider the sentence.
If a card has an even number on it, it has a vowel on the other side.
The question is, which cards do you need to flip over to see if the sentence is true?
He found that when confronted with a straightforward logical task, we perform exceedingly badly.
Less than a quarter, sometimes as low as 4% of his subjects figured out that you only
need to flip two, the even number and the consonant.
It seems that we're not wired to be logical.
Evolutionary psychologists Lita Cosmetus and John Tooby, the co-directors of the Center
for Evolutionary Psychology at the University of California, Santa Barbara, noted that when
one small change is made to the test, embedding it in a larger context of finding a cheater,
the same test has very different results.
Their version of the test had cards with numbers on one side and beverages on the other.
Some alcoholic, others not.
The subjects were told that each card represented a person at a party with their age on one
side and what each was drinking on the other.
The four cards displayed showed one with an age over 21, one with an age under 21, one
with an alcoholic beverage and one with a non-alcoholic beverage.
People were told that it was their job to see if there was any underage drinking going
on.
Now about 65 to 80% of the test subjects took the most effective route.
Radically different results for the exact same logic problem, the exact same test.
If you could answer the second, you clearly have the know-how to answer the first.
But supplying context made all the difference.
The brain may have to make the same logical moves, but the program in our neurological
computer is not filed under general logical inferences, rather it's filed under how to
find a cheater.
The important point for the evolutionary psychologists is that the programs stored in the computers
of our brain are not universal schemas, but rather specifically designed to accomplish
particular tasks.
We can detect what kind of tasks they are by seeing where they work well and then we
can start to think about why we would have such programs embedded in our brains.
So the first fact is there are commonalities in psychological features across the entire
human race.
The second fact is that many of these psychological features are use specific.
That is, we are incredibly good at using them for certain kinds of tasks and remarkably
bad at using them for similar tasks that appear in other contexts.
The third fact is that all humans come from a single small group of ancestors whose brains
rapidly increased in size.
We all get the genetic basis for our neural development from the same source.
About four million years ago, Australopithecus afarensis, our earliest ancestor to have split
off from the evolutionary lines of the other great apes, appeared in Africa.
They had brains about the same size as the ancestors of chimps and gorillas.
They're not classified in the genus Homo since they do not share the standard traits
that we use to differentiate our later relatives.
That begins about two and a half million years ago with Homo habilis, where we see some tool
use in a somewhat larger brain about half the size of bothered humans, although there
is the emergence of a pronounced frontal lobe, especially the part that includes Broca's
area.
There's reason to think that it's here where we see the emergence of language.
About 1.8 million years ago, Homo erectus shows up, with a body shaped, much more recognizably
human with longer legs and shorter arms and a significantly larger brain.
Homo erectus spread out across Africa and Asia, but was eventually overrun by the new
kids on the block, Homo sapiens, who evolved out of a small group in East Africa about
250,000 years ago.
We know this in part from the work of the New Zealander, Alan Wilson, who, working at
the University of California, was able to trace back the roots of humanity to a single
great, great, great, great, great, great grandmother, mitochondrial Eve.
We have two kinds of DNA in ourselves.
There's the nuclear DNA, that's the stuff we've discussed, the result of contributions
for both mother and father.
It holds the coding for proteins, which trigger the functions that make us who we are.
But then there's the DNA inside the mitochondria.
Mitochondria are part of the cells that are found outside of the nucleus, where they produce
the energy that the cell needs.
So if the cell is a country and the nucleus is the capital, making all of the executive
decisions and seeing them carried out, then the mitochondria are the farmers, living
in the rural area of the cytoplasm, working hard, keeping to themselves, and producing
the food needed to keep the whole enterprise running.
It turns out that there's DNA inside of these mitochondria.
But because of the way cell division occurs, it's only the DNA in the nucleus that splits
itself during fertilization of the egg in order to combine with the father's genetic
material contained in the sperm cell.
The new, unique DNA of the offspring is the nuclear DNA.
The mitochondria come entirely from the egg, unchanged, but for the sorts of mutations
that occur once in a while in normal cell division.
This means that your mitochondrial DNA comes entirely from your mother, and her mitochondrial
DNA came from her mother, and hers from her mother, and hers from her mother.
What Wilson was able to show is that every living human has mitochondrial DNA from a
single source.
We all have the same female progenitor.
No matter who you are, if you're human, you're a cousin of some degree with every other human
on the planet.
We all come from the same mom, ultimately, mitochondrial Eve, and looking at the rate
of mutation of mitochondrial DNA, and the similarities and differences in populations
around the globe, Wilson was able to say with confidence that this common forerunner of all
of us lived in East Africa about 250,000 years ago.
We all came out of Africa.
And for 238,000 of the last 250,000 years, we all had ancestors who lived the same sort
of stone-aged life.
They lived in small groups.
They hunted and foraged.
They sought shelter against the same sort of elements.
They feared the same sorts of predators.
They had the same sorts of needs and the same sorts of resources.
It's only in the last 12,000 of those 250,000 years that we've been different.
We developed agriculture, metallurgy, antibiotics, hegelian epistemology, and reality television.
Some of it's still Neolithic.
In evolutionary terms, 12,000 years is the blink of an eye.
If we figure a human generation is 15 to 20 years, then that's only about 600 to 800
generations.
Not nearly enough time to do anything substantial.
Oh sure, maybe lighten some skin, hair and eye color here, make some taller or shorter
over there, but when we're talking about affecting something as complex as the human
brain, no chance of anything happening that quickly.
Especially given how the development of technology has changed at such an incredible pace that
the pressures experienced by you compared to your ancestors only a couple hundred years
ago would be significantly different.
But if you look at the preceding 238,000 years, now you're talking 12 to 18,000 generations,
all experiencing the same way of life, the same selection pressures.
That could be enough time to develop neurological features that would then be shared by us,
all of their progeny.
So the advocates of evolutionary psychology contend that we have inherited parts of our
mind shaped by the evolutionary pressures felt by our Stone Age ancestors.
We think of the terms Stone Age and caveman, and many of us think primitive and stupid.
But our ancestors were actually quite like us.
They had pretty much the same equipment upstairs that we have.
They were as clever, as ingenious, as resourceful as we are.
They just had an environment and historical context that forced them to start from a
rougher place.
The claim here is not that the Flintstones was a documentary, but it isn't that far
off either.
Evolutionary psychologists argue that the sustained, consistent environmental stresses
on our ancestors would have led to adaptations.
Some of those would have been advantageous, and over the long 238,000 year period would
have made their way into the population.
Not all of our psychology, but some of it, and some very foundational aspects, are the
remnants of what they had to go through.
If we think about the challenges they faced, day after day, generation after generation,
they include things like, and this list is from Cosmetus and Tooby, giving birth, winning
social support from band members, remembering the locations of edible plants, hitting animals
with projectiles, breastfeeding, breathing, identifying objects, recognizing emotional
expressions, protecting family members, maintaining mating relationships, self-defense, heart
regulation, assessing the character of self and others, causing impregnation, acquiring
language, maintaining friendships, and thwarting antagonists.
These were the sorts of problems faced by our Stone Age ancestors, and they adapted
quite well over time to solving them.
We have good reason to believe that aspects of ourselves are inherited from our evolutionary
past.
Evolutionary psychologists contend that any behaviors that are uniquely well-suited to
solving these problems, and which are unlikely to arise accidentally, are the remnants of
the human brain's evolution, the leftover fingerprints of our historical development.
As an example, evolutionary psychologists point to the ability to read emotions from
other people's faces, even when they're trying to hide them from us.
We sense when something is wrong with someone, or when someone is harboring ill intentions
towards us.
This isn't something computers do well, but we do it without being taught.
It's a skill that's innately part of the human mind, but it seems unlikely to have
arisen accidentally, and there don't seem to have been any inborn features that would
have permitted us knowledge of some other's intentions just from looking at their faces.
So, we tend to think of this ability as inherited from our evolutionary past.
Another example, here's a frightening statistic.
If you look across every human culture, the probability of a child being killed by a step
parent is over 100 times greater than the likelihood of the child being murdered by a biological
parent.
Doesn't matter where in the world you look, it's the case.
Violence against step children is a universal feature of humanity, as often referred to
as the Cinderella effect.
Think of the phrase, red-headed step child, which we use metaphorically for anyone or
anything which is mistreated while those around it, him or hers, treated well.
Evolutionary psychologists say that this is quite easy to explain, and would be expected
if we buy into an evolutionary basis for behavior.
There are few activities more important to make sure your genes are passed on than parenting.
Humans are unusual animals, and that we have incredibly long childhoods.
It takes us much, much longer to be self-sufficient and ready to procreate than other animals.
As such, parenting takes a lot of time and energy, resources that could be going to all
sorts of other activities that would be advantageous to the parent.
To exert those resources on behalf of a step child would be to act in a fashion that was
not only disadvantageous to you as an individual, but to your future genetic line.
All this to help a competitor's genes establish themselves in the population?
Being kind and supportive to a step child runs counter to the entire evolutionary project,
so they argue the Cinderella effect should not surprise us in the least.
But some retort, it really doesn't happen all that often.
Indeed, human violence is relatively uncommon.
All in all, we're a pretty peaceful bunch.
Sure, we have wars and nuclear weapons, and there are dangerous people out there, but
those are the exceptions, not the norm.
People are strangely helpful in most of their actions.
One of the questions for evolutionary psychology is altruism in humans.
Why are we, as a species, so sociable, so thoughtful, so empathetic, so nice?
We have cultures everywhere, and these could not occur if there was not a presumption of
cooperation.
Sure, we have laws and enforcement mechanisms, but those are for the few sociopaths out there,
not the normal people.
Why is selfishness not the norm?
If we're so influenced by our evolutionary past in shaping our natural behaviors and
stance towards the world, we saw with Harlow and Gilligan that caring is a fundamental feature
of human psychology.
Now, some offer explanations that we're not altruistic to just anyone, but more often
than not to those like us.
Our ancestors did not live in societies, but in small bands of relatives.
If they didn't care for each other and give to each other, then the group as a whole would
fail.
The Stone Age Clan was a small group who shared genes, and so mutual survival was as important
as individual survival.
Indeed, group survival aided individual survival.
So we developed the predilection to be nice to people who seem a lot like us because it
made it more likely that we and our own offspring would survive to procreate.
When the context changed and we started living in more diverse communities, this got tweaked
to general altruism.
A different account came out in 1962 from the Scottish ecologist, Vero Copner-Winn-Edwards,
who contended that because animals depend on their surroundings for survival, there
is a deep connection to those surroundings.
They see the surroundings as a part of themselves and therefore have a natural predisposition
to take care of them.
When their environment is in trouble and unable to provide and nurture them, they will keep
from having young, so as not to overtax the environment and allow it to heal itself until
it can support more of the species.
In this sense, that evolution is not simply a matter of individuals looking out for number
one, but seeing all of nature as an interconnected web is a holistic perspective not uncommon
among ecologists.
Where ecologists see evolution as a foundational principle, they see it in a systemic sense.
The group evolved, the group adapted, as well as the individual organism.
The extension of this approach to evolutionary psychology is what has become known as Ecosychology.
The idea is that the human brain is indeed a product of an evolutionary process, but
it's not one guided by selfishness, and only the desire to perpetuate one's own genetic
code at all costs, but rather that the human brain evolved as part of an ecosystem, as
part of a complex web of interconnected species at home on the earth.
As such, when we look at the innate aspects of the human mind, which have come down to
us from our ancestors, what we see is a connectedness to the universe, to the earth, to all of the
plants and animals we share it with.
We feel better when we return to nature, cities and all the crowds and culture are exhilarating,
but when we seek to calm ourselves, to put ourselves in a place where we can be restored
and rejuvenated, we do not seek sirens, loud music, horns, honking, and the noises of
urban environments.
We listen to the sounds of nature, they're soothing to us, even if we've never been
in places where those sounds originate.
The rain gently tapping, the waves coming in and out, the wind through the trees, all
of it somehow speaks to us.
Incorporating the title of Eco-Psychology, advocate Theodore Rosak's famous book on
the subject, We Listen to the Voice of the Earth.
Now, the claim here is not that we all love hiking and camping and that cities are in
any way inherently dangerous to our state of mind, rather it's the hypothesis that our
neurological wiring is such that we are a connected part of the natural world and threats
to the health of the environment are reflected in our own mental states.
The ecological damage we see around us should affect us on a cognitive level.
We should understand that resources are finite, that sustainability is crucial on a planet
with an increasing human presence in which fossil fuels pollute.
But the eco-psychologists argue, while this cognitive level is important, there's a deeper
precognitive effect that damaging the environment is having on us.
We harm ourselves when we harm the earth, and this harm is inflicted not just physically
with increased rates of asthma and various cancers, but psychologically as well.
We become mentally less stable.
We suffer from a malaise that suffocates the spirit.
And we allow our belief in human and technological progress to overshadow our connection to
the earth.
This was the basis of a very powerful film, Kojana Scotsi, Life Out of Balance by Godfrey
Reggio and Ron Frick in 1982.
Almost an hour and a half with not a single word, only minimalist music from Philip Glass,
the film shows interspersed landscapes and time-lapse footage of both natural and man-made
surroundings.
Now, no narrative structure to follow.
The viewer then is left to simply feel as you see each new shot.
Over time, you notice yourself longing for the natural and recoiling from the artificial.
It's an aesthetic version of the eco-psychologist's theoretical structure.
Ecosychology is the evolutionary psychology as Jung was to Freud.
Freud and evolutionary psychology both rely on a subconscious, but where Freud creates
the id and locates it in the non-observable place below consciousness, the evolutionary
psychologist makes use only of the brain science coming out of neurological research, where
Jung takes Freud's notion and expands it in a holistic sense, creating a collective
conscious, an id shared by all humans and endowing it with a spiritual element.
So too, we observe eco-psychology, expanding the line of argument from evolutionary psychology
and applying it in a holistic way that also has a spiritual element.
You can see the distinction between these two views by comparing two similar science
fiction films, the 1968 classic Planet of the Apes and James Cameron's 2009 epic Avatar.
Now, evolution is a central plot device in Planet of the Apes, where three human astronauts
who left Earth around the year 2000 and were placed in deep hibernation, find their spaceship
has crashed landed on a planet 2,000 years later.
They have no idea what planet it is, but upon investigation, they find that on this
planet there are both gorillas and humans.
Unlike their home on Earth, the humans are still the wild, lacking language and culture,
whereas the apes have evolved to a point where they have a rudimentary culture with religion,
science, civil institution and governments.
Two of the astronauts are eventually killed, leaving only George Taylor, whom the apes
are amazed to find is capable of speech and complex thought.
Contrary to their anti-evolutionary beliefs, they think that there's a great chain of being
that apes are higher and humans inherently lower.
The discovery of George Taylor challenges their entire intellectual structure and the
powers that be do everything they can to keep him from undermining their ideological hold
in the society.
The apes have taken a region of the planet that holds provocative remains of an old human
culture and placed it off limits, even to the scientists.
They punish those who would hypothesize alternative worldviews and reserve even harsher sanctions
for those who produce empirical evidence.
But eventually, George Taylor escapes, and after a scathing monologue rides off to find
that the planet he's on is, in fact, Earth.
Earth after humans had annihilated almost all of themselves in a thermonuclear war.
The character played by Charlton Heston finally realizes that guns don't kill people, damn
dirty apes do, and more importantly, that atomic weapons allow humanity to destroy itself.
The entire film is based on the notion that psychological aspects are features of evolution.
Humans had adapted themselves in a way that gave rise to intelligence, but they used that
intelligence to alter the planet in such a way that to survive, they had to re-adapt,
and once again became like their pre-Stone Age predecessors.
Survival meant becoming natural again, instead of cultured.
Between the niche unoccupied, other primates seized the opportunity and followed the path
that hominids previously walked, developing complex psychologies just like people with
all the wonderful and problematic traits.
We see in Planet of the Apes a fictionalization based on the idea of evolutionary biology.
Now, in Avatar, we once again have humans traveling in space to another planet.
We once again have humans that destroyed the Earth they inhabited because of their baser
desires serving as a motivation for their intellect.
But now we see a second human-like race that has evolved a very different stance towards
their home planet.
Instead of seeing their home planet as a thing separate from themselves, something they have
dominion over, something that is theirs to use and abuse as they choose, instead they
see themselves as integrally connected to it as a part of its web of being.
They live a natural life in harmony with the plants and animals that share the planet with
them.
Where the apes in Planet of the Apes seem doomed to deterministically repeat the errors of
human folly, the enlightened Navi of the planet Pandora live in harmony with Mother Earth,
or Mother Goddess Ewa.
As the humans did on their own planet, they use violence in the name of greed to destroy
the environment for resources.
But now they're destroying someone else's environment.
It was bad enough that they did it to themselves, but now they feel so entitled that they have
no problem doing it to somebody else's backyard.
In the end, the great white hope, the interstellar Lawrence of Arabia, the noble earthling warrior
Jake Sully, who had been living amongst the Navi in a computerized Navi lookalike robot
suit, joins the savage natives, adopts their eco-psychological viewpoint, and saves the
day by employing human violence against the invading humans, and of course, gets the girl.
In these two films, we see an interesting difference.
The one based on evolutionary psychology wrestles with questions of determinism in psychology,
especially with the question of inherent violence and the lack of altruism.
Can we develop intelligence from a brain that's the result of an evolutionary process that's
inherently competitive and yet come out caring?
The eco-psychological film, on the other hand, asks us whether this difference is a viewpoint,
whether it's a choice that's instilled within us and is being masked by other competing
desires.
If it's a choice, then it's a function of the social institutions we build.
How do those institutions come about?
How do they affect us?
And what control do we have over them?
Are the questions of sociology?
