Ralph Waldo Emerson famously said, a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds,
adored by little statesmen, philosophers and divines.
Well, he was certainly right about one thing.
Philosophy has been adored by philosophers, especially philosophers of science in the 20th
century, an adoration shared by physicists who, like their philosophical counterparts,
sought to take all of the work in 20th century physics and create a single coherent structure,
a grand unified theory, a theory of everything.
Indeed, we can see this celebration of unification as a running theme throughout
intellectual history. William of Occam is the name most associated with the principle
of metaphysical parsimony we see explicitly stated in Aristotle. This principle has been
called Occam's razor. All else being equal, prefer the demonstration that employs the fewest
hypotheses. In other words, when we are using science to redefine reality, what Aristotle
meant by the word demonstration, then if everything else is equal, that is, if you have
two scientific theories which account for all the same phenomena, we should think that the
theory that posits the fewest elements to reality is likely the one that's true.
We often hear it phrased as prefer the simplest explanation. By that, we do not mean simplest
in the sense of easiest understand, rather having the fewest assumptions about what sorts of things
are real. Reality, according to Aristotle and Occam, is elegant, contains no more things than it
needs, so when deciding between two possible accounts, the better one is that one which puts
the least amount of furniture in the universe. This sentiment just refers to the metaphysical
aspects of scientific theories. A similar principle holds true in terms of the explanatory power of
scientific theories. William Hewell was a scientist. Indeed, he was a person who first coined the term
scientist. He also wrote important works in the History and Philosophy of Science at Trinity College
Cambridge in the first half of the 19th century. In fact, he was one of Darwin's professors there,
and his views greatly influenced the structure of Darwin's arguments. Hewell held that a
significant mark of a true scientific theory is what is termed conciliance. That is, the ability to
bring together results and to make predictions and fields of science other than that which the
theory was created to explain. See, scientists are bright people, right? They find classes of
phenomena, they want to explain, and they come up with theories to do so. Since scientists are so
smart, it shouldn't strike us as remarkable that their theories work most of the time. That is,
they come up with intellectual constructs that explain exactly what they were designed to explain.
There's little fuel for confirmation there. Hewell argues because the theory is just doing what it's
designed for. But when a theory designed to explain A is suddenly also found to explain B
with no significant additions to the theory, when B was nowhere in the scientist's mind,
when deriving that theory, that gives us reason to think the theory is true of the world.
Good scientific theories, Hewell argues, simplify science. They bring together what seemed like
different fields into a single explanatory scheme. Successful science, true science, is unifying
science. Rene Descartes in the 17th century pointed out that we prefer buildings that were
constructed from plans developed by a single architect to those that were built piecemeal.
When a building has been added on to and added into, strange features emerge, right?
Stairways that lead to nothing, hallways that don't quite meet from different directions,
odd dead ends. But those built from a plan developed by a single mind have a coherence
and elegance that we admire. The intellectual edifice of our knowledge he contended should
be similar, and he sought to rebuild all of human knowledge in a clear, systematic way.
Indeed, his famous dictum, I think therefore I am, is the justification for the first absolute truth,
the existence of the self as a thinking thing that he would use in his project.
He would go on to apply this unifying project outside of philosophy when he developed what we
call analytic geometry. Now before Descartes, we thought that mathematics was comprised of
two distinct areas, one that dealt with numbers and equations, arithmetic, algebra, and another
that dealt with shapes and space, geometry. We thought that these were completely distinct
concerns with their own rules, results, and methods, but Descartes did something incredible.
He figured out that we could translate shape talk into equation talk, that we can graph lines and
circles and describe their behavior not just as Euclid did with word-based propositions,
but numerically. This unification of mathematics allowed us to create equations of motion
for complex trajectories of real objects in real space and open the door for modern mathematical
approach to physics. This was inherited by Newton, who extended Descartes' analytic geometry in the
creation of his mathematical theory of fluctuations, now called calculus, which was used by its co-creator
Newton's rival, the German philosopher, physicist, and mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz.
But we know Newton's name much better than Leibniz's, in part because Newton used his
fame and power to try to destroy Leibniz, but also because of what Newton did with the calculus.
He created a scientific theory that replaced Aristotle. Now, recall that Aristotle had
one scientific theory for terrestrial physics, one based on the natural places of the four earthly
elements, earth, water, air, and fire. And he had a second theory for astronomy based on the nature
of the fifth element, ether. Aristotle believed that physics and astronomy dealt with different
substances, and so they were different sciences that required different sorts of accounts.
But Newton gave us three laws of motion and a law of universal gravitation. The important word here
is universal. Newton's law of gravitation applies to everything. The story of Newton and the apple,
it comes from Newton himself and most likely is apocryphal. The idea is that he was at home on
his farm when Cambridge had been shut down because of an outbreak of the plague. He was sitting under
an apple tree looking up at the moon. He was wondering what kept the moon in its orbit when
all of a sudden an apple dropped from the tree in front of him. The idea that the apple hit him on
his head adds a later development that was used in commercials. But seeing the apple fall to the
ground in front of the moon, he came to realize that both phenomena were caused by the same force.
Newton unified physics and astronomy into one single study of nature. His combined theory of
mechanics and gravitation became celebrated fuel-contended because it was a grand example of
conciliance. It explained phenomena from astronomy, the falling of objects, the tides and so much more.
Newton was great because he unified science. Similarly, James Clark Maxwell in the middle
of the 19th century changed how we saw the universe by taking the separate laws that were
discovered to hold for electrical phenomena and those discovered to account for magnetic phenomena
and brought them together into a single coherent account. This single account showed that electricity
and magnetism were just flip sides of a single coin. That what we thought were two completely
separate aspects of reality were just different expressions of a unified picture of reality.
It got even better when it was shown that light was to be understood in this way as well.
Optics was thought to have nothing to do with either electricity or magnetism,
but here was one coherent approach that showed them all to be interrelated in a way that simplified
the underlying picture of reality. It made the universe a more elegant place by creating a single
theory that unified our understanding of the happenings within it. Recall that Einstein had
similar motives at the start of the 20th century when he found himself dissatisfied in 1909 with
his theory of relativity because it lacked an organic place for gravitation. This lack of unity
is what in part fueled his obsessive search for a general theory of relativity. Nature had to be
compact, it had to be unified, and if the theory did not display that then the theory needed to be
changed. This is what brought Einstein ultimately to his field equations according to which space
itself is curved. Now, Einstein's work spurred two very different movements in scientific
unification. The first came from a group of philosophically-minded scientists and scientifically
minded philosophers who came together in the wake of the theory of relativity to try to do what they
carted down in the first scientific revolution. They wanted to develop a unified picture of human
knowledge coming out of the new scientific developments. This movement had one group in
Vienna called the logical positivists who were led by Maurice Schlick. Schlick was the first
philosopher who was also a trained physicist. He studied under Max Planck and he approached the
underlying meaning of the theory of relativity. Einstein read and adored Schlick's work and
stayed with Schlick and his family whenever he visited Vienna. The second group went by the label
logical empiricists. They were centered in Berlin and led by Hans Reichenbach, who was one of the
eight students to take Einstein's very first course on the theory of general relativity
at the University of Berlin in 1919. Now, these thinkers were committed to a unity of science,
a view that goes back to Auguste Comte, the founder of sociology in the 19th century.
According to Comte, the science is developed in a definite order, first mathematics, then astronomy,
then physics, chemistry, biology, and finally sociology. For Comte, this progression is necessary
because each new science requires the tools and knowledge from the last.
The logical positivists took this one step further and argued that what we have is not just a scheme
about the historical time development, but a logical relation between the sciences. Chemistry,
for example, is an interesting subject unto itself, but underneath it's really nothing but physics.
Chemistry is done as chemists do it now, not because chemistry is an independent science
from physics, rather because the interactions of chemicals are such complex physical situations
that we cannot yet work with them in purely physical terms.
Similarly, they thought biology is just complex chemistry. Life forms do not have a non-material
soul, they're just incredibly intricate functioning chemical systems, right? Take a fruit fly,
remove everything from it that's not a chemical, what's left? Nothing. Biology is nothing more
than very complicated choreographed chemical reactions, but chemistry is nothing but physics,
and so ultimately all of biology, they thought, reduces to physics.
Human psychology? It's to be understood biologically, and once we get more adept,
the study of the human mind is just chemistry and eventually we'll see
that the workings of our minds are just physics. This unification is developed through what we
term reduction. We don't have separate realms in the study of the universe, but all of them are
just more and more complex instances of a single underlying science. The most basic science,
physics. Physics and physics alone tells us what is real, what is the furniture of the universe,
and the other scientific disciplines exist as separate sciences only because we're not yet
able to fully reduce them. But the future of science is one in which we progress step by step
towards a fully unified scientific understanding of the world, and thereby the underlying picture
of reality we receive from it. This picture of science and human knowledge gave rise to one of
the two main branches of philosophy in its contemporary form. It's what we call analytic
philosophy, and it directly derives from the first attempts to make sense of the philosophical
ramifications of the theory of relativity. The other branch, which is largely hostile to the
foundations and methods of analytic philosophy, is what's come to be called continental philosophy
and was launched by the mathematician and philosopher Edmund Husserl. Husserl argues that
all meaning, all sense of reality must begin with human experience, that we are incapable of
speaking about anything objectively, anything from a perspective that is not rooted in human
experience. The logical positivists are doing their best to create absolute knowledge independent
into the particulars of human consciousness, but Husserl contended that it's only our internal
experiences that we have as the basis for anything we think we know. A student of Husserl, and he
was teaching at the University of Goettingen, was Hermann Weil, who dabbled in philosophy,
but went on to become an important figure in physics. He opposed the positivist reductionist
project. That sort of unification of human knowledge was wrong-headed, but he did see
unification as crucial to the advancement of science. As a result, he was the first person
to attempt to develop what we now call a unified field theory. Now, Einstein has given credit for
the discovery of the general theory of relativity, but it could equally well be called the Einstein
Hilbert theory. David Hilbert is one of the greatest mathematicians to ever walk the face of the
earth, and his best friend was another genius, the mathematician and physicist, Hermann Minkowski,
who was Einstein's professor in college. Minkowski's mathematical reformulation of
Einstein's work is what opened the door to the general theory of relativity.
Minkowski died before progress was made, but as Einstein did the work, so did Hilbert. The final
formulations of the field equations for the general theory were published first by Einstein,
but there is reason to think that Hilbert may have found them first. Hilbert was always clear
in giving credit for the theory to Einstein, but the historical case is more complex.
Now, Hermann Vial received his PhD under Hilbert for work in mathematics that would be applicable
to physics. He'd been thinking about non-Euclidean geometries and the mathematical fields they
employed. Remember we discussed what Einstein did in the general theory of relativity was to take
gravitation from being a force between two bodies and made it the interaction of mass and energy
with the underlying space. Space became malleable, stretchy, curving, and bending based upon the
distribution of stuff in it, and dictating to that stuff how it would move. The way to determine
how much space is curved is to compare the orientation of unit vectors. A vector is an arrow,
and a unit vector is an arrow that is one unit long. Place the arrow in a spot in space so
that it's pointing straight up according to someone who's standing at that spot in space.
Now, allow the arrow to move around the space such that an observer at every new point it occupies
fixes the arrow so it points straight up according to him or her. Now, if we were on a sphere and
starting at the North Pole, the arrow would be pointing straight up as we normally think of it.
But, as we move away from the pole, the arrow would turn because straight up changes for the
people at different points. We can determine the amount of curvature in a space by looking at the
angle between the arrow's directions at different places. This was how we thought about the curvature
of spacetime field for Einstein. But Vile realized that along with this gravitational field, this
undulating spacetime underneath reality, physicists also employed a second field,
the electromagnetic field. Vile's suggestion? Maybe we ought to take William Occam's suggestion
and create a theory that took these two fields and made them into a single field, a theory with a
unified field. Vile very cleverly figured out how to fold the electromagnetic field
into the gravitational field. Vectors have two elements. The arrow has a length and a direction.
If we compare the angle at different points to tell us about the gravitational effects from
the field, maybe we should vary the length according to the electromagnetic contribution
of the unified field. Compare the arrow at point one and point two. The change in angle tells us
about the gravitational effects and the change in size tells us about the electromagnetic effects.
A unified field theory with a single metaphysical element underlying our observations. Beautiful.
Einstein's reaction to Vile was disappointing, but interesting. At first he raised some technical
objections, but when Vile answered them showing that Einstein's worries were unfounded,
Einstein still dismissed the project. Not because he thought it was wrong, but because he thought
the world was not yet ready for it. He told Vile that it was an idea whose time had not yet come.
Indeed, Einstein thought the idea was exactly the recipe for the advancement of science,
and he spent his own final years looking for such a unified field theory. However,
with Einstein's rejection of quantum mechanics, he set off to research in a direction different
from the trajectory of the rest of the field. While Einstein was trying to unify the gravitational
and electromagnetic fields, the real action began in the quantum field.
Recall that once we had a sense of how atoms work. We were left with four forces, right?
Gravitation and electromagnetism are the two we see in the greater world. But then we needed
the strong force to keep the nucleus full of positive charges bound together,
and the weak force to help create the other subatomic particles. A universe with four basic
forces seems elegant enough, but not the physicists. Why four? The idea was to try and see if there's
any way in which these seemingly quite different forces were really just different ways of seeing
the same mechanism in different contexts. Just like James Clark Maxwell in the 19th century,
when he demonstrated that electricity and magnetism were two sides of the same theoretical coin,
theorists in the mid-20th century were trying to unify forces as well. Americans,
Sheldon Glashow and Stephen Weinberg and Pakistani physicist Abdul Salam, were able to do just this
in 1967, when they showed that the electromagnetic force and the weak nuclear force were different
instances of the same thing. Alright, there's two out of four, right? So recall that forces are
transferred by the exchange of particles called bosons for the electromagnetic force.
This is carried by the boson we call the photon. The weak force is transferred by a particle called
W, which is quite different from the photon in important ways. Glashow, Weinberg and Salam
hypothesized the existence of a second boson for the weak force, that is a second type of particle
which carries the weak force, a particle they called Z. And this hypothesized Z would be a sort
of middle ground between the photon and W, more like W in some respects and more like photons in
the other. If this were true, then we can show how the electromagnetic force and the weak force
could be thought of as the same thing, because this new Z particle would be the bridge which at
extremely high temperatures, the sort of temperatures we haven't seen since just after the big bang,
would cause the photon and the W to collapse together. If the Z boson was real, then photons
and W bosons were just different flavors of the same underlying force.
Experimental physicists at CERN, the big particle accelerator in Switzerland, were able to produce
both W and Z bosons in the 1980s, but not before Glashow, Weinberg and Salam were already given
the Nobel Prize for the idea in 1979. The missing part from the picture that Glashow,
Weinberg and Salam produced was the Higgs boson, so complete confirmation would have to await its
discovery also at CERN in 2012. So, we now see two of the four unified and have a universe in
which there are three active forces, but these three are not seen as a trio, more like a pair
in a third wheel. The combined electromagnetic and weak force, now called the electro-weak force,
and the strong force are part of the standard model and come from a quantum view of the universe.
Gravitation is described by Einstein's general theory of relativity, which has a fundamentally
different view of the universe than quantum theory. Indeed, the two have deeply conflicting elements.
Relativity is classical in that every measurable quantity has a unique value at every time.
Quantum theory is modern in that there are not absolute values for all observable properties
at all time. Relativity theory is deterministic. If you have full knowledge of the state of the
universe at any time, this will uniquely determine the state of the universe at any future time.
Quantum theory is indeterministic. There are observations whose results we can at best
determine to a probability, but cannot determine with absolute certainty. The relativistic world is
smooth, where the quantum world is chunky. The underlying realities pictured in these two theories
are radically different, but there's only one universe, and so the hope is that we'll be able
to find some way to unify the three remaining forces in a way that creates a single, coherent,
elegant structure to reality. Reasonably, this has been thought to be a process that would
proceed stepwise. Since the electromagnetic and weak forces have been unified, the next candidate
would be the strong force, thereby completing a quantum world synthesis. Such a combination
has been given the name grand unified theory, G-U-T, or gut, since it's a unification of the
non-relativistic elements. A theory which then brings together the elements of the grand unified
theory with gravitation is what we refer to as a theory of everything, T-O-E, or toe. So,
if you happen to hear physicists talking about their guts or toes, you'll know the conversation
is not exactly anatomical. Now, great press has been given to a potential theory of everything,
which is known as string theory, in an attempt to not only unify the electro-weak and strong forces,
but also include a quantized picture of gravitation. Now, if it's true, it would give us a completely
new and exciting, if not strange, new image for our universe. Now, to get a handle on what's
happening in string theory, let's go back to the good old pre-quantum days when Vial came to
Einstein with the first attempt at a unified theory that joined gravitation and electromagnetic fields.
Now, around this time, others were thinking along the same line. The German physicist Theodor
Kaluza proposed a picture that was subsequently developed by the Swedish physicist Oscar Klein.
According to the Kaluza Klein model, we could bring gravitation and electromagnetism together
if the field underlying reality was not four-dimensional, but five-dimensional.
If we add a dimension to the world, we can create a working mathematical model that seems to have
all of its features. It's possible physicists and philosophers alike for centuries why space
has the dimensions it has. If you want to join lines perpendicularly together, you have to stop at
three. We have a three-dimensional space. Events are located at places in this three-dimensional
space at a time, which has been a single future and a single past. Time is one-dimensional.
Bring them together as Einstein did, and you see a world that is four-dimensional. There is no fifth
dimension, that is, until the dawning of the age of Aquarius, but that wasn't in 1919. So, this is
where is the supposedly real fifth dimension for Kaluza and Klein? Rolled up. Now, if we think of
each point in space, not as a little dot, but as a little circle that the unit vector
placed there couldn't move around, then we could account for both the gravitational and the electromagnetic
forces at that location. Einstein himself pursued Kaluza Klein type ideas, hoping that these extra
dimensions might be the trick for restoring determinism to the universe. He thought that maybe
the reason quantum mechanics seems probabilistic is that the deterministic goings on happen in
this invisible extra dimension. Once we realize this, we'll be able to start looking closely enough
at the world to find it, and determinism will be restored. Unfortunately, it failed.
Wolfgang Pauli, the great Austrian physicist, thought that a Kaluza Klein picture could unite
the weak and strong nuclear forces. Unfortunately, this too failed, right? With these failures,
the multi-dimensional approach was discarded. Yes, it was mathematically elegant, but its results
didn't pan out, and worse, it seemed to violate Occam's razor. If the entire project in science
is unification, bringing things together in a simpler way, why resort to a hidden extra dimension
to do it? The basic move smelled fishy to some. But then, in the 1970s, it came back as string theory.
Now, string theorists seem to have come up with a way to account for all four forces. If we think
of the points of space as small loops of string in the way that Kaluza and Klein pictured for
electromagnetism, space here is not smooth. It's not continuous, but it's made up of a collection
of these tiny loops of string. These strings can move in place in very different but independent
ways, right? That is, they can vibrate or spin in ways that don't affect the other sorts of movement,
right? So, think of a string, right? A loop of string spinning around. Now, it can also roll
in on itself, right? This is an independent motion because it no way affects the spinning, right?
Now, I could take my spinning rolling string and introduce a longitudinal wave. That is,
a wave that goes up and down as it moves across the string. I could have another longitudinal wave
moving in a perpendicular direction, right? I could introduce a compressional wave,
a wave along the direction of the string. In fact, I could have these compressional
waves moving in opposite directions. So, between my spinning, my rolling, the longitudinal waves,
and the compressional waves, we've just pictured six different independent motions the string could
be undergoing at the same time. If we think of these independent motions of the string as dimensions,
then we have a rich collusion client type model. In 1995, the American physicist Ed Whitten
showed that we could use these loads of string vibration to account for both
quantum and gravitational effects if they have 11 distinct modes. That is, if we take reality to
have 11 dimensions, 10 for space and 1 for time. This doesn't mean that we should be able to take
10 pencils and arrange them so that they're all perpendicular to each other. But if we think of
space as made up from infinitesimal strings, then they would need to be able to vibrate
in 10 distinct ways in order to begin to account for all the field interactions we observe.
Some theorists argued we should not think of the points of quantized space as strings,
but as two-dimensional surfaces, like the head of a drum. Right? Such surfaces could vibrate in
much more interesting and intricate ways. Space is therefore not made of strings, but membranes.
A string is a simplified membrane of degree one, where a drum head membrane is degree two.
Others extended the idea to take higher degree membranes, but then the image is lost,
and so the term membrane was shortened to just brain, B, R, A, and E.
So, we now have physicists talking not only about guts and toes, but also brains.
Right? Different theories utilize brains of different degrees. Wanted to speak
generally about such theories, physicists would refer to arbitrary brains of degrees P,
or as they like to call them, P brains. The idea is that in the properties of these P brains,
we will find a way to unify all of the forces in the universe into one single picture of reality.
So, do we live in an 11-dimensional world filled with P brains?
We don't know yet. The process of redefining reality by modern science continues,
as will our discussions, when we begin to look for the relation between P brains and human brains.
