We've looked at cloning, that is, taking the DNA from one organism and placing a whole
cloth into an egg to create a new being with the identical internal instruction manual.
But what if we don't want the whole genome, just part of it?
And another part from over here, and another part from over here.
Now we're talking about genetic engineering.
The term engineering here is used to differentiate the application from science.
The science was used to discover how genes work, what specific elements of our genetic
code are designed to do, how to spot malfunctions, and the health effects that accompany them,
and what triggers are needed to activate certain genes to do what they do.
Once we had this knowledge in hand, the engineering question became, now what can we build with
it?
What can we use it for?
What can we now design?
In one sense, we've been doing genetic engineering on plants and animals for centuries.
We call it selective breeding, or in animals, husbandry.
We figured out the basics of inheritance, that properties could be handed down from
parents to offspring, and selectively cross plants and bred domesticated animals for
particular properties.
Think of dogs.
We have over 400 breeds of dog in the world.
Canis have greater genetic differences across species than any other mammal.
We have large dogs like the St. Bernard and tiny dogs like the Chihuahua.
Some have snouts like the Foxhound, others have flat noses like the English Bulldog.
Some are hairy like the Lassa Opso, while others are bald like the Mexican Hairless.
How did they get that way?
It wasn't a matter of accident.
We bred them.
Sometimes we selected traits that suited a purpose.
Border collies are working dogs.
They have both tremendous speed and endurance.
They tend to gather rather than drive herds of animals.
They're regarded as the smartest of the dog species for their ability to understand a
broad range of commands.
This is not accidental.
The breed appeared about a century ago in the British Isles when the Industrial Revolution
led to a large textile factory in Northern England that could produce woven goods at
previously undreamed of rates.
This meant there was a huge growth in demand for wool.
Large sheep herds were required and, with a market ready to pay, farmers responded.
But the herds needed to be tended, and for this dogs would be helpful.
So the traits of a good herd dog were selected for, and the border collie was created.
Now, it's strange to think of a natural being, a dog that was born as being man-made, but
in a sense it was.
After selecting for particular properties, the breed was intentionally brought into
being.
Indeed, all modern border collies trace their lineage back to a single dog, Old Hemp, who
was the atom of the species.
Compare the border collie with the beagle.
The modern beagle was bred about the same time as the border collie, but in the southern
parts of Britain, where a dog was needed to hunt hare and fox.
After this, a smaller swatter size was desired, with an exceptionally developed sense of smell.
Beagles won't gather animals into herds like a border collie, at least not live ones.
They're hunters.
We see not only differences in size and shape, but in personality and sense-acuity.
Border collies stare.
Beagles bark.
All of these are properties that were intentionally selected for by breeders.
Border selection and sexual selection allowed for diversity and speciation in ever-changing
ecosystems, but selective breeding is based on human desires.
We change the species to be more like we wanted them to be in order to fit our needs.
This takes time, and it has its limitation.
If a trade is recessive, the offspring might not carry it.
The desired property may be a combination of several traits.
Breeding two fast adult horses is no guarantee that the offspring will be as fast as either.
The offspring could be much slower than the parents.
And it takes time, generations, to breed for a specific property, timelines which, in many
plants and animals, can be prohibitively long.
We know that these properties are the result of genetic differences, differences encoded
in the DNA.
What if we could work with a scalpel and not a sledgehammer?
Instead of breeding two whole creatures with all the many characteristics we may or may
not want, what if we could get inside the genetic code itself and make the changes at
that level?
What if we could rewrite the individual instruction manual any way we wanted?
That is what modern genetic engineering is all about.
We had the chance to think about the limitations of genetic engineering through selective breeding.
We could cross dogs all day long, we could select for whatever properties and dogs we
observed, but we were limited in how much we could do with this approach.
We could accentuate properties that occurred naturally, but we couldn't radically alter
them.
For example, we could never turn dogs into jellyfish, or create jellyfish dog hybrids.
We can hybridize some animals, if they are very close relatives.
Mules are the best example which are a cross between a donkey and a horse, but there are
others, coyotes and dogs, tigers and lions, camels and llamas, but evolutionarily these
are close cousins, in this case more than kissing cousins.
The biggest limitation of selected breeding is that we could select for and enhance only
those properties that already appeared in the population, or a genetically neighboring
population.
When a random mutation produced characteristics in the offspring, we could selectively breed
for them, but because they are random, we don't know what characteristics or properties
will appear and when.
Wanting there to be a property is not enough to bring it about.
We have to see what's already there and then we can manipulate it, but we can't introduce
new aspects.
What we really want is the ability to create the mutation ourselves, to sit down at the
drawing board and come up with what we want the entity to be.
Do we want glow in the dark mice, or bugs that excrete diesel fuel?
It's the difference between walking into a restaurant and deciding most what you want
on their menu, that's selective breeding, or walking into the grocery store and buying
the ingredients for the dish you want to make, which is sort of the equivalent of genetic
engineering.
What do we want to exist in nature?
The artists have been working on this question for centuries.
The ancient Greeks, for example, crossed the horse with the bird and got Pegasus in their
art and stories, and if wings weren't enough, they also added a horn and gave us unicorns.
The Europeans put wings on a lizard and created dragons.
The Chinese didn't go with the wings, but put legs on a snake to make their dragons.
Persian artists crossed the lion with the eagle and came up with the griffin.
Egyptians used the lion, but crossed it with a human to come up with the sphinx.
Assyrians crossed humans with the fish and the result were mermaids.
The Greek god Pan was half human and half goat.
Centaurs half human and half horse, and the Minotaur was half human and half bull, an idea
they may have gotten from listening to some of their politicians.
20th century tales bring to mind Dr. Doolittle's Push Me Pull You, a combination of gazelle
and unicorns smushed together in a weird Siamese twin sort of way.
And even more recently, our comic books have conjoined a spider with a man.
This sort of thing was well beyond the capabilities of science, indeed beyond the thoughts of science,
until the late 20th century with the invention of the polymerase chain reaction and the development
of recombinant DNA techniques.
The idea is that we could create cross species hybrids if we had a means of cutting and pasting
bits of the genetic sequence from one organism's DNA into that of another.
And this way, we could bring with the portion of the genome of the first organism the desired
properties of that first organism and insert them into the second.
We can do this with genes of the organism if they're of the same type.
We call these cisgenic organisms.
But we can also add in genes from quite different sorts of organisms.
We call these transgenic organisms.
The first organisms into which we planted trans genes, or genes from other life forms,
were bacteria.
This was because we had already seen it done by nature itself.
Bacteriophages are a kind of virus that prey on bacteria.
They're strange sci-fi looking things, picture a lunar landing module with six legs supporting
only a bulbous pod, the pod is full of DNA.
The bacteriophage, or just phage for short, lands on the bacterium and hooks its landing
gear into it.
It then drops the pod, piercing the bacteria's cell wall and injecting its DNA into the cell.
Now, some bacteria have two different kinds of DNA that are separated in the cell.
On the one hand, there are the bacterial chromosomes that contain the DNA with the internal instruction
manual for the cell to do what it needs to do with regard to its basic functions.
But then there are rings of DNA completely separate from this called plasmids.
These are rings of DNA that code for proteins that may be offensive or defensive.
They might have the information for the dirty work that makes the host of the bacterium sick,
or they might hold the information for how to fight off antibiotics.
The reason bacteria develop immunity to the antibiotics we use to try to kill them is
that the information about how to neutralize the antibiotic is stored in the plasmids.
The plasmids are distinct from the bacterial chromosomes, so they copy themselves.
As such, there may be a bunch of copies throughout the cell and they're entirely distinct from
cell division.
If the divided cell splits up the plasmids, sometimes not.
As a result, the daughter cells might or might not share the resistances of the progenitor cell.
What the phages do is inject their DNA into the cell in such a way that it becomes part
of the plasmid.
The phage DNA becomes part of the DNA of the invaded bacterial cell.
The instructions that get inserted are, of course, directions for constructing more phages.
The bacterium is tricked into creating multiple copies of its parasite.
Eventually, one of two things happens.
Either the phage construction uses up all of the resources of the host cell and just
depletes it, in essence, starving the bacterium to death, or so many phages get produced that
it overwhelms the bacterium cell wall, which can't contain all of them, and they explode
the bacterium.
It's sort of a bacterial version of the movie Alien.
Before antibiotics, phages were the most effective treatment for bacterial diseases.
There are legends about certain rivers and lakes having curative powers.
These were usually attributed to divine causes, but really it was because they were rich in
bacteria phages.
And if you got in the water, the water would soak in, and the bacteria phages it contains
would find the bacteria in your body that were making you sick and kill them, making
you better.
Bacterial revenge.
Turnabout as fair play in biology.
Since phages could inject their DNA into bacteria, why couldn't we?
Death.
There was something we wanted the bacterium to do for us.
We could copy the process.
In this way, we could get bacteria to produce substances human bodies do, at least most
human bodies.
Consider diabetes.
The human pancreas creates insulin, which allows us to digest sugars, but some people
have malfunctioning systems that don't produce enough of it.
We were able to do what phages do, and take the section of the human gene that contains
the instructions for insulin production and inject it, thereby creating insulin-producing
bacteria.
We made an insulin farm, a non-human source of a human hormone.
We could have the bacteria do the labor.
Bacteria worked very cheaply, and we could reap the benefit, insulin that could be used
by humans with diabetes.
But not just insulin.
We've been able to modify bacteria to also produce interferon, necessary for immunity,
and human growth hormone.
We had transgenic bacteria that produce what will hopefully be cured for hepatitis B in
Crohn's disease.
Bacteria are one thing, however.
What about large, complex animals?
With further advances, we've been able to insert the instructions for desired traits
into them as well.
These are what we call transgenic animals.
We've been able to add and subtract properties almost at will.
The first step in the process is to figure out what genes in the two organisms are responsible
for the desired and undesired properties, what property do we want to be replaced, and
what do we want to replace it with.
If we want to change the color of an organism, we see what parts of the genome and each is
responsible for the color.
This is the sort of genetic mapping we've done for decades.
Step two is trickier.
Here we need to be able to remove just that stretch of genetic information from the target
DNA.
We want to isolate the replacement code.
We want to insert from the organism whose property we're adding.
The DNA molecules in chromosomes are long strands of base pairs.
We would need to know exactly where to snip it and exactly how to snip it.
The key here was the discovery of restriction enzymes.
Bacteria use restriction enzymes in their fights with bacteriophages.
The restriction enzymes cut up the invaders rogue DNA before it can get inserted into
the plasmid.
The restriction enzymes find a puree, stray genetic material rendering the phage attack
harmless.
The great discovery made by the Nobel Prize winning microbiologist Hamilton O. Smith from
Johns Hopkins University was that some restriction enzymes were programmed to only cut an invader's
DNA at specific sections of the DNA.
These restriction enzymes are only triggered by particular bits of genetic information.
They look for certain sequences of the nucleotides and when they see their specific pattern then
they cut.
Restriction enzymes were used to destroy phage DNA.
They could be used more carefully by us to snip out exactly the segments we want from
a given genome.
If we know the pattern we're looking for, and that was step one, we pick the appropriate
restriction enzymes and we get the chromosome sliced at just the right point to get us only
the pieces we want.
Having the gene we want to insert and having the restriction enzymes remove the bit we
don't from the target chromosomes, we now need to get the new DNA into the target.
For this we need to copy it.
We need a bunch of copies to shoot in.
How do we make these copies?
The Xerox machine of the biochemical world is the polymerase chain reaction and it is
step four.
The polymerase chain reaction is a cyclical process for which the American Kerry Mullis
received the Nobel Prize.
It takes bits of DNA and using heat separates the strands.
Next, a primer is added which sticks to the separated strands in such a way that creates
a template for the reconstruction of the full DNA molecule.
A polymerase is added which provides the nucleotides needed to complete the process
and then the separated strands are made into two completely different strands of the same
DNA.
Do this twice, you get four strands.
Do it three times, you get eight strands.
Do it twenty times and you have over a million exact copies.
Let's call this amplifying the DNA fragments.
Having these copies of the gene we want, now the last step is to insert them into the genome
where we want them.
We know where the restriction enzymes cut the target DNA.
This cut's not made straight across but leaves a few nucleotides hanging off like the frayed
pair of genes that we were talking about.
These unpaired bases protruding from the missing segment of the DNA are what we call the sticky
ends.
We know what bonds with them, since bases in DNA pair up specifically, so we make sure
the DNA we want to add has the complement of the sticky ends.
These bond together but the results not quite stable.
We still need to smooth out the DNA.
For this we use a ligase enzyme.
The purpose of ligase is to fix DNA.
The world of the cell is rough and tumble and nicked up DNA can lead to all sorts of
problems, proteins not properly made, functions not carried out, cancer, so we need a genetic
janitor, a handy maintenance man who will oversee the property and fix anything that
goes wrong.
This is the job of the ligase enzyme.
Since the copies of the gene are inserted into the cell with the knocked out section
we wanted to replace, now we need the ligase to come in and fix it up, hang new drywall,
spackle and sand, put on two coats of paint so you would never know the chromosome was
not the original.
Following these steps, we were able to take genes from anywhere and insert them into anywhere
else.
We can create plants and animals with properties they never otherwise would have had.
Mice for example make very useful models of medical research.
Mice are enough like us that we can see how diseases progress in mice, how medicines affect
sick mice, how genetic changes result in different observable properties of mice and then make
reasonable inferences about the same in humans.
Mice are useful but they are not perfect stand-ins.
The genetic differences between humans and mice make them ill suited for certain jobs.
So a mouse for example can't get polio.
The polio virus will not affect mice and so they are quite useless in our quest to understand
it and eradicate the disease from the planet.
But researchers were able to create transgenic mice who had the appropriate genes added to
the mouse genome to make them susceptible to polio.
Now we have another tool in the battle to save people from the disease.
We can use recombinant DNA technology to create transgenic plants and animals that
will act as pharmaceutical factories.
We can splice into the genome of a banana tree the genes for producing vaccines that
would protect people from hepatitis B or cholera.
Instead of a shot all one would need would be to eat some banana.
We can splice genes into chickens so that the white of the chicken's egg contains an
antibody that would fight skin cancer.
We can create transgenic goats and cows that will produce milk that is identical to human
breast milk or milk higher in lactoferrin, a protein used in the immune system.
Aside from medical uses we can alter animals to make them more environmentally friendly.
Beside our use of carbon based fuels one of the leading causes of global warming is
methane produced by cows.
Cows eat grass all day long and the chemical reactions in their digestive system breaks
down the plant material, extracts the nutrients and among the chemicals that are left over
is methane gas which is expelled in the usual fashion that amuses 12 year old boys.
We can use recombinant DNA technology to create less flatulent cows.
Similarly, an environmental hazard from the raising of pigs is the large amount of phosphorus
which is found in their manure.
Minors keep the manure and use it as fertilizer.
One result of that practice is that there is runoff from rainfall on the land that has
been fertilized with the manure.
The excess of phosphorus has serious effects on streams, rivers and lakes.
Phosphorus feeds algae.
One pound of phosphorus can feed three to five hundred pounds of algae.
When that algae dies the decomposition pulls oxygen from the water making it inhospitable
to life.
Huge dead zones are created.
In 2014, for example, because of algae blooms, the Gulf of Mexico had a dead zone the size
of the state of Connecticut.
That is, over five thousand square miles of water which can support absolutely no life
at all.
So, enter Enviro Pig, alternately known as Frankenswein, a transgenic pig who has been
genetically altered so that the pig's digestive system can capture more phosphorus instead
of excreting it.
Its body makes use of it.
This is an attempt to make pork farms more environmentally friendly.
We can also use this genetic engineering technology to try to fix some other problems.
We have plants that have been engineered to trap more carbon.
In taking more carbon from the air and fixing it within the plant, the hope is that these
plants could make some small difference in the fight against climate change.
There are plants that can detect landmines.
The explosive chemicals in the mine can be sensed by these genetically altered plants
whose roots grow down into the soil.
When the plant is exposed to explosives, the leaves turn red instead of their usual green.
Red leaves signal civilians to stay away and signal officials to dispose of the threat.
But many of the uses are commercial.
Recombinant DNA technology is being used to create goods for the marketplace.
At a pet store, you can buy glow-in-the-dark fish.
The gene from a jellyfish that glows in the dark has been isolated.
Scientists have inserted it into the chromosomes of all kinds of animals, including pigs, mice,
cats, and monkeys.
These animals all glow in the dark now.
The intention in this case was to have a marker that could differentiate the transgenic animals
from the rest.
If we insert some other property into the transgenic mice and want to observe how this
property affects mice when they socialize with normal mice, we'll have no way of keeping
track of the transgenic ones, but now just turn out the lights and it becomes obvious.
The fish on the other hand have been altered simply because it would be cool to have glow-in-the-dark
fish.
Products have been genetically altered to make them cheaper to grow.
Corn and soybean have been genetically altered to make them immune to particular herbicides
so that farmers can spray their fields with a particular product and have confidence that
it will kill the weeds, but not the crop.
This genetic alteration means that there are proteins in the food supply that were engineered
that were not a natural part of the plants we usually eat.
Now, some people are concerned that these genes will have health effects.
Studies so far have tended to show that genetically modified organisms do not have significant
health effects on the population at large.
Some studies show there are environmental effects, and other studies show that there
are observable health effects, but nothing definitive has been demonstrated.
Longer term studies are underway.
Now, polling has shown that when people know that a food product is made from genetically
modified crops, they are less likely to buy it.
Take, for example, the Flavor Saver Tomato, also known as the Fish Mato.
There are a few things more tasty than a tomato right off the vine.
Gardeners know that a freshly picked tomato is a thing of beauty, but store-bought tomatoes
never the same.
Why?
Because it takes time to get them from the large fields, through all the intermediate
steps transporting them to warehouses, to stores, to shelves, to your kitchen.
With such, tomatoes have to be picked early when they're green, so that they're not
rotten when you look at them in the store.
But if tomatoes could be altered so that they ripen more slowly, this would lead to store-bought
tomatoes tasting more like garden tomatoes.
Scientists have added a gene from flounder to a varietal of tomatoes that would protect
the skin from the cold.
This would allow the tomatoes to ripen better in storage while they're shipped and stay
ripe longer without getting squishy.
The fish gene in the tomato is what led to the name Fish Mato.
News reports about these practices have generated divergent public attitudes.
Some people embrace the technology, others worry about its effect.
A campaign was launched to have genetically modified organisms, or GMOs, and non-GMO food
products clearly marked, so that the people can make informed decisions about whether
to buy GMOs or not.
The marketplace will have a big hand in the fate of these products.
Seeing the labeling of GMOs or non-GMOs as a threat, the agribusiness companies who produced
the genetically modified seeds and the accompanying herbicides, the farmers, and the food producers
argue that, since there seem to be no health risks from the food, consumers should not
have the right to know whether they're eating genetically modified foods or not.
As there's no definite health risk they contend, and nothing in GMOs have been shown to affect
consumers' health, labeling that could harm their profits should not be required.
Consumer groups respond that, since we are what we eat, we ought to have the right to
full information in making personal decisions about what we buy at the grocery store.
This debate is one of the significant moral and political issues that technology is generating.
But when we think about the need to redefine reality, the questions run even deeper.
Going all the way back to Aristotle, we define the different forms of life through their
essential properties, that combination of elements that made species unique.
Once we had evolutionary theory and genetics, we could talk about DNA structure and the
historical path that led to that structure.
To be a starfish is to have a certain genetic code that was selected for by natural pressures.
But with recombinant DNA technology, the genome is opening up as a blank canvas.
We can make adjustments that nature would never make.
We can create combinations that nature could never have developed.
We can make life forms of our own choosing.
If life is the result of natural processes, and we can now use artificial means to create
forms with no natural history, is the nature of life itself changed?
Is this question different when we move from tomatoes and start thinking about engineering
humans, genetically or otherwise?
Are engineered people still people?
