Evolutionary theory forced us to reconceptualize ourselves and the world.
Charles Darwin gave us a sense that the biological world was not static, but forever changing,
adapting to new contexts.
His theory described the results of such changes and the pressures that lead to them.
But what he did not know was the mechanism by which the changes occur.
This is one of the great stories in the history of science.
What Darwin did not know was how the changes happen.
Why is it that offspring resemble their parents in so many ways?
What causes the random mutations?
We now know the answer in one word, genetics.
The first great name in the study of genetics was Gregor Mendel, the Czech monk whose work
with pea plants first disclosed the regularities and inheritance.
Mendel examined several characteristics of pea plants which he grew in the Church's
garden.
The shape and color of the pods, flowers and seeds, the height of the plant, the expectation
would be that hybridization causes mixtures of properties.
Across a tall plant with a short one, you get a medium-sized one.
But to see whether there was some sort of mathematical relationship, Mendel tried to
keep his investigation to yes, no, on, off, have it or don't have it, binary type properties
as much as possible.
He started with purebred strains that exhibited the property cleanly.
He then took the pollen from purebred plants exhibiting one property and inserted it into
a plant that exhibited the other property to see what would happen.
The result was not blending at all, but one property or the other.
After looking at thousands of hybrids and keeping track of the properties for which
parent plants were purebred, he found that of the pair of on-off properties, one would
show up in the second generation more often than the other.
Indeed, with a sizeable sample, he showed that the more likely property, what we call
the dominant trait, appeared three times more frequently than the less likely or recessive
trait.
This three-to-one ratio popped up over and over and over again.
Now, when positive integers, the simple numbers we count with, appear in the natural world,
then we usually think that there's something being disclosed to us about the nature of
the universe.
When simple numerical relations are found, there's something interacting with something
at that level, a simple mechanism that's right below the surface.
Mendel showed that there was likely a straightforward explanation for inherited properties.
Regardless of what property was examined, he found the three-to-one ratio in the second
generation, but for all other properties, there was absolutely no correlation, just
a random distribution.
When he looked at pod shape, he found the three-to-one ratio, but then there was no
connection to flower color.
Whatever was responsible for determining one was independent of the other.
There was something in the reproductive process that allowed the inheritance to occur such
that the traits were not linked.
This was not completely mysterious, but a mechanical process that led to predictable
results.
This would have been important to Darwin.
Mendel published his findings in the journal The Proceedings of the Natural History Society
of Brun in 1866.
A copy of that very issue of that journal was found on Darwin's desk after he died.
In those days, journals were printed with multiple pages on oversized pieces of paper
which were then folded and bound to create the pamphlet.
To read it, you'd have to slice open the edges of the pages in order to turn the pages.
Darwin's copy containing Mendel's work arrived before he passed away, but Darwin died before
cutting open the volume and finding the answer to his one big open question.
The easiest way to account for the 3 to 1 ratio is to say that every plant contains
two some things that determine the property.
Let's say they're coins, right?
If you have two heads, then you get trait A. If you have two tails, then you get trait
B. If you have one head and one tail, then you get the dominant trait.
Let's say it's A. Now if these are fair coins, then you get two heads, 25% of the time, two
tails, 25% of the time, and a mixed result, half the time.
If each of the two parents, each passed along one of their coins in the reproductive process,
then we now understand how we get the 3 to 1 ratio discovered by Mendel.
But what are these genetic coins being flipped?
What is it that gets passed on?
What is the exact mechanism?
Around the same time that Darwin and Mendel were doing their work, embryology was born.
The microscope allowed us to see that living tissue was made up of smaller bits.
Like the atoms of the chemist and physicists, life scientists would have a basic unit, the
cell.
Originally, the thought was that the protoplasm, the bulk of the cell, was responsible for the
transmission of heritable traits.
But in 1844, there were suggestions that it was the nucleus that was the important player.
By 1866, the German biologist, Ascht Hegel, declared the inner nucleus is responsible
for the transmission of the inheritable characteristics, while the outer plasma is responsible for the
accommodation of, or adaptation to, the conditions of the environment.
The focus of biology turned to the role of the nucleus in cell division, especially in
fertilized eggs.
The studies of the cell nucleus were becoming an increasingly exciting subfield of cell
biology.
Die, injected into the cell, stuck particularly well to one structure in the nucleus, which
became brightly colored, and therefore easier to observe.
This structure was named the Colorful Thing by biologists, who utilized the famous trick
of saying something in Greek when you want to sound smart.
And so, when referring to the Colorful Thing in print and to those outside the immediate
intellectual community, they used the Greek translation, chromosome.
Chromosomes seemed a good candidate for the cellular coins for which we were looking for
three reasons.
The number of chromosomes in a cell nucleus was the same in all the cells of every organism
of a given species, but was different for different species.
Second, the chromosomes were two seemingly identical strands that were tangled together
during cell division in most cells when they untangled themselves, with each new nucleus
getting one of them.
Third, for sperm and egg cells, the cells contained only one strand, so that when they
combined to form a zygote, the new potential offspring received one from each of the parents.
So, it seemed responsible to hypothesize that the chromosomes carried the units of Mendelian
inheritance.
Not everyone bought this chromosomal theory of inheritance.
One of the most vocal and stubborn critics was the American biologist Thomas Hunt Morgan.
The objection came from the idea that if the chromosome theory was correct, then the environment
had little to do with the determination of the traits.
If we could locate the mechanism in the chromosomes, then the parental contributions made all the
difference, and the where, when, and how of the procreative event were irrelevant.
But there seemed to be cases in which environment mattered for the traits of the offspring.
Was it warmer or cold?
Was there plentiful food or not?
Surely these had effects on the properties of the organisms conceived.
So, Morgan was going to prove that this chromosome nonsense was wrong once and for all.
He decided to focus his research on fruit flies.
They offered several advantages.
First, there are several traits that are easy to study.
The sex of the fruit fly, the color of the fruit flies body, the color of the fruit flies
eyes, whether the wings are short or curly.
Second, the lifespan of the fruit fly is short.
You get a new generation every two weeks.
Third, the number of chromosomes is small, five pairs in each nucleus.
Four, they're simple to keep, low maintenance subjects.
So, Morgan changed the environmental factors and kept track of all the traits of the parents
and the offspring.
He tried changing factor after factor.
He even stuck the eggs in a centrifuge to see if warling them hard enough would be enough
to cause mutations.
Nothing happened.
After years of work, trying everything he could think of to refute the chromosome theory,
he faced the fact.
No matter what environmental factors he monkeyed around with, the only thing that seems statistically
relevant were the properties of the parents and that seemed to point to the chromosomes.
One of the biggest opponents of the theory reluctantly became one of its most important
supporters.
Okay, so it has something to do with the chromosomes.
But what?
Morgan and his students examined the chromosomes more closely and found that they had a structure.
The chromosomes had parts and these were termed genes.
The term was first coined as pan-gene by the Dutch botanist Hugo de Vries, but shortened
to gene by the Danish researcher Wilhelm Johansson, who used the idea to distinguish
between two other terms he coined, genotype, which refers to the difference in the chromosomal
makeup and phenotype, which refers to the difference in the observable properties of
an organism.
The question could now be framed.
How does a difference in genotype create a difference in phenotype?
It is, how does a difference in your chromosomes make a difference in your body?
Morgan studied this question and found out that genes that were close together on a chromosome
often were passed along together and this reflected the passing of traits from one generation
to the next.
Morgan's student, Alfred Sturdevent, created the first map of a chromosome, showing that
the distance between genes was important in understanding heritability and birth defects.
So the key to understanding how we passed down our traits from one generation to the
next was to be found in the genes.
Okay, but how do the genes work?
Since the community was focused on mapping, it made the physical architecture of the gene
the primary factor.
It was a mechanistic picture.
There must be something in the structure of the genes that is the determining factor.
We needed to see down to the level of the gene, but that was small, smaller than biologists
could deal with.
So, they had to call on the work of the chemists and the physicists who were using x-ray technology
to make sense of the structure of molecules.
It was cutting-edge work that had been developed for the theoretical fun of the physicists
and now had a deep application to the work of biologists.
Max Delbrock was a German physicist who became fascinated with the fundamental questions of
life.
He held the view that we discussed earlier called reductionism, according to which biology
is just a complex application of physics.
He was going to do the great work of translating biology speak into its true physics-based
nature.
He was going to find the physical basis of life.
Delbrock was working a generation after radioactivity was the big question in physics, the question
that led to quantum mechanics.
Now, he learned quantum theory from Niels Bohr himself and worked as an assistant to
Lisa Meitner and Otto Hahn, whose work included the first splitting of the atom to discover
the phenomenon which first demonstrated Einstein's E equals mc squared.
He had learned science at the feet of the great ones.
He was going to follow in their footsteps by extending the quantum theory to life itself.
To take physics to encompass the whole world, what Bohr did with the quantized model of
the hydrogen atom, Delbrock was going to do with genes.
He would find the biological version of the hydrogen atom and explain it in fully physical
terms.
Now, it was known that radiation of the sort that sparked the quantum revolution had biological
effects.
Exposure to radioactivity caused mutations, birth defects.
This meant that purely physical phenomena affected biological happenings.
This would only happen if the underlying biological processes were themselves just physical processes.
This was the birth of what we now call molecular genetics.
Delbrock worked with Linus Pauling, who was of like mind.
In 1949, Pauling was part of the team who discovered that the cause of sickle cell anemia
was genetic.
The cause was the sickle-like shape of the metalloprotein hemoglobin in the blood cell.
As the title of the famous paper revealed, sickle cell anemia was, in his terms, a molecular
disease.
He too thought that the key to understanding the nature of the processes of life was to
be found in the molecules.
So Pauling and Delbrock began the search for the molecular processes that were responsible
for the differences in the genes that were responsible for the differences in the traits.
The scientific world was split between those who thought that proteins were the responsible
agents and those who thought that deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA was the active molecule.
Pauling and Delbrock were convinced that it was the DNA and set out to describe its structure,
certain that once we had figured out how it was built, the very processes of heredity
would reveal themselves to us.
If only we knew the architecture of DNA, we'd be able to reduce the most important property
of life to a purely physical basis.
Pauling was a thorn in the side of Sir William Lawrence Bragg, the great British physicist.
Bragg is the youngest person to ever receive a Nobel Prize, aged 25.
It was in physics for work on x-ray diffraction.
He shared the prize with his father, Sir William Henry Bragg, and was dug throughout his life
by a whisper that he was undeserving of the honor, that it was the old man who was the
real scientist.
Bragg the younger, it was suggested, was included only because of his name.
Bragg was annoyed by this whisper and extremely proud of every advance that could be made
using x-ray diffraction.
In his work to seek out such advances, he came head to head with Pauling, who always
seemed to win the race of a Bragg.
Whether it was using x-ray diffraction to determine the structure of large inorganic molecules
or of organic molecules like proteins, Pauling always seemed one step ahead of Bragg, always
receiving fame for discoveries Bragg was just about to make.
When Pauling turned his eye towards the structure of DNA at the California Institute of Technology,
where he was a colleague of Delbrook, two young researchers at the Cavendish Laboratory
at Cambridge headed up by Bragg decided to work on the same question.
These two were a Brit named Francis Crick and a visiting American Jim Watson.
While Bragg believed deeply in the brotherhood of science that science is a universal and
cooperative endeavor and thought that such direct competition amongst scientists was
unseemly, he allowed himself the feeling that if his laboratory were to best Pauling,
he would find it somewhat agreeable.
Crick and Watson were worried by Pauling's interest.
Pauling was notorious not only for being brilliant, but also for being able to see problems in
new and curious ways that opened up the doors to answers others had missed.
And so it was that Pauling beat Crick and Watson to developing a model of DNA.
Pauling used the best x-ray images he had of the molecule.
They clearly showed a helical structure like that of a spiral staircase.
He proposed that it had three interlocking chains.
Now, Crick and Watson had an advantage on Pauling.
They had a mole.
It just happens that Pauling's son Peter was a student at Cambridge and able to provide
Crick and Watson with insights into Pauling's progress on the project.
When they found out about the three-chain model, they realized it was wrong.
Pauling had made a mistake, but was not yet aware of it.
It provided them with a gap, a chance to sprint in and steal the prize.
Crick and Watson had an additional advantage.
Better data.
Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins at King's College London were doing the x-ray crystallography
needed to generate the best images that had ever been taken of the DNA molecule.
Emulating Pauling, they too came up with a flawed model, but this one with only two chains.
After it was blown out of the water, they went back to the drawing board and the result
was a model that worked.
DNA they showed is a double helix, two strands of biopolymers on the outside and pairs of
nucleotides on the inside.
There are four nucleotides which form base pairs such that each step on the twisted ladder
is made up of either adenine and thymine or guanine and cytosine.
Since they bond in only those pairs, you could split the ladder, peel the biopolymer chains
apart, such that one member of the base pair stays bonded to the chain and the other side
of the chain can be replicated in a completely unique way, thereby restoring the complete
information held by the molecule.
The information is the template for protein creation.
The encoded sequence directs the creation of proteins that perform the needed functions
to the body that give rise to the phenotypic properties, the observable traits.
In this way, you can get replication of the instructions into every cell and that is the
basis of heredity.
This discovery established a paradigm.
Recall that the opponents of chromosome theory thought that environmental factors would
be important in determining the properties of offspring, but here we see that it is purely
a function of chemical composition.
This realization has had deep and lasting implications for a picture of reality.
We saw in earlier conversations that one of the primary worries about a picture of reality
shaped by science is that it may do away with the notion of free will, which we think is
essential to our understanding of ourselves as human.
If all our actions are determined by external factors, then we are mere machines of fate
and not the autonomous entities we think we are.
While the standard picture of reality has us embedded in it as free beings, there's
always been a degree of determinism allowed.
There are some properties that are not purely a matter of will.
We may want to be taller, but wanting will not affect that change.
We may want to have a different boldness pattern, but this is not ours to decide, unfortunately.
We may want a different singing voice or a different level of innate mathematical ability,
but alas, it's later in life when we discover these lacks and these properties and talents.
The question is, what accounts for them?
Traditionally, the answers seem to be one of two mutually exclusive possibilities, nature
or nurture, that is, innate property or ones that have been endowed by the individual because
of environmental context, because of the circumstance in which you spent your earlier years.
The genetic revolution gave significant ammunition to the nature side of the debate.
Sickle cell anemia is a molecular disease.
Those who have it were biologically determined to have it.
There's no choice and there's no escape.
It's part of who you are.
What makes you you is your unique genetic code.
Your uniqueness as an individual is not your biography, not your decisions, not your memories.
It's your sequence of genes and what your genes say goes.
This picture of illness is quite different from the one we had for centuries.
Many health problems are the result of interaction with the environment, exposure to bacteria
or viruses.
In this case, you cure the illness by repelling the invader.
But with genetic ailments, the problem isn't that the person is being made sick by something.
It is the person, him or herself, who in essence is the problem.
There's nothing to be fixed.
If the person's biological function is to be a healthy active specimen of the species,
there's no external agent stopping him or her.
The problem isn't brought upon the person.
The problem is in the person.
Indeed, if we are our genetic code, the problem is the person.
The role of medicine is to cure people.
Illnesses are necessarily bad.
If the illness is a result of the genetic code, then the code is bad.
But the code is the person, so it seems the person is bad.
If our job is to eliminate suffering, to alleviate sickness of every sort, then we will need
to eliminate genetic-based diseases by eliminating the genetic flaws that cause them, and this
can only be done by preventing those with that code from becoming a part of the gene
pool.
This was the central doctrine of the movement called eugenics.
The term today has a deeply negative connotation because of events in the middle of the 20th
century.
The idea of social engineering was one that came from a desire to eliminate real human
pain.
People with genetic diseases suffer.
If we could act to minimize human suffering, we seem morally required to do so.
In this case, we cannot do anything once the person is born, so our ethical obligation
begins before birth.
Everyone who is born with a genetic ailment or deformity will be limited in the ability
to flourish as a human, and that detriment is not their fault, it's ours.
It's our moral failing that we allow that unsuccessful life to come into being.
Eugenics was not a dastardly plan to create perfect people, but rather a movement to minimize
human suffering, at least at first.
Eugenics sought to eliminate genetic diseases from the human population by making sure that
there were no more carriers in the population.
But what exactly do we mean by the term disease?
Is a disease a condition that shortens lifespan?
What of debilitating conditions that cause pain or deformity or inability to do the things
we expect most people to be able to do, but which don't kill the person before their natural
lifespan concludes?
Should we think of diseases as any condition that keeps one from being maximally successful
as a member of the human species?
But now we have an even trickier question about what constitutes human success.
How do we determine that?
Who determines that?
In the end, it's a political question, and political questions are sometimes resolved
by rational means, including thoughtful discourse, but they are always a function of power.
This of course immediately brings to mind Hitler's program in Nazi Germany.
Now, Germany had a lively eugenics program before the rise of Hitler, and his taking
of power divided them.
Virtually all those working on eugenics thought that the Nazi vision with a master race that
denigrated non-Aryans was deplorable.
Some thought that the far-right followers of Hitler would see their 15 minutes of power
and then disappear into the inevitable return to rationality.
But while the Nazis were in power, the eugenicists should use them to get more funding for their
work.
Others saw Nazism as a gross perversion of their movement and wanted nothing to do with
them.
Few thought they were playing into their hands and that the final solution was a real possibility.
But the point is that natural selection develops in accordance with changing environmental stresses
and artificial selection, like animal husbandry, proceeds according to the whims of those in
power.
Eugenics, animal husbandry, applied to people, will inevitably give those with the power
the ability to define what counts as human flourishing, and this will always look a whole
lot like those who already have the power.
It's the power to play God, and the German philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach said that we create
God in our image, that if birds had a God, he would have wings and feathers.
Those in power would use eugenics to entrench their power, finding some way, any way, of
deeming their enemies or anyone different as deficient.
But while differences are exaggerated into genetically determined inferiority, our art
shows that actual genetic diseases do not eliminate the possibility of authentic human
existence.
I've met no one who could keep from crying at the end of the film Brian saw.
The Chicago Bears football player Brian Piccolo's death is indeed tragic, but surely no one would
argue after seeing the dramatization of the end of his life that his life should not have
been lived.
The film My Left Foot takes precisely the opposite tack, showing episodes in the life
of the Irish poet and painter Christy Brown, who was born with cerebral palsy.
Instead of eliciting pity for the character with the severely life-affecting condition,
we're shown the humanity that lies beneath it.
Brown is not one to be given sympathy, but rather to be understood.
He's both charming and obnoxious, alternatingly arrogant and insecure, both strong and weak,
in a word, he's human.
The eugenicists in trying to remove the suffering that comes from genetic defects fail to see
that people with genetic diseases are people.
They're defined by their humanity, not by their disease.
The success of the genetics program gave rise to the doctrine of genetic determinism.
It was not full-blown determinism in that no one thought that your DNA determined every
action you would take, but just how much can it explain?
How much of us is a function of our genetic code?
If it determines hair color and height, may it not also determine which of us is good
at math?
Which of us are natural artists?
Which ones of us are compassionate?
Which ones are criminals?
We recognize that there are certain innate aspects to personality, and the success of
genetics has led us to assume that every trait that's innate is somehow the result
of genetic makeup, that everything with a biological explanation has a genetic explanation.
This is something we fight against because it challenges our sense of autonomy, and yet
embrace because we want an explanation, especially for those parts of ourselves which we wish
were otherwise.
We see the Greek myth of Heracles or Hercules in Latin as a tragedy.
Hercules is not only extraordinarily powerful physically, but he has the propensity to fly
into a blind rage, causing him to use his physical gifts in a way that causes harm.
He kills his own children, for example, unaware of what he's doing.
We all know people like Hercules, people with severe anger issues.
Sometimes we try to explain the way in terms of upbringing, but we all know people from
perfectly peaceful backgrounds who suffer with such issues.
We recognize the innateness of some characteristics and see the human condition in terms of dealing
with them.
There are some cases in which our genes do determine fundamental aspects of who we are.
Our identity is not always under our control.
Yet, while we know this, we still root for Eliza Doolittle and my fair lady.
On the one hand, we recognize the power of environment and believe that humans are malleable
enough to fit into social context into which we were not socialized.
We hold tight to nurture over nature.
But in the end, we also believe that there's a part of her that is who she is, that there
was some injustice in trying to change who she is, both because the value judgment that
demeans her is biased and unfair, but also because we recognize that there's a part of
her that is in a part genetic.
While we hold fast to our freedom and our ability to grow, we also believe the wise
dictum of the great philosopher Popeye, I am what I am, and the success of genetics
gives us insight into what we are.
