Okay, so I just wanted to go ahead and say that there's a preacher who wants to tell me
the videos old but the sentiments like with many things in fundamental preaching
have never really ever gone away. So there's a preacher that wants to tell me and by extension
you that God hates you. So I brought somebody that God definitely hates on with me. How's it going
Hi, I'm yeah.
I know it's been a while since we've been able to do something together.
Yield hammer out days are quite quite the backlog now as it were, but right. Yeah,
so I guess this is not hammered out. Welcome everybody to not hammered out. And but yeah,
I guess like there's definitely kind of a disagreement between pagans and Christians,
right? And at least a lot of Christians. I think there's not all kind of things that get applied
here. But but yeah, there's especially when you get into some of these like big preachers and such
they don't like pagans very much. So I guess we are hated at least by the the God they believe in,
right? So we will get into that here in just a second. But as per usual, even though we have
a guest, we are going to get into the fan art section first. So this one is from Thomasia.
They say it's their first fan art, their first digital piece they've ever done on a drawing
tablet. And they say it looks super shitty, but I don't think it looks shitty. I was good. I do
think that there's a certain level of I'm going to fuck you eyes here. Very Nala from the Lion King
right now. But I'm sorry, did I just give any any any furries PTSD? I'm sorry. But thank you for
your fan art. I wound up on. All right, we have we have one more piece and is from Nami the Elder
Dragon Neco. It is a slime rancher as a slime service. They've been playing a lot of slime
ranchers. So they wanted to show this and I guess I'll say it again. I said it before. But we have
another wonderful 2D artist, Suza, who was actually going to be working on a slime version of my
character model for those of you who are into that. So yeah, very gooey, very gooey. As always,
thank you all for your fan art submissions. I will fucking kill you anyway. Anyway, as always,
everyone, thank you very much for your fan art submissions. If you want your fan to show up
on the channel, the best way to do so is dropping them in the fan art section of the discord server
where they will be gotten to basically chronologically with that said, let's go ahead and get into
how God hates us. Yeah, let's hear it because I don't all right.
That you need to know who the real God is and how the real God feels.
So we need we need to know how the real God is and how the real God feels. Do you agree with that
ocean? I mean, he's saying things in a very singular way. I tend to polytheist here. So
let's let's hear I want to I want to hear him out. I want to hear what the rest of
here he goes. Thank you very much for redeeming your points for it. Oh, well,
Oh, well.
He grabs his his some of you. There we go.
God hates you. Okay. Some of you. God is sick of you.
Okay, God is frustrated with you. He said all too often. He says into the mirror.
This sounds like therapy for him. I don't know. This sounds like I hear.
I hear this sentiment sometimes where it's like, I don't think this is where he's going,
but where people say I think I'm annoying God because I pray too much or something like that.
God's not returning my calls. I'm the person that's leaving God hundreds of voicemails or
something. Yeah. Why did God leave me on red?
Sorry, I had to. All right. But yeah, no, I like, but there's a sentiment there that can be
discussed like, but I don't think that's where he's going to go with it. I would. Let's see what
direction he takes it. Yeah, I want to hear where he's going to go. God is wearied by you. He's tired
of you. God has suffered long enough with you. That just sounds like someone. I have this image
in my head of it being that you're praying too much and leaving in God too many voicemails. And
my head cannon for this as further we go into this is like, that's, is that, wait, is that actually
where he's going? He's like, he's just going to say, stop, stop praying. Stop praying, everybody.
God's sick of your shit. Child cancer. That's because God's mad at you specifically.
Oh, God's. All right. This is taking the problem of evil until like a whole new,
all right. Anyway, let's, let's hear more. Let's hear more because I want to know where he's going.
He doesn't think you're cute. He doesn't think it's funny. Wait, he doesn't think I'm cute, but
have you seen my legs? Have you seen them? You really don't think I'm really the fuck is wrong
with you, God? Jesus Christ. He doesn't think your excuse is meridus. Okay. He doesn't care if you
compare yourself to someone worse than you. He hates them too. This is going to be like all sins
are created equal and fuck you. You're going to hell. I, that, that's where my head has switched
to. Yeah, it's no longer the voicemail thing. I think we're going to be talking about just like,
all right. Stop being a sin. Stop being a sin. Stop being a sin. I don't know.
Is it play? Play video. Play please. Thank you. God hates right now. Personally, objectively,
hates some of you. Okay, cool. He has had enough. He is sick of it. There's no sense of urgency.
No, God doesn't do hate. God doesn't do hate the sin anymore. He just,
he just looks at you and he's like, ocean, I fucking hate your face. I don't know why I made it that
way. I'm going to fuck you up when you get older. That's God right now. legit. My, my self-esteem
just dropped. I'm, I'm sitting here just like, no, I'm sad. God bonbon in the chat. It's not
premarital sex if you never get married. That's playing 3d chess with you, but the cup is filled
to the rim for him. So God's got blue balls and we're just edging him now and that's the problem.
Oh, whoa. The Bible speaks of God not just hating sin, but sinners. Yep, you're right. It's just,
there is not hate. There is not hate. He's literally, he just hates all of us. God just
objectively, you, you exist, you breathe, you a thought God hates you.
I love when like, you know, there's like a progressive Christian conversation that's
being had and then like, because it's fine. Like with a lot of progressive Christians,
it's okay to disagree with the Bible, right? But then you'll have like, you get some of these
Bible onlyists that will come out and say, no, actually, the Bible does say hate, hate the center
too. So you wind up with like Bible being against some of these progressive Christian positions,
right? Yep. And, but I mean, from the progressive, from the progressive Christian perspective,
usually that's fine. Like they don't have to agree with the Bible on everything because
a lot of times you get into progressive Christians, their perspective is that the
Bible was written by humans interpreting the word of God, and therefore it's not inerrant, right?
But obviously that's not the position this guy holds.
Because I think this, this guy is an inerrant Bible onlyist is what it sounds like. Anyway.
Also, G dubs and this bunch of numbers at the end, thank you both for the follow.
G dubs, I think I know who you are. I think I actually like legitimately know who you are.
If you, if you're who I think you are. Anyway, continue. Because sin is of our nature.
So wait, hold on, I have to stop it on that one because this was the whole thing that I got into
one time about God created us this way and then hates us because of something he did ultimately,
right? It is within our nature to sin. Therefore, it is within God's nature to hate us because
he cannot, he cannot abide sin despite the fact that he created us in such a way that we have to
have sin. And you can't, you can't make the argument that, oh no, fallen world, blah, blah,
blah, blah, all that bullshit. No, God has perfect knowledge. As he is a being who is both omnipotent
and has perfect knowledge, he knew that the end result of his actions would inevitably lead to
a world with sin that he could not abide, which means he's either capricious enough to create
a world that he must hate, or he's uncreative enough to fathom a world without sin. This is
actually one of the things that early Celtic Christianity got into. The reason why Pelagius,
it was an early Christian father, a Celtic Christian who, anyway, I have a video on
Pelagius on my channel where I go into him, or a lot of his positions as well, that he was,
he held the position of original blessing rather than original sin. He got into a big fight with
Augustine over it early in the Christian church, and he was eventually excommunicated over this
issue and related issues, like, you know, he was teaching women scripture and stuff like that,
and that's a no-no. But, like, you get out of a lot of these consequences when you don't have
sin as an essential part of our nature, because, and then you also liken that to God's love and
God being a perfect creator and all this other kind of stuff. Like, Pelagianism is basically
just looking for consistency in that, and saying, like, no, your nature is good. You can be misled,
you can make choice, you can make bad choices or whatever, but, you know, it's your, you can,
it's not within your nature to be evil, and in fact, appealing to your nature and searching
within yourself and that, that, that moral consciousness in your heart of hearts is what
you should be looking more to rather than against, and if that disagrees with the Bible, then the
Bible's probably wrong, and this is, this is the foundation of a lot of progression, a progressive
Christian thought, that, you know, that voice within you that is, that essence of goodness
and creation is a positive thing, not a bad thing, but when you get into like this, this brand of
Christianity that this guy's in, none of that works anymore because he's holding to sinful nature,
but it'd be interesting to see, like, a lot of these guys will hold that kind of position,
but also object to original sin on the grounds that it's Catholic, because they just don't think
that it's passed down from generation to generation, it's all individual, that all of our
natures are inherently evil. Jesus became, Jesus became human and he was able to not sin,
so why is it so fucking hard for you type of deal? Kind of, it's just that our nature is still sinful,
but they still disagree with original sin because they don't think it's inherited,
like they don't think that sin is passed down from generation to generation. Also,
this is why they have like an age of accountability and stuff, and they don't
think that infants need to be baptized and all that shit. Anyway, sorry, complicated theology,
Christianity is wide and varied and complex. Kirisakara, so if non-marital sex of any kind
is a sin and God is omnipresent, then isn't God sinning right now? Yes, in fact, actually,
I've made this, I've made this point on the video before. If God hates so many so much,
why is he literally located up my ass and your ass right now? Oh my.
It's not wrong, though. I mean, when omnipresence is sinful, there is like, is God present in evil
and omnipresence? That's a logical problem that you wind up bumping into sometimes.
Yeah, we also had a $25 donation come in. Again, real names don't want to say it,
but it begins with an H. Thank you very much for those who are tuning in on YouTube and haven't
seen over on Twitch. My car is dead. It is completely dead. So we are running a fund right
now to try to get me mobile again. So anybody who is donating on that, thank you so, so terribly
fucking much. It means the absolute world to me. Let's continue listening to a preacher tell us about
why we're God and go. He's real quick on the omnipresence thing. Omnipresence is basically
God is everywhere. Hell is somewhere. Is God in hell? Yes. Okay, I was just clarifying. He's very hot.
Sin is not just a mistake that we make. It's not that we're good people down in our heart
who had a bad moment. In our worst moments is the truest revelation of who we really are.
God, I'm getting serious fucking Joker vibes right now. All it takes is one bad day.
This is again disagreeing with that Pelagian aspect, isn't it?
Like he's original blessing versus good nature versus sinful nature. Yeah, he doesn't believe
that we have a good nature. He just believes that we are dirty. Right. Like Pelagius was taking,
we are created in the image of God. That means that we have a divine nature.
So that we have like, there is a goodness that is within us at our core of being.
And the opposition to that is no, no, no, no, we have a sinful nature at our root and core of
being. Therefore, we're bad. And this is a big disagreement in early Christianity.
But the people that believe that we had a sinful nature as our core of being
won the argument in like 400 something AD. And a lot of Christianity kind of evolved from that.
Now, you do have versions of Christianity that survive with
our nature is good, or that there is a the spark of divinity within us that God created us in our
image, in his image. And that you find that in Celtic Christianity, and it still survives today.
But overwhelmingly Christianity does have this, your nature is bad sort of thing. And it also,
like the your nature is good that has started to show up in more progressive forms of Christianity
that aren't related to Celtic Christianity. They don't know that they're
agreeing with Pelagius on this, but they're still engaging with it because it's there.
Like it's a pretty easy position to kind of come to if you if you're looking at Christianity.
Is God all good? Did God make you in his image? Therefore,
therefore, your core of being should also be good, right? That's a logical progression.
But a lot of Christians hold to this, your your core of being is sinful because,
you know, something involving an apple with the Garden of Eden.
At the deepest level,
you will struggle mightily with this. Okay, but it is the beginning of freedom.
I don't like the whole like slavery is freedom argument. And this feels very much like that.
Mm hmm. For if we do not diagnose the problem, how in the world can we present the solution?
You are the problem, not the solution. You and I are sinners, and we are by nature,
objects of wrath. That's a then why the fuck are you talking to us about it? You're literally
part of the problem. You're literally part of he's gonna he's gonna even he might even acknowledge
that and then just say God is the solution, right? Quote from the Bible. I'll give you three examples.
Psalm 55 you speaking of God hate all evildoers. And again, you can find a Christian on the run
when they start doing word studies. So wait, but God's committed genocide. Wouldn't that make him
an evildoer? You commanded it. DCT, it is ethical subjectivism.
Oh, it means he hates the sin, not the sinner. That's Gandhi, not Jesus.
Gandhi's not in the Bible. Gandhi's not close to the Bible. I'm not the judge. I don't decide who
goes to heaven or hell. I'm not saying where Gandhi's at. I'm saying apart from Jesus, I know exactly
where he's at. Wait, wasn't Gandhi's quote, I like your Christ, but I don't like your Christians?
I don't think it was the hate the sin, hate, love, hate the sin, love the sinner thing.
Pretty, I could be very wrong here. But I'm just trying to say that he's not, he doesn't know what
Gandhi's salvation is or whatever the fuck, but like it, it's a, I don't know.
Oh, okay. Anyway, go ahead. Sorry.
God doesn't just hate what you do. He hates who you are.
That's fucking gross.
My job is to tell the truth. Your job is to make a decision.
I've decided that I don't like you and you need therapy. That's what I've decided. Good sir.
I'm just waiting for him to get to the point. I'm just, Rallith, come on now. Come on. Hold on,
I need to let Rallith out real quick. All right, cool. Terrible timing. Yeah, that's fine.
Let's see.
I don't like the vibes I got from you or the problem. Yeah, no, I agree with you, Moon Star.
Let's see. I'll just put the, the Dono link in the chat again because we're trying to get
service back on wheels. Let's see. I am done. We did it. Bear out.
Let us continue after Sandy Cat redeemed their, oh well, fucking oh well. Dream of God.
Psalm 11, four and five. The Lord is in his holy temple. The Lord's throne is in heaven. His eyes
see the children of man. The Lord tests the righteous, but his soul hates the wicked.
How? Wait, he said he tests the righteous, but if everybody's, if nobody can be righteous, though,
he literally just made that fucking point. The world could have good, just holy God.
Look at the earth and say, good people with good hearts.
How could God wait thousands of years? One generation to the next. Look down and say,
with this, I am well pleased. He doesn't.
But does he do that with everybody or does he do that with some people? Because now we're getting
into this whole like, because, uh, fucking argument from argument from, I can't remember what it's
fucking argument from composition. There we go. Like God's literally doing a fucking fallacy here
by just going, Hey, some humans are bad. Therefore, fuck all of you. Right.
Jose, nine 15 speaks of a place. He says there, I began to hate them because of the wickedness
of their deeds. I will drive them out of my house. I will love them no more.
Oh, see, that's actually an interesting point because usually we get this whole like,
God loves you. God loves you. Uh, but it literally just like, no, God, God loved you at one point.
And now he just said, fuck it. Not anymore. Also, Phantom REM. Why the fuck did you do the call
for war right now? God fucking dammit. God fucking dip. Phantom REM. Thank you for redeeming 50,000
channel points. Jesus Christ. Oh, whoa. I hate myself and all of you. Jesus Christ.
Uh, this is the reason it's almost a call for no, no, it is not that this is the whole reason we
have we're, we're making this fucking merch line with the whole fucking war, the Oh, whoa, and we
wore this reason because some of y'all can't behave. I put it at 50,000 points and some of you are
just like, that just means I have to get a lot of points. Jesus Christ. Like putting the cookie jar
12 feet up and the kids just like, that just means I need a ladder.
Species. Yes. Somebody redeemed 50,000 channel points. That was an Uwu because I got,
because it gets, it doesn't get dropped in stream parts. It always gets dropped in videos.
So people can point, people can point to the recorded segment and just be like,
that's the YouTube video where I ruined everything. That's exactly why.
Phantom run. Thank you for saving up that many points. Also, you're a monster. Let's continue.
That let Phantom run. We need to understand why God hates you now.
God hates you. See, like I said,
and there is wrath for you. The wrath of God is being stored up for you.
Oh, so it is blue balls. I know I made the joke earlier, but like now we're now we're literally
there. He's literally storing this up. You cannot believe in the personal love of God
and not believe in the personal wrath of God. You can though. You actually can.
Okay. I mean, I think that you can, you can recognize that God has both a loving and wrathful
side while not holding the position that like every single person has a sinful nature.
There's nothing inconsistent with God having a wrathful side with Pallagianism, for example.
Well, yeah, what I'm saying is I'm not saying that you have to hold that like
he has one side and not the other. What I'm saying is that it is possible to hold
to an all good God not having any of this wrath. Like that is a thing you can.
You can. Yeah. If you hold that God is like entirely good and therefore has no wrath, right?
Like because if you just define wrathfulness is not good.
Yeah. You wind up with a position that's inconsistent with the Bible, but it is
coherent. Like I don't know. This is one of the problems with Christianity.
Like when you get like in a broad sense is that some of the reasons that they provide for some
things wind up falling into this category of like, well, it's semantic, semantically true.
Yeah. You know. And I think that that's what we're that's what we're bumping into here is that in
his attempting to explain this, he's resulting in just this semantic case. He's making he's making
these like really broad generalizations. We've got a minute left. We'll see or two minutes left
actually. Let's see what else he what else he says. I'll give him the benefit of the town.
Some of you are in grave danger. You should have a sense of urgency. And and as I speak,
don't let that small attorney in your conscience come to your defense.
The small attorney in my conscience brain lawyers, please save me. He is absolutely
like I think there's one on the one side. He's talking about like some people who justify
them themselves the bad things that they do, right? On the other hand, he's directly disagreeing
with Pelagius here. And like this is this is the point where he's disagreeing with Pelagius,
because that that inner consciousness in your deep heart of hearts, that part of you, which
isn't like deceiving yourself into thinking that something that you did that you know is wrong
is actually good, right? You know intuitively, according to Pelagianism, because of that divine
nature, right? Like without created in the image of God, therefore you have an into a moral intuition
because you have the moral because you have God's good nature in you. That's how you can
even perceive right from a Christian perspective. That's the reason you can even perceive these
things. The eye was causing Pelagius to lose his mind over this idea of like God of humans being
intrinsically evil. He's like, no, we we have like moral intuitions. So, you know, conceivably,
we can make a series of choices in our lives that involves us not sinning at all. And that's what
caused the church to go absolutely nuts over him. It was like, whoa, hold up, what did you say?
Also, this seems like it's logically possible. It's not it's not that it has happened or will
happen is that it's logically possible. And that logical possibility is the thing that really
fucks with them, though. Like, I remember this a very brief story after I go through the fact
that cinnamon roll just dropped 500 points for an oh, well. But so there was this thing it was
back when I was working as a manager for McDonald's and there was a customer who came in he actually
wanted to talk theology. And he he made a point that like the US could never fire off a nuclear
device. And I said, Well, why? And he goes, Well, because everybody would fire off their nuclear
devices at once in the world would be destroyed. So okay, yeah, but that doesn't mean that somebody
cannot fire off a nuke. He goes, No, God wouldn't let it happen. Oh, okay. Yeah. And then that
that's where that precipitates, right? Yeah, like because because God would not let it happen,
because God needs the needs his third coming. Yeah, fucking blue balls jokes everywhere. Anyway,
because God needs because God needs to solve his coming.
We cannot have nuclear explosions. That's what I but that's that's what his point was. And that's
what I'm hearing like the thing that you described sounds like that as well, or just like the mere
fact that I was trying to point out that no, it is possible for us to fire off the nuclear arsenal.
Like that is a that is a possibility. And he's just like, No, it's not. It is impossible. It
can't happen. It's like everything you're saying is wrong. My brain lawyer wants to talk with your
brain lawyer. I mean, I would be like, can you cite that script surely? Can you cite where God
said I would allow a new weird device? I guess the response to that would be like, it's inconsistent
with like, what are the Christians called? Right. Revelation. The Christians call rag.
That's fucking funny that they would that there's like, it's inconsistent with their
their prophecy thing. And like that, you know, and that that would be that would be his scriptural
citation as a response. Like I'm just kind of looking at from from that person's perspective.
But yeah, I don't know. Other than that, like, I don't think there would be any scriptural
evidence to say that we can't fire off a new you can even say that the firing off a nuke is
actually a pretty good justification for events in Revelation to kick off. You know, what is
that in Revelation? It's like giant monsters and dragons and shit. Yeah. Like, you know,
the nuke is the nuke is dragon fire. Well, there's I mean, has anybody seen Godzilla? Like, come on.
Like, everybody knows that Godzilla just has Goku in his mouth firing command male waves.
All right.
It's as if you were in the path of destruction and I am trying to warn you and you're arguing
rather than running. It's as if I knew that when you return home today, a plane was going to lose
an engine and crash into your home and destroy you. And I'm telling you, and rather than running,
you're arguing. Yeah, because we just think you're wrong. Okay. Is anybody else? Tell me,
Chad, if I'm losing my mind, is anybody else seeing the wall and the podium kind of blend
together as if it's like the podium is like this two dimensional thing that is like drawn onto the
wall right now? My God, his podium is an asset like my entire. It's like, it's like slowly becoming
one to me. And I'm having like, even with the shadows on it, I'm having some difficulty there.
Like, it's just the coloration, right? Until he steps behind it and then my mind is blown.
Like when he interacts with it, like all of a sudden it's like, whoa. It's like you're playing
in an old like PlayStation one or N64 game. But like the thing of the distance is just a 2D,
like a 2D sprite.
Ah, Old Testament, Psalm 711. God is a righteous judge, a God who expresses his wrath every day.
Ephesians 5, 6, let no one deceive you with empty words. Don't say, I read a book and I could
I'm just going to stop him right there. I'm just going to stop him right there.
Please don't talk to me about empty words. Don't sit here on this podium and tell me
that you read a book and now you have information for me. Please. Like holding a book. Yes.
Don't don't do that thing that I'm doing right now. The preacher says
Consulted a theologian and there's some guy in the New Testament class at my college educated
beyond his intelligence who says this is all very primitive and and the God of the New
Testaments, nothing but hugs and muffins and we're all going to go to heaven except maybe Hitler,
but it's a coin flip for him too. So he literally just like took you. Oh,
should I think he was speaking directly to you? Go back a little bit. What did he say?
New Testament Psalm 711 every day. No, is it five minutes, five minutes book and
I consulted a theologian and there's some guy in the New Testament class at my college educated
beyond his intelligence who says this is all very primitive and and the God of the New
Testaments, nothing but hugs and muffins and we're all going to go to heaven except for
maybe Hitler, but it's a coin flip for him too. Yeah, he's talking about universalism there,
which has a relationship with Pallagianism. A lot of Pallagianists, a lot of Pallagianists,
Pallagianists or Pallagists are Pallagians. A lot of Pallagians are universalists because
when you believe that your divine nature is good, that you're going to wind up. But even I think
even Pallagians hold to like when you get in the ones that believe in hell, right?
They're going to hold positions of Oh, well, if somebody is like actively going against
their that nature and they're committed to causing death and destruction and genocide and
all that kind of shit, that's that's the kind of person that winds up being reserved for a
punishment afterlife. You know, like, so and a lot of universalists will even go to a point
of saying that there's some people like nobody goes to hell, but not everybody goes to heaven,
you know, that when you get somebody that has that is again, like that commitment to destructive acts
or harm to others from a in that level, that they're not welcome in the kingdom or wherever,
right? And that's a reasonable position. Like, I think that he's trying to oversimplify like
that's he's kind of straw manning the opponent there, because even universalists sometimes
will say, Well, look, there are exceptions here. And but they're, they would be also the position
like he has to be earlier about Gandhi, right? Like where he doesn't know what their salvation is,
according to his image, you know, Hitler could have gotten saved, right? Like, this is, it's kind
of frustrating because you'll get people that will accuse others of having like heinous people
winding up in their heaven. When if you it's it's too cool, it's there's, there's a hypocrisy there
and it's too cool. Okay, or whatever. But like, what if if you're using this as a criticism to
knock down the opposition, then if it applies to you, shouldn't that shouldn't that hurt your position?
Well, because it's the same way, but it should like, you know, like if you can have a horrible
person get saved in the view of Christianity, he's spouting, right? Well, not to mention you can
get mad at like heinous people being in heaven. But if you accept that all sin is equal, then
you're a heinous person in heaven. Like, welcome, welcome to the pearly gates, motherfucker.
Well, I guess everybody that goes to heaven is a heinous person. Yep. If you take the reductive
view on sin, yeah, that's actually what he's expressing, isn't he? Yes. Yeah, he's got a
reductive view on sin, because he's, he's reduced it to where God hates everybody,
carte blanche. That's his thing. That's what he opened. It is a hyper reductive view on the idea
of sin. Right. God hates your child, the child that just came out of the womb that hasn't had
a chance to do anything yet. God looked at that child and just went, and I hate this fucking kid.
Let no one deceive you.
I won't. 50 words. Okay. Because of such things, God's wrath comes on those who are disobedient.
God's wrath comes on phrasing. Colossians three, six, put to death, whatever belongs to your earthly
nature, sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desires, and greed, which is idolatry. Because
of these, the wrath of God is coming. Oh, whoa. The wrath of God is coming on those who have
rebelled against God and those whom God hates. God is literally participating in sin, Bukaki,
everybody. This is this is just sin, Bukaki. His wrath is coming on all of you. Is that it? There's
like one more second left. Yeah, that's it. That's it. That's it. I guess, yeah, this is the
it comes down. It comes down to the Pelaginism thing, doesn't it? And that's that's pretty much
like he doesn't what this boils down to is that he's expressing just his position on theology.
And unfortunately, though, this is a position. This is a position that I find to be really toxic
because this particular position toxic and common. This is a position that when you take it and you
accept it wholeheartedly, you have to simultaneously have disdain for every other human being in the
world and also engage in a metric ton of self hatred. And I just I just think that that's
that's just not healthy. It's not healthy for anybody. Right. And I know that like there's
going to be so many of the comment section that just goes, this is an old video. You pulled
this up from 10 years ago. And yeah, this is a 10 year old video. But do you know people who
believe this today? Yes, it's still relevant. I can see that I can see that sermon happening
today with like a little bit of a spin on it. I think that a sermon today would actually
on a subject like this would be worse, not better. Like a post Trump version of this sermon
does not get better. Right. It doesn't. It doesn't. And I would be interested in seeing what this guy
is saying now, you know, but like, I don't know if we if you really want us to we can go find Greg
Locke, we can talk about his shit. Like that's like, I don't know how influential this guy is or
anything like that. I don't know the first thing about this dude. But what matters here is not him
as an individual matters here, as in with most of my videos is the ideas presented and the ideas
here, like you said, they're not only toxic, but they're common. Right. Right. Like this is this
is good old stuff around man. This is good old Southern Georgian Christianity. North Georgian
too. Like it's not, you know, you get up in the mountains, you hear stuff like this. This guy's
much more like, I don't know, he looks like he's in a bit of an expensively built church.
And, you know, but where I came from, you'd have churches that where they turn like a
warehouse or some sort of whatever into a church, because like Christians are great at that. They'll
turn whatever if it's got four walls and a roof, they'll turn into a church. Yep. And
like, you could you would hear shit like this from them. It's a very common position in Southern
Protestantism. And like 10 years ago, yeah, it was just an example of currently existing
prevailing theology. Nothing that he said here that was particularly controversial when you get into
some extreme forms of Protestant Protestantism. And it's not even that extreme, honestly,
you find this in fairly mainstream versions of Christianity. I think I think the problem
isn't that it is or isn't extreme. I think the problem is that this is considered normal.
Yeah, I think that's where my like, that's where I hold my issue. I think it's extreme,
but it's also fairly mainstream theology. It's extreme in the position that it takes,
but it's not extreme as to where it sits in the Overton window. Like it's just normal as far as
like social zeitgeist is concerned. And that's kind of the problem. Like also Bon Bonberry,
thank you very much for redeeming your points for a hydrate. I shall do that.
The thing.
But with that said, do you have any closing remarks on this particular video before we wrap
things up for this episode? Now, I think I yapped sufficiently.
Fair enough. Well, where can people find you since this will be at the very least over on my channel?
I'm Ocean Keltoy. You can find me if you look up YouTube Ocean Keltoy. It's K-E-L-T-O-I. I guess
there'll be a link down in the description. But yeah, I mainly do like pagan topics. I've got a
video on Pelagius, which I talked a lot about a lot in this video. So definitely go check out
that video. We can kind of see like who this guy is that I'm talking about and a little bit of
history associated with him. I'll actually send you a link to that video, so you can include that
if anybody wants to do like a deep dive. But yeah, I enjoyed coming over and hanging out,
and thanks for letting me hang out on your channel, Cerys. Hey, no problem. I greatly appreciate it.
And as always, everyone, if you want to support the channel and what I do,
the best ways to do so are by looking in that description box. And there's various ways to
support the channel down there. Also, if you haven't subscribed already over on YouTube,
please do that. If you're watching over on Twitch, maybe hit the follow button if you
haven't done also already. With that all said though, as always, everyone, insert in the video tag
line here.
