In the last three lectures, we've been talking about the Buddha, first of all, by telling
the story of the Buddha's life, and then beginning to dig a little bit into the categories
of the Buddha's teaching, the Buddha's dharma.
When we do this, we're really taking our cue actually from a fundamental formula that's
used in the Buddhist tradition to express faith in the tradition itself.
It's called the Three Refuges, and some people have said that it functions in Buddhism a
little bit like the Lord's Prayer, or some other very common affirmation of faith does
in other religious traditions, and it sounds simply like this.
In English, you would say, I take refuge in the Buddha, I take refuge in the dharma,
I take refuge in the sangha, or the Buddha's community.
These are the three focal points of faith in the Buddhist tradition.
Most people would recite as part of an ordinary daily ritual, these three refuges, and for
some people it is used as a formula when they want to assert that their own Buddhist identity.
They say that they take refuge in the Buddha, the dharma, and the sangha.
So obviously the next important issue for us to consider here in our discussion of Buddhism
is the nature of the sangha, or the community.
We need to know something about how that community developed, what some of the issues
were that affected its historical evolution, and how it's functioned as a bearer for the
memory of the Buddha himself, and of course also as a vehicle for the expansion of his
teaching.
Now, at the very beginning of course, the community was quite small and really consisted
of just an informal band of followers wandering with the Buddha as he wandered the roads of
northern India, visiting from town to town, teaching his dharma, and gathering together
a band of disciples and lay followers.
It was a diverse community, it's often spoken of as having four parts, monks, nuns, the
male and female members of the monastic community, and male and female lay supporters.
So that you can ask yourself to start with, what are the basic roles, the basic types
of people who would be found in a Buddhist community?
And I think probably the best place to start, right at the very beginning, is with the role
of the lay supporter, because obviously these monks and nuns can't really continue for
very long unless they've got a lot of devoted lay people to support them.
And when we talk about the lay supporter, obviously are quite a few pretty good examples
of lay supporters in the Buddhist tradition.
And I like to focus on a man by the name of Anattapindika, who is called a donor, a great
donor in Pali and in Sanskrit also, a donor is called Adhanapati, a lord of generosity.
The word dhana, of course, comes from the same root as our word donor.
So Adhanapati is a lord of generosity, somebody who makes generous donations.
The story about Anattapindika is that he felt the community needed to have some kind of
a place to live, where they could set up shop and be able to teach in some kind of settled
way to the community in which he lived, and there was a particularly desirable place out
in the territory that surrounded the town.
He offered to buy it from its owner, and the man said, I wouldn't sell it to you unless
it were paved with gold.
And Anattapindika, according to the story, what would he do?
We're here in the realm of the miraculous and the extraordinary, he paved it with gold.
He spread gold coins across the ground and bought the land for the use of the Buddhist
monastic followers.
And I suppose you could say from that time to this, Anattapindika and other great donors
like him have been models of generosity for the lay supporters of the community.
Now this is pretty obvious in a way, it's been pretty clear from what I've said about
Buddhist monasticism, which couldn't have these monks unless there were a devoted band
of generous lay followers to support them.
But there are a couple of implications of this concept of this practice, this image
that are perhaps worth considering.
First of all, when we talked about the practice of the path last time, I told you that the
five moral precepts of lay people were really rather negative virtues.
Now they're important virtues, it's important not to kill and steal and lie and all those
things, but they involve really restraints on conduct.
They don't allow you to do anything in a sense that positively asserts your concern
for others or for your concern for the community.
Now you could get the impression from that, I suppose, that Buddhism is again largely
a negative tradition in its discipline.
It isn't, of course, and one way we see that, I think, is by considering very seriously
this question of generosity.
To be a good lay person is really to be generous, to donate as much as you can for the sustenance
and support of the sangha and for the preservation of the dharma.
In fact, you could probably say, I think this would be true, the generosity is in some respects
the most basic form of lay meditation because it involves giving up, expressing concern
for others in a way that allows you no longer to focus quite so much on yourself.
So it is, in some ways, a very simple but very effective way to meditate on the basic
fundamental value of no self.
It also is interesting to note here, and this is just more intriguing to ponder, I'd have
to say, that it's one of the duties of a monk to give a lay person an opportunity to give.
You could see how in some kinds of situations you might caricature this as being with the
image of a greedy monk who's constantly out asking for donations.
There's some monks really who look like this in many situations, but the truth is they're
acting out another important aspect of the Buddhist ideal.
A lay person has the duty to give, how can a lay person give if there isn't a monk who
is there at the door humbly receiving the donation that a lay person has to offer.
So in this complicated system of a Buddhist institutional life, I suppose you could say
it's as important to receive as it is to give, to give others the opportunity to make the
merit and to express their generosity by supporting the monastic community that you represent.
So Anantapindika represents this important Buddhist ideal, the ideal of a generous lay
donor or dhanapati.
Another type of person we should consider is the nun, the organization of nuns, the community
of nuns who are a significant important part of this early Buddhist community.
The story about the formation of the community of nuns I think to our eyes these days is
somewhat problematic, but I'll tell it to you anyway and we can comment on it, ponder
it together.
The Buddha's aunt Mahaprajapati asked one of the Buddha's trusted followers if he would
be willing to ordain her as a nun.
Up until this time he had only ordained men in his monastic organization.
The Buddha initially refused and she pressed him again and again and finally he agreed
to do it.
But with a couple of restrictive stipulations, one was that the nuns would have to abide
by an additional series of regulations over and above the regulations that applied to
the monks and another stipulation, perhaps troubling to us, was that even the most senior
nun would be junior to the most junior monk.
The monastic system is hierarchical based on age and this meant that even the most senior
nun would rank in the hierarchical system lower than the most newly ordained monk.
Now this tradition of nuns thrived in the early community and was an important part
of the expansion of Buddhism on into Southeast Asia and into the rest of the world.
There are now active communities of nuns, particularly in China, but the traditional
practice of Buddhist nuns has died out now in Southeast Asia, although there are in some
places attempts to reestablish that lineage.
So if you want to study Buddhist nuns, it's probably easiest to look at that community
in a traditional Chinese context such as Taiwan or in Tibet where Buddhist nuns are active
as well.
What should we make about these additional stipulations that the Buddha imposed on this
early community of nuns?
Was he doing a good thing for Mahaprajapati by establishing this kind of community?
I suppose it's difficult for us to judge, really, a historical phenomenon that operated
or that developed in a time and in a context very different from our own, but I think we
should probably say two things.
One is that in its time, it seems this was quite radical to open up the possibility of
renunciation in a formal context to women.
So the possibility of monasticism for women has been an important part of the Buddhist
community and it represents in a significant way, I think, a commitment to the possibility
of nirvana and as it were, full liberation for women within the community itself.
So it's important not to caricature the early Buddhist tradition in any way as derogatory
or diminishing the ability of women to achieve enlightenment or awakening in the same way
that the Buddha himself achieved it.
But it is true, of course, that there have been these additional restrictions on the status
that nuns can acquire in the Buddhist community that reflect, I suspect, we would have to
say in some way the restrictions on the behavior and the status of women in the context, the
time in which these regulations were made.
In any case, nuns were an important part of the early community and the monastic practice
of women continues to be significant in the Buddhist community today.
Now the early community began as a group of wanderers, of course, but it soon evolved
a settled pattern of life, at least during a portion of the year.
In northern India, there is a rainy season that arrives during the months of June or
July, the monsoon.
And it makes the roads, especially, of course, in fourth century BC, India, impassable for
a group of wandering monks.
It's kind of hard to go out on these muddy roads and really do the kind of wandering
that you would normally expect to do.
So it's important for these monks to find a place where they could settle down during
the rainy season for what's called the rain retreat.
Sometimes in the very early texts, they went and said that they went and stayed in caves
or even at the base of a big tree.
But eventually, especially with supporters like Anatapindika around, it was possible
for them to set up established regular dwelling places where they could live during the rainy
season.
These originally were temporary places.
They then get up and wander around for the rest of the year and then come back to these
places the next year for the rains.
But of course, as the community became more complex and more sophisticated, these evolved
into regular, settled monastic communities known as viharas, communities in which monks
lived all year round and lived an organized and sophisticated life of a group of monastic
specialists.
This monastic practice or this monastic institution has, for good or ill, and I think largely
for good, been the bearer of Buddhist civilization really from that time to the present.
Monasteries have been particularly important, as you may well know, in Tibet.
In fact, one of the best places to go to see traditional monastic practice in action would
be in one of the great monasteries in Lhasa or in central Tibet.
But monastic practice is important in China, Japan, and of course throughout Southeast
Asia.
In its heyday, say, around the year six or seven hundred of the common era in India,
the great Buddhist monasteries were extraordinarily sophisticated and complex centers of learning.
They were really like modern universities, like what universities are for us today, and
they taught not just religious discipline and religious ritual, but a lot of the secular
disciplines, literature and the arts, medicine, and so on, that were part of the sophisticated
and intellectual life of the communities that they were part of.
Now that was, I think, probably something that you would have to mark up on the positive
side of the ledger.
These monasteries really permitted the development of a kind of sophisticated Buddhist civilization
that would have been difficult without them, simply among a small band of wanderers, but
also, strangely enough, made the Buddhist community vulnerable to persecution because
if these monasteries were really the major centers of Buddhist life, if public support
for the monasteries began to wane, or if in more problematic circumstances, you had a
group of invaders coming in whose job, or who took their job, to be the suppression of
practice of monasticism like this, they were extremely vulnerable to persecution.
And that eventually is what happened in India.
During the 11th and 12th centuries, there were a series of invasions that swept across
northern India from Afghanistan and devastated many of the sophisticated cultural institutions
in northern India, and one of the major focal points of persecution was this group of monasteries
strung down along the Ganges basin and on into the region that is now Bihar and Bengal.
And when they were suppressed, when they were burned and destroyed and the monks were dispersed,
it was very difficult for Buddhism to regenerate in India.
So one of the ironies of Buddhist history is that Buddhism has virtually died out, or
did virtually die out in that time, in the land of its origin in India.
Do at least in part to the vulnerability of these sophisticated monastic institutions.
Now as you trace the history of this community after the Buddha's death and on into that
challenging time when the Buddha was no longer around to guide the early community, one of
the things, one of the issues that you need to focus on is the problem of authority.
When he was alive, obviously, if you had a dispute you could go to him and he would
sort the dispute out for you and give you if necessary a new regulation to deal with
whatever the issue was at hand.
In his absence, where do you turn?
Where do you go to settle any kind of dispute?
Early in the day, shortly after the Buddha died, the community banded together and called
what's called the First Buddhist Council to recite his teaching and to codify his teaching,
to recall it and to codify it so that the Dharma itself, the teaching itself could be used
to resolve disputes.
Now at this gathering at the First Buddhist Council, a disciple by the name of Ananda
who was the Buddha's trusty sidekick and the person who knew him best, who was most
present with him during many of his teaching situations, recited the Buddha's doctrine,
his doctrinal teachings, and these became what's known as the Sutta Pitaka, the basket
of doctrinal discourses, the collection of Buddhist doctrine.
Another monk by the name of Upali recited the Buddha's rules and regulations.
These became the Vinaya Pitaka, or the basket of discipline.
And then eventually later, not right at the very beginning, another basket was added to
this group of texts called the Abhidhamma that included a body of sophisticated reflection
on the categories of the Dharma.
These three together constitute the three baskets of Buddhist teaching.
It's common to call these three baskets a canon of Buddhist scripture, although they
were actually not written down for several centuries after the Buddha's death.
So these constitute the scriptural corpus of the Buddhist tradition.
And they are, as you might well imagine, quite extensive.
If I stacked them up on my rather small podium, they would fall off the ends.
So the Buddhist tradition became a scriptural tradition, and we'll see as time goes on in
Tibet, China, and Japan, one of the most important things to do as you confront a new situation,
in many cases, is to generate a new scripture, or if barring that to generate some new commentary
and new explanation of older scripture.
What are the contents of the Buddhist scriptures?
Well, traditional discourses of the Buddha begin with a formula that is clearly drawn
from the oral tradition.
They always start out, thus have I heard.
At one time the Buddha was dwelling in such and such a place, and he said such and such
a thing.
So they reflect, especially in the early suttas, this original oral matrix in which the Buddhist
tradition was presented.
The old discourses of the Buddha often have a very simple and down-to-earth style that
a lot of people find quite attractive, and they present what I think you would have to
call is a very pragmatic approach to religious truth.
They're concerned about experience, and what will be confirmed in experience, not about
spinning out all sorts of doctrinal distinctions.
The discourse on the turning of the wheel of the Dhamma, for example, a discourse that
I mentioned when we were talking about the Four Noble Truths, starts out simply by commenting
on the middle path, O bhikkhus, O monks, these two extremes ought not to be practiced
by those who have gone forth from the household life.
What are these two?
There's devotion to the indulgence of the senses, which is low and common.
And there is devotion to self-mortification, which is painful and unworthy.
Using these two extremes, the Buddha has realized the middle path.
It gives vision, it gives knowledge, and it leads to calm, to insight, to awakening,
to nibbana, and he goes on from there, of course, to give the outline of the Four Noble
Truths.
And one of the simplest of the early sermons, and in my view I think one of the most intriguing,
and precisely because it seems on the face of it to be so simple and so one-dimensional,
is called the fire sermon.
The Buddha starts out and says this, bhikkhus, everything is burning, everything is burning.
And what is it that is burning?
Bhikkhus, the eye is burning, visible forms are burning, visual consciousness is burning,
and so on.
It goes through all of the other senses, burning with what?
Burning with the fire of lust, with the fire of hate, and the fire of delusion.
He goes on then and says each of these things about other categories of Buddhist experience.
Now what I like about this is, I suppose, partly the echo that it produces for me of
a good sermon.
I don't know if any of you turn on the TV on Sunday morning and just flip through the
channels to see who happens to be preaching that day and listen to the cadence of a good
preacher's voice.
Sometimes preaching is best when it is simplest, and it has a certain kind of rhythmic cadence
that repeats the same formula again and again and applies it to different aspects of experience.
Now part of that is an artifact, obviously, of the oral nature of preaching.
It's one of the places in our culture where you can still really hear the oral medium,
the human voice at work conveying emotion and truth.
This early sermon is like that.
I think it grows out of an oral setting and it conveys its experience with the same kind
of repetitive quality that you hear in a good sermon.
Another story that is very important for the self-understanding of Buddhists in the modern
world is the story of a man named Malunkya Putta.
It's called the story of Malunkya Putta and the Arrow.
Story goes like this, Malunkya Putta, a possible convert to the Buddha's Dharma, comes to
the Buddha and he says, well, you know, Buddha, I really kind of like some of the stuff you're
saying, but you know you haven't answered all the questions for me that I want to have
answered.
So if you can tell me, and he lists a series of ten questions, is the world eternal or
not?
Does it have an origin or not?
Is the Buddha going to survive after death or not?
If you can answer all those questions for me, then I'll be a convert and join your community.
And the Buddha says, well, Malunkya Putta, you know, you ask me these questions and you
kind of remind me of a guy who's just been shot with a poisoned arrow.
And you're lying there on the ground, somebody walks up and offers to pull the arrow out
and you say, wait, wait, wait a minute.
Don't pull out that arrow.
I want to know first of all, who shot it?
What cast did that person belong to?
What kind of bow did he use?
What feather is used to guide the arrow and who made the arrow?
And when you tell me the answer to all of those questions, then I'll let you pull the
arrow out.
I don't remember exactly how Malunkya Putta responds to this, but the story in the end
I suppose is being spoken to us as much as to Malunkya Putta.
It's a way of saying, don't be concerned about a lot of doctrinal issues that have to do
particularly with the origin of things.
What we're concerned about here in the Buddhist tradition is the pragmatic removal of suffering.
We want to get that arrow out and not speculate too much about where the arrow came from.
We need to know something about its origin in order to remove it fine, but otherwise
let's focus on the pragmatic issue of removing human suffering.
You also find that the tradition is expressed in very simple and memorable verses as you
would expect in an oral tradition.
Proverbs are one of the ways, of course, that traditional teachings are conveyed religiously,
especially in an oral tradition like this.
I'll read you a couple of them just to give you a flavor for what these proverbs sound
like.
There's a text called the Dhammapada, or the words of the teaching, one of the very early
collections of the Buddha's spoken teaching.
Not to do any evil, to cultivate good, and to purify one's mind.
This is the teaching of the Buddhas.
So simple.
I can hear it being spoken to me by Buddhist monks in Sri Lanka and in Thailand.
What is the Buddha's teaching?
Don't do evil.
Do good and purify your mind.
Now it seems extremely simple, and I suppose if somebody told you, well, what's my teaching?
Don't do evil, do good, well, it's hard to disagree with that.
But notice this little added bit at the end, also purify your mind.
That's Buddhist.
That's the Buddha speaking.
You've got to find some way to purify the mind of ignorance and desire, and then you
can really strike at the root of issues of evil and good.
So in its simplicity, it also conveys a distinctive message that tells us something about this
early community.
Another proverb like this, you are your own protector.
What other protector can there be with yourself fully controlled?
You obtain a protection that is hard to obtain.
Another statement, very simple.
We know that Buddhists are self-reliant.
We know they're concerned about achieving nirvana for themselves and not depending on
others.
Now this seems simply to be an affirmation of that.
This word protector has a little hook in it.
It's also the word that you can use to refer to God.
So the Buddha is saying here, you are your own God.
You are your own God.
What other God can there be with yourself fully controlled?
You obtain a protection that is hard to obtain.
Strong teaching stands the Buddhist tradition up in opposition to much of what was happening
in Hindu life at that time.
So you get a flavor here, even in the simplicity of the teaching of some of the distinctive
aspects of the teaching of the Buddha.
Now I should close by mentioning one more important institutional development in the
history of this early community.
This is somewhat problematic to interpret, but it is important for our own consideration
of Buddhist history.
It's called the Second Buddhist Council.
And according to some accounts, it took place about 100 years after the Buddha's death.
And it was staged in response, held in response to an incipient sectarian split within the
Sangha.
When one group, it seems, wanted to overturn and revise some of the basic stipulations
of the Buddhist discipline.
Sometimes the opposing party is caricatured in a way that seems to attack its moral standing.
But at the core of the dispute seems to be some kind of a disagreement about the use
of gold and silver and in the carrying of condiments from one day to the next.
Some people thought you should be able to adjust the discipline to make this possible.
And some thought that you had to stick strictly according to the traditional discipline.
Now out of this split came two parties, the Staviravadas, or the elder, the doctrine of
the elders, who were the conservative party, and the Mahasangakas, or the great community
party that were the liberals.
They split and didn't recognize each other's interpretation of the discipline.
Out of this split came eventually 18 separate schools of traditional Buddhism and began
the process of sectarian division that led eventually to the split between the Mahayana
and the traditional forms of discipline that we'll discuss when we come to the Mahayana
in a later lecture.
