If I asked many of you how you first came in contact with Buddhism and how you began
to develop some kind of an impression of the tradition, I suspect that for many of you,
your first contact with this great formidable religious tradition that we're discussing
in these lectures would be through Buddhist art.
Oftentimes I see in the offices of people who are not particularly religious and don't
know very much even about the Buddhist tradition or about Asian civilization, little images
of the Buddha, sometimes the fat little images that you see from China, sometimes the more
rarefied and more elegant images that come from India, whatever kind they are, they often
seem to express to some people, even if they don't know very much about Buddhism, something
that's important about this religious tradition and are, for that reason, I suppose, an object
that would be attractive to put on your desk or in your apartment or in your room.
So our job, it seems to me, as we work our way through many of the different kinds of
historical expressions of the Buddhist tradition and of Buddhist values would be to comment
a bit on this development, this tradition of Buddhist art, so that we can understand
how Buddhists have expressed the Buddha through visual media, how these images have functioned
in Buddhist life, and understand something about some of the different types of images
so that we can begin to recognize them when we encounter them in museums or in the apartments
or offices of friends or associates.
Now if we look back historically, the very earliest representations of the Buddha in
the Buddhist tradition, we find not statues or images of the Buddha, but what I think
you would have to call shrines, these holy places that are connected in one way or another
with the presence of the Buddha.
The Pali word for a shrine is chitya, the Sanskrit word is chitya, and it means simply
a holy place that's associated in one way or another with this powerful and influential
figure.
The earliest of these shrines contained relics of the Buddha's cremation, and later ones
were associated in one way or another with events or objects that were connected with
the Buddha's life.
Now in the early shrines, these ones that were established, we imagine shortly after
the death of the Buddha, the relics of the Buddha's cremation were taken to funerary
mounds, big solid round mounds that had a square structure on the top, and then a series
of parasols that extended up from the top of that square structure.
The relic of the Buddha's cremation was put inside that square structure at the top of
the mound, and then around the mound, very often, not in every case, but very often,
there was a railing that seemed to delimit this space as a sacred space.
Now as time went on, the relics of the original cremation of the Buddha were taken out according
to Buddha's tradition and re-divided and further distributed, so what was originally
a set of only about six different holy places became a vast perfusion of places associated
in one way or another with the relics that lingered from the Buddha's cremation.
But this wasn't the only option.
There also were objects that the Buddha owned in one way or another.
I mentioned in a previous lecture that important shrine of the Buddha's begging bowl in Peshawar
up on the border between Pakistan and Afghanistan.
There were other shrines like that too in the early centuries after the Buddha's death,
associated with objects that were part of his life, and a common form of shrine similar
to these shrines of the Buddha's relics and also of the Buddha's possessions is the shrine
associated with the Buddha's footprints.
You can imagine once the storytelling capacity of this early community began to elaborate
itself that you could find footprints just about anywhere in the ripples in the stones
on the bed of a stream, in the indentation in the rock on the top of a mountain, and
all sorts of stories could be spun out to explain how the Buddha might have traveled
through that spot or landed there and making some remarkable visit to the heavens or whatever
it was.
So Buddha's footprints are found very commonly in the Buddhist world and function as shrines
in this early sense.
How did they work in Buddhist devotion?
One of the things that these shrines made possible was the early Buddhist tradition
of pilgrimage.
Some of the early reliquary mounds were set up in places that were associated with particularly
important events in the Buddha's life, like the Great Reliquary Mound at Sarnat near the
deer park where the Buddha gave his first sermon.
There also are other reliquary mounds associated with other places that were important in the
lifetime of the Buddha.
People went around to these pilgrimage spots, paid the mommage, venerated the memory of
the Buddha in these places, and also at the same time visited many other important shrines
that are connected to these larger shrines.
I sometimes think that the tradition of the biography of the Buddha, which grew up rather
late in Buddhist history, is really a collection of the great stories that began to elaborate
themselves at all of these pilgrimage places in Northern India that were associated in one
way or another with events in the Buddha's life.
When you visited a pilgrimage site like this or came into the presence of one of these shrines
associated with the Buddha in some fashion, you engaged in what we would call an action
of worship.
It's important, I think, for us as observers, students of the Buddhist tradition, to be
aware to some degree of the vocabulary of Buddhist worship, how you would actually go
about worshipping at a Buddhist shrine.
The Indian word for worship is puja, and in many respects Buddhist worship is very similar
to the worship you would find of an image in the Hindu tradition, or for that matter,
in Sikhism or in Jainism or one of the other religious traditions of India.
You make offerings to the image, fruit, flowers, incense, very often, sometimes a flame,
a candle.
In Southeast Asia, one of the most important things you can do for many images is to take
in just a little bit of gold leaf and add it to the image.
The images themselves are already gilded in many cases, but you can go in and simply add
another layer to the gilding of the image.
It's a way of making an offering to the image and, in a sense, worshipping it in the classic
vocabulary of Indian worship.
Another thing that's important to do at an image is simply to see it.
This is where the worship of an image begins to cross the line for us into the aesthetic
contemplation of an image.
In classical Indian worship, one of the things that you do is, as we say in English, to take
the darshan of an image.
The word darshan means simply to see.
You go to the image, you look at it, very often its eyes are quite striking, and you
get the sensation that it's looking at you, and some important emotional connection is
established by this visual relationship between you and the image.
If you ever get a chance to travel in India, one of the things that you might do to open
yourself up to this way of relating to an Indian image would be to go to a Hindu shrine.
It's difficult to do this at Buddhist shrines, at least in India these days, because there
are very few of them that are active and actively in operation.
But to go to a Hindu shrine at the beginning of the worship process, often the image sits
in an enclosed area right in the center of the temple, and there's a curtain over the
place where the image, the central image resides, and in that enclosed area there would be a
group of Brahmins performing some rituals, and as you come up you don't know very much
about it.
It looks a little mysterious, and you hear some drumming and some chanting, and you
can smell the smell of incense beginning to waft out of the holy of holies in the center
of the temple.
And then at least, as I've experienced it in a few Hindu temples, there's a moment when
all of a sudden there's a burst of drumming, sometimes with a little dummeroo drum, and
the bell rings, and somebody pulls the curtain aside, and they're staring at you as this
remarkable image, and you really feel the hair stand up on the back of your neck.
You feel like you are, in some visual sense, face to face with some kind of manifestation
of ultimate reality.
It's a very strong experience of vision, and it's not quite comparable to anything that
I can think of in Western religious traditions that might be closer to home for many of you.
Perhaps a good example might be the Greek Orthodox worship of icons, where the visual
connection with the image is really the central thing.
It's not simply that you're contemplating a vision of a saint in some aesthetic sense.
You're looking through the icon as a mirror, or as a window into ultimate reality.
There's an element of that that takes place in the Hindu and Buddhist traditions.
This is part of the Buddhist contemplation of an image.
Now when lay people go to an image and make offerings to it, or for that matter take the
darshan of the image, their principal goal would be to make merit.
That is to perform good karma, to accumulate good karma, so it'd be possible for them to
have a better rebirth in a future life.
And often when you see the way Buddhist images are used in our world, it is clear that something
like this is going on.
There's a Thai restaurant in our neighborhood at Boston University, for example, just up
Commonwealth Avenue from the classroom building where I normally teach.
It's a charming, delightful, but fairly typical Thai restaurant, and in the back of the restaurant
there's a small altar with an image of the Buddha, and flowers, and incense, and so on
have been placed there.
My sense, even though I've never talked to the owners of the restaurant about why it's
placed there in the restaurant as it is, is that of course it's a gesture of respect to
the Buddha.
But it also, quite seriously, is a way of invoking the Buddha's aid, making an offering
to the Buddha to invoke in some way the power of the Buddha to prosper in the business of
serving Thai cuisine to the inhabitants of Commonwealth Avenue.
So the vocabulary of worship is connected with prosperity and good luck, not merely
with the pursuit of nirvana.
Normally speaking, though, a monk or a nun would not use the shrines in this way.
They would use the shrines as a focus of meditation to be reminded of the Buddha's teaching in
order to prosper themselves on the way to nirvana, to pursue nirvana and be reminded of the things
that they need to do in their own meditation and in their own practice to achieve nirvana
as the Buddha did in his own experience.
So the distinction between the layperson's use of image and the monk or nun's use of
an image is like the distinction between the form body and the dharma body.
The layperson worships the form body to get good karma, to get merit.
The monk or nun meditate on the image or on the shrine in order to understand the Buddha's
dharma and appropriate it in their own experience.
But actually the practice of laypeople and monks or nuns is more complicated than that
and doesn't fall so easily into such a simple distinction because the laypeople often use
the shrine clearly to meditate on the Buddha's teaching.
It's not just a way of gaining merit, but it's a way of reminding themselves of what
the Buddha teaches them about their own life.
Remember reading a story about a Thai businessman in Bangkok who was wearing a particular image
of the Buddha around his neck and somebody asked him why he did that and he said, well,
of course it's good luck, it brings me prosperity in my business, but when he was pressed somebody
asked him, well, how does it bring prosperity to you?
The man said, well, it's because it reminds me that I should observe the five precepts
and by observing the five precepts I can follow the example of the Buddha and that will help
me prosper in this life.
So the image teaches him something about the Buddha dharma while he also pays homage to
it as an image and I think it's also true to say historically and practically speaking
that monks or nuns are not at all averse to gaining merit in certain kinds of situations
and one obvious reason for this is that not all monks or nuns are going to achieve nirvana
in this life.
They're part of a long process that will lead perhaps to nirvana somewhere down the road
and so it's not totally inappropriate to act for the purposes of merit making in their
ordinary, the ordinary flow of life even though it's not a part, you might say, of the vocabulary
of monastic practice.
Now another question you might ask about these shrines, which we're really treating in a
way as typical Buddhist objects of worship, let's ask another question about it, often
is troubling to people who come from a Western culture and see Buddhists worshiping it and
image or a shrine of the Buddha somewhere in the Buddhist world.
In what sense do these images represent the Buddha?
Is the Buddha present in that image?
Is he there?
Is the image the Buddha himself?
Does the image in some way contain the power of the Buddha?
For Hindus the answer to this question would be relatively easy because as part of Hindu
worship the deity is called in to become present in the image so that you can say I think quite
appropriately in many Hindu settings that when you worship an image of a god like Shiva
or Krishna or Vishnu that you are worshiping the Shiva or Krishna or Vishnu that is present
in that image, but in a Buddhist case strictly speaking the Buddha has achieved nirvana and
is no longer available, is no longer present in that image.
So the image stands in a somewhat more complex and more sophisticated relationship to the
Buddha himself.
How does that relationship take place?
Well it's understood historically that when the Buddha died he left behind in his relics
and in the places that he touched in the objects that he used a certain power.
It's called in Sanskrit Adishtana.
I translate it as sustaining power and it resides in that object in such a way that
can make that object effective for you when you worship it.
So to pay homage to something like the Buddha's begging bowl or to footprints that he left
behind in the landscape of northern India allows you to plug in some way into the lingering
power of the Buddha's presence in that place.
The Buddha himself may be gone, but there's a power left that he has left behind that
you can get access to by engaging in some act of worship.
Now this was made particularly clear to me in an episode that I once observed in the
Dalai Lama's visit to Middlebury College in Vermont.
The Dalai Lama was there of course like a great Buddhist saint perhaps in some respects
like the Buddha himself and he was engaging in a worship service in the chapel.
They said a lot of prayers and gave some sermons and then the Dalai Lama got up from his throne
and he walked out of the chapel and on down the hill to go and have lunch.
There were a group of Tibetan devotees of the Dalai Lama there, it was a small gathering.
They probably could easily have gone up to the Dalai Lama and asked him for a blessing
or asked him for some teaching, but instead it was really struck by this.
Instead they waited until he left and went into the chapel and placed flowers on the
empty chair where the Dalai Lama had been sitting.
It occurred to me that what they were doing at that moment was a lot like the basic vocabulary
of Buddhist worship.
The Buddha is gone, he's in Nirvana, we can't get access to him, we can't invoke his aid,
but he's left behind powerful places where we can worship and we can get access in some
way to the power that he has left behind.
Now you can ask one more thing I suppose, how do you get access to it?
In what sense are you touching the power of the Buddha in that place?
Of course on one level it is physical power that's present, but on another important level
for Buddhists always, it's a power that grows out of your own response to that object in
that place.
So it's a connection, you might say a meditative connection that you make with that place that
reminds you of the Buddha's presence.
So all of that is meant to describe what I think is rather sophisticated and complex
vocabulary of Buddhist worship.
You don't just worship the Buddha in a particular shrine or an image, you get access to his
power in a way that reminds you of the Dharma and helps you embody it to one degree or another
in your own experience.
Now having said that about as it were the vocabulary of Buddhist worship and the establishment
of a tradition of Buddhist shrine making and image making, what are the types of Buddhist
images?
What types of Buddhist images are out there for us to observe?
Some of the earliest images are called an iconic images that represent the Buddha through
symbols, places associated with his life or sometimes simply by his absence.
For example, we often see images of lay people bowing down in devotion to the Bodhi tree
and to the empty throne of the Buddha's awakening.
These images are quite common early in the Buddhist tradition in the early centuries
of the common period, common era, at sites in Andhra Pradesh in south central India.
These are found in many American museums, there's a great cache of these in the British museum
and they may well be very familiar to you if you have studied some of the traditions
of Buddhist art.
You can see similar images on one of the most important early Buddhist monuments, the Stupa
at Sanchi.
In both of these cases, the Buddha would be represented by a symbol or by a place that
the Buddha once occupied but now is absent.
There's a debate about the meaning of these images.
Some scholars say that these images are evidence of a tradition that prohibited representation
of the Buddha in physical form.
Others say that they don't represent the Buddha but represent shrines associated with
the Buddha after his death.
I'm somewhat sympathetic to the second argument because I think many Buddhist shrines do function
as reminders of the Buddha's absence.
But I think if truth be told, if you look at the total, at the whole tradition of these
so-called an iconic images, there are many images that clearly are meant to be representations
of events in the Buddha's life.
So the interpretation of these images is, as yet, shall we say, uncertain.
But they constitute for us an important category of early representation of the Buddha.
Near the beginning of the Common Era, craftsmen began to create images of the Buddha's physical
form to image the Buddha as a physical human being.
These images appeared in a number of distinctive sculptural styles, and I'd like to mention
some of those sculptural styles to you so that you can recognize them when you see them
in museums or you see them in the pages of books.
One of the first is the so-called Matura style, associated with the region of Matura in the
Ganges Basin.
Buddha images in the Matura style often have a large and fleshy body, typical, I think,
of an indigenous Indian way of expressing the form of a human body.
One of the earliest of these images is a seated Buddha from Ishapur in Matura that can be
dated to the first century before the Common Era.
That's a very early Buddha image.
They weren't very common until after the beginning of the Common Era in other areas of India.
This is a flat, stylized image.
It seems in many respects to be extremely simple, almost as if it were a folk image,
but it clearly is the source of a tradition of representing the Buddha in physical form
that then evolved in more elaborate ways later.
Matura is in a Buddha image that is fairly commonly seen in Buddhist literature about
Buddhist art from Abhichatra in Uttar Pradesh that shows a seated image of the Buddha with
his hand up in a gesture of fearlessness, his hand up just above his shoulder conveying
fearlessness to his disciples, and a slight smile on his face as if he were conveying
also by the expression of his face a sense of fearlessness.
This too is a rounded, fleshy figure that feels in some sense like a folk image, although
it's somewhat more sophisticated, considerably more sophisticated, really, than the image
from Ishapur.
It shows a characteristic of Buddha images that I must say I'm always impressed by even
in the most simple type of image.
It seems like all Buddha images to be very firmly grounded on the ground, firmly seated
on its seat, so it's not going to be shaken or rocked from side to side.
And yet there also is a sense of buoyancy in the image as if it somehow floated.
I think to me that's one of the most impressive aspects of the physical representations of
the Buddha.
It's stable, but also in a sense has a quality of buoyancy.
Now another style that you'll see quite commonly is a style associated with Gandhara, a region
on the boundary between Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Here the Buddha images show the influence of Greek craftsmanship, because Alexander
the Great, as you may know, when he invaded the Persian Empire and managed to travel all
the way to the plains of northern India, left behind in Afghanistan a series of Hellenistic
kingdoms that had Greek craftsmen who were enlisted to provide images of the Buddha.
These images show Greek influence in the drapery of the robes, and in what I would call the
muscular anatomical quality of the image itself, you're much more aware in a Gandhara image
of the gracefulness and the strength of the Buddha as a physical being.
You can see lots of different types of Gandhara images representing different stages in the
Buddha's life.
You often see images of the Buddha's victory over Mara, the tempter, or an image that's
quite striking to me of the emaciated Buddha during that austere period before he had undertaken
the middle path.
Images of the Buddha's first sermon in the Gandharan style are often identifiable from
deer that are listening to the Buddha's sermon and from a wheel that symbolizes the Buddha's
teaching, and then you often see some quite striking images of the Buddha's Parinirvana
of the reclining Buddha at the moment of his death.
The Mottara and Gandharan styles came together to create what became eventually the classic
style of Buddhist art.
We know as the Gupta style that appeared in Northern India during the 4th, 5th, and 6th
centuries of the common era.
Buddha images in the Gupta style are more fluid, more graceful, and in a sense more abstract.
The Buddha's body is more slender.
The drapery on his robe is depicted often as a series of fine folds and seems almost
to make a kind of transparent veil over the Buddha's body, and the expression on his face
often is more delicate and refined.
You can often see standing Buddhas in the Gandharan style, quite graceful and impressive
figures I'd have to say, coming from different sites in Northern India, including Mottara.
The greatest of the Gupta images of the Buddha is this image of the seated Buddha teaching
in the deer park in Sarnath, where else, but in the Sarnath museum in Sarnath itself.
This image is one I suspect that many of you have seen, and as you look at it, I think
you might well ask yourself, since it's an image of the Buddha at the moment of teaching,
what it teaches to you, since that aspect of Buddhist sculpture is essential to the
tradition itself, how does that image convey to you the message of the Buddha's Dharma?
This period also produced the monumental Buddha images at Bamiyan in Afghanistan that were
recently destroyed by the Taliban government in Afghanistan.
You see here, I think, not anything like a systematic or thorough account of Buddhist
art that would be difficult for us to do in the time we have, but just some indication
of the different varieties of images, and some indication also of the way these images
have functioned in the life of Buddhists from this time to the present.
We'll have more to say as time goes on about the tradition of Buddhist art in other aspects
of, in other periods in Buddhist history, particularly when we come to the period of the Mahayana.
