Lecture 14 Buddhist Tantra
In the last lecture we took a journey into what you might call the high monastic culture of India.
This was a world of fine intellectual distinctions, sophisticated debate,
as you would expect from the monasteries that for seven or eight hundred years were the bearers of Buddhist culture in India.
In their day, these monasteries were probably as complex and as influential as modern universities are for us today.
But there was much more going on in Indian Buddhism than just the elevated intellectual activity in these monasteries.
On the fringes of Indian civilization, in the unsettled areas at the edge of the forest,
maybe by the roadside in remote rural areas of India,
and in the frightening and impure spaces in the cremation grounds on the edge of major cities,
another vision of Buddhist practice began slowly to emerge.
This vision eventually came to be known as Tantra.
The Tantric version of Buddhism brought about another profound change in Buddhist values.
So our job in this lecture is to try to understand the shape of this new revolution.
Tantric Buddhism began to emerge in India during the sixth century of the common era.
And I use the word emerge because once again, as in the case of the Mahayana,
we don't really know where this began.
Its origins are quite obscure like the Mahayana.
It's traced back to the time of the Buddha.
But if it was available in any way during the lifetime of the Buddha,
it was passed on very much in secrecy for quite a long time
because it only emerged as a full cultural phenomenon in India many centuries
after the lifetime of the Buddha himself.
Tantra is really a pan-Indian phenomenon.
It's found not just in Buddhism but also in Hinduism
and in other Indian religious traditions like Jainism.
There's a recent, very fine collection of sources about Tantra in India
that has recently been published.
And in that text, you can find examples even of Islamic Tantra in India quite remarkably.
So Tantra is a religious tradition that is found across the whole sweep
of the Indian religious landscape.
So Tantric Buddhism shares a lot of important concepts,
symbols, and ritual practices with its Tantric counterparts in other Indian traditions.
As was true with earlier movements like the Mahayana,
Tantric Buddhism produced an extraordinary transformation in Buddhist values.
So the first question that we might ask ourselves about Tantra
is whether this means that Tantra is in some sense a whole new form of Buddhism.
We need to ask that question in detail by looking at Tantra itself,
but it's a perfectly legitimate question to ask right at the very beginning.
Is Tantra brand new? Is it a new form of Buddhism?
Well, not necessarily.
Sometimes people treat the Tantric tradition as a separate vehicle,
alongside the Hinajana or the lesser vehicle and the Mahayana,
the great vehicle that we've talked about in so much detail.
But I think it's more accurate and more helpful for us to think of Tantra
as really an extension of the values of the Mahayana.
I'll present it this way, and you should think about it this way, I think,
as we begin to explore the different ways the Tantric tradition diverges,
and sometimes diverges quite radically from anything that we've seen in the Buddhist tradition previously.
Now, I think the best way for us to start studying Tantra in a substantive way
to begin to look into the question of what Tantra actually is,
is to look at some of the names that people use to refer to the Tantric tradition.
They tell us something about what the tradition itself involves.
They identify important aspects of Tantra, and they help us, to some degree or another,
begin to differentiate it from the earlier traditions that we're already familiar with.
Start with the word Tantra itself. What does that mean?
Well, turns out it's actually pretty mysterious.
It's got several different meanings, and it's hard for us to know exactly which one
is the one that most directly applies to the Tantric tradition, especially in its origin.
The word Tantra originally refers to the warp in a piece of fabric.
The warp is the thread that's laid down on the loom on which you weave the rest of the cloth,
so that a Tantra is a thread that runs through a piece of cloth.
You could, I suppose, think of Tantra as something like the thread on which reality is woven.
Think of the world as a piece of cloth woven with threads.
What is it that holds it together? It is its Tantra, the thread that runs all the way through it.
Somewhat less poetically, but with the same meaning, we could take the word Tantra like the word sutra
to refer to the thread that holds together the leaves of a book in the Indian tradition.
We talked about this, I believe, earlier. If we didn't talk about it earlier, we can talk about it now.
Sutras in India, when they're written, early sutras, of course, were passed on orally,
but sutras, when they were written, were written on palm leaves, narrow, long, hard palm leaves
that were capable of receiving and preserving inscription.
At the end of a palm leaf, there's a hole. Through the hole goes a thread.
The thread is what binds this together, and the thread is sometimes used as a way of designating the text itself.
So Tantra, like the Mahayana and like the earlier tradition, is a textual tradition.
Tantras are texts, and they're passed on in the same way the texts were in the earlier tradition.
The word Tantra can also refer to a lineage of transmission that's passed from a teacher to a student
in a continuous line from generation to the next, from one generation to the next.
The Tantra tradition is concerned with the transmission of teaching from teacher to student.
We'll talk about this in time as we dig more deeply into the tradition.
And Tantra, finally, in other meaning, can mean power.
We were talking in just the last lecture about the Swatantra argument,
the argument that is independently presented in order to defeat an opponent's position.
Swatantra, independent, it operates under its own power.
Tantra, as a word, can mean power.
And this too characterizes the Tantric tradition.
Tantric Buddhism is concerned with ways of cultivating and passing on power in a religious sense.
So the word Tantra has a lot of meanings, and each one of us is a clue to the identity of this new tradition.
Tantra can also be called the Vajrayana, or the vehicle of the diamond or the thunderbolt.
The word Vajra can mean either diamond or thunderbolt.
Why is it called this?
Because the Tantric tradition is meant to produce an experience of awakening that is as hard as a diamond
and as sharp as a thunderbolt in the sense that it slices through the dualities of ordinary consciousness
into an experience of awakening.
Tantra also is quite commonly called the Mantrayana, or the vehicle of mantras.
A mantra is a sacred chant.
Now the word Mantra is an important Indian word and one worth pausing over, I think,
especially because it plays such an important role in the Tantric tradition.
A mantra is a series of syllables that bring about an effect simply by the utterance of the syllables themselves,
not because they necessarily refer to anything or because they communicate some kind of a message,
but simply because the words themselves have power.
That mantra that is used to summon Avalokiteshvara's compassion,
we talked about in discussing the celestial bodhisattvas of the Mahayana,
the mantra was Om Manipadne, whom is a mantra like this.
Those syllables you could conceivably translate into English and interpret the meaning of,
but the meaning is really not important.
What's significant about them is that the words themselves, the syllables themselves, have power.
This is a mantra that Tantric tradition uses mantras quite deliberately and quite extensively in this way.
Now historically, the early Vedic hymns, the hymns that we discussed right at the beginning of our course,
were called mantras because they too were believed to have the power to invoke the gods.
The Tantric tradition uses mantras like that sometimes as magic charms and sometimes as tools of meditation.
I'd like to give you an example of this just so that you have a sense not just of how a mantra operates,
but maybe of what some of the Tantric rituals look like in their mundane form.
An example that I often talk about with my classes at Boston University
is an example of a rain-making ritual that comes from a Tantric text known as the Hey Vajratantra.
I'm going to give you an extemporaneous summary of this ritual for a very practical reason.
The first time I read this ritual from the text itself to a class in Siever Hall at Harvard,
I read very precisely in the way in which you are supposed to read Tantric rituals.
And when I came to the end of it, all the fire alarms went off in the building
and we all had to vacate the classroom.
I don't know if this was related to the way I pronounce the mantras or not,
but ever since then I've been a little wary of the power of this particular text.
I'm going to summarize it to you in the hopes that maybe we won't set all the fire alarms off,
either where I'm speaking or where you're listening.
Now, the rituals described like this, the practitioner, the shaman, the yogi, whoever it is
who's performing this ritual sits down, draws a circle on the ground
and begins to mark out the sacred space of the circle using a lot of ritual colors,
associated with bones, with death.
Black color made by grinding up the bones from the cremation ground,
other kinds of things to designate the space in a certain ritual way.
Into the middle of the circle goes a pot with a snake inside.
Why? Because snakes, especially nagas or cobras, are associated with the control of the rain.
So what you're trying to do in this ritual is to invoke the power of the nagas,
the spirits who control the rain.
And then the tantric specialist begins to say a mantra that sounds something like this.
This is an imprecise version of it in the hopes that we can avoid being in some way overwhelmed by its power.
Sounds like this.
Om.
Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Gautaya, Gautaya.
O Lord of the snakes, make the snakes to tremble.
Om.
Foot.
Swaha.
And if this doesn't bring the rain, the text says, then recite the whole ritual backwards.
And if that doesn't work, then may the snakes' heads split like grapefruit.
Phew.
Good.
We set it, and no fire alarms went off, at least, as far as I'm aware.
This is a very common kind of ritual in the tantric tradition,
in which you use mantras to perform, in this case, quite a mundane task, which is to bring rain.
Mantras are used also more integrally in the quest for enlightenment in ways that we'll talk about in a minute.
Now, all of this is to elaborate a little bit on the names of the tantric tradition,
on the name Tantra, on the name Vajrayana, on the name Mantrayana.
What is the fundamental teaching of the tantras?
What are they trying to convey to us?
Buddhist tantra, I think, was based on what I would call a radical extension of the doctrine of emptiness,
understood as an assertion of non-duality.
So think of tantra to begin with as simply a radical extension of the idea of non-duality,
the overcoming of duality that is related in some way to that doctrine of emptiness that we've been discussing in the Mahayana.
Now, how does the tantra do this? In ways that, for us, I suspect, are quite striking.
First of all, the Buddha, that peaceful old guy that we've seen in so many lovely forms in earlier Buddhist art,
was pictured now in the tantric tradition not as a serene, peaceful, and calm figure.
I can remember just a few lectures ago describing the Buddha seated in meditation and trying to convey to you with my voice how quiet and how calm he was.
Now the Buddha is pictured as a figure who is full of passion and wrath.
He's got skulls around his neck. He holds weapons in his hand.
He has a wild look in his eye and his hair is standing on end and he's trampling on demons.
I wish I could almost body this for you if I could to put the wild look in my eye and look like I'm trampling on a demon.
That's what a Buddha looks like as pictured in the tantric tradition.
Now this image is called a wrathful Buddha. This is like a technical term for us in discussing the Buddha images of the tantric tradition.
Why is the Buddha described this way and depicted this way?
In tantric texts tell us that poisonous emotions like passion and wrath can be removed not by denying them, not by pretending they don't exist,
but by cultivating those emotions and then transmuting them into an experience of awakening.
I'll read a description of this from a tantric text that will tell you a little bit about what I mean.
Those who do not perceive the truth think in terms of samsara and nirvana,
but those who perceive the truth think neither of samsara nor of nirvana.
Discriminating thought is then the great demon that produces the ocean of samsara,
but being free of this discriminating thought the great ones are freed from the bonds of existence.
Just as water, think about this for a minute,
just as water that has gotten into your ear may be removed by water and just as a thorn may be removed by a thorn,
so those who know remove passion by means of passion itself.
Just as a washerman removes the grime from a garment by means of grime,
I'm not sure exactly what the Indian laundry technique is that's being referred to here,
but I think we can get the point.
So the wise man renders himself free of impurity by means of impurity itself.
This understanding of non-duality is represented, I think, quite beautifully
by the image of a woman using a thorn to remove a thorn on the wall of one of the great tantric monuments in India,
the great temple at Kajaraho.
If you ever have a chance to visit India, that's an extraordinary place to visit
on the ordinary tourist route through northern India and gives quite a remarkable visual account of the tantric tradition.
On the side of that temple there's a beautiful woman with her foot raised,
I can't raise it quite as high as she did, picking a thorn out of her foot using another thorn.
Lovely image expresses this fundamental idea in Tantra.
So one of the ways Tantra visualizes non-duality is in the form of a wrathful Buddha.
It also uses another extraordinary image for us, one that we haven't seen at all in the Buddhist tradition previously.
This is the image of awakening as the union of male and female.
These figures are known for us as yab yom images.
The term yab yom comes from a Tibetan word that means male and female or mother and father.
People often, when they see these images for the first time, ask whether they were meant to be taken literally
and to suggest that sexual union is a form of Buddhahood.
Certainly if that's true it's something we haven't discussed before in this tradition.
Turns out this question is difficult to answer because the texts are difficult to interpret.
There's no question in some situations though that a ritual of sexual union played a role in tantric meditation.
But it's much more common for these images to function as symbolic representations of a mind, consciousness,
the consciousness of a meditator and a practitioner who has transcended all dualities including the distinction between the sexes.
Now if you put these together you can see that the tantric tradition symbolizes the union of opposites.
In a series of contrasting pairs that are related in some ways to the fundamental images of the fundamental values of the Mahayana.
First of all, compassion and wisdom.
We said earlier that the mind of enlightenment, the bodhicitta, represented in some way the union of compassion and wisdom.
Compassion is visualized in the tantric tradition as male, wisdom as female.
These two are united in tantric ritual and tantric symbolism but they're symbolically represented by other pairs as well.
One very common pair of ritual implements that's used in the tantric tradition is the pair of the vajra and the bell.
I have these implements with me and can hold one up and attempt to describe it.
The first one is a vajra.
This is the symbol of masculine energy in the tantric tradition.
This vajra that I have in my hand is about I'd say three or four inches long.
It's slender in the middle.
It's more rounded on the ends and at the very end, both ends, it comes to a point.
This is the vajra.
The word means thunderbolt.
It also means diamond.
It's very commonly used in tantric ritual to represent the male aspect of the personality.
I also have a bell.
This represents the female aspect of the personality for reasons that you can probably see.
It too is a beautiful object.
It has a handle on the top that looks a little bit like the end of a vajra.
And the rounded portion of the bell is very beautifully inscribed with designs that once would have been found on the top of a stupa.
I've sat in monasteries in southern India and Tibetan monasteries where the ritual practice of tantra is being done.
And these two objects, the bell and the vajra, are manipulated as part of the ritual in very beautiful ways.
It almost as if the monks were dancing with their hands, representing the relationship between these two aspects of the personality, the male and the female.
There are other pairs as well.
Seaman, blood, representing again male and female.
In the mantras, the consonants are male.
The vowels are female.
In the cosmos, the moon is male.
The sun is female.
In the mind, the subject consciousness itself is male.
The object of consciousness is female.
And in tantric physiology, it's understood that there are two veins that run down the spine that meet at the base of the spine and run up the central vein of the spine to a lotus that sits on the top of the head.
The left vein is male.
The right vein is female.
And when the power of these two veins meet at the base of the spine, it constitutes the union of male and female of wisdom and compassion that makes up the mind of enlightenment.
These two pairs, this system of pairs, was not just used in tantric ritual and art, but it was also used in the practice of tantric meditation.
Now, the last question that I want to ask about tantra, and would like to comment on as we introduce ourselves to this tradition, is whether there was anything that distinguished the practitioners of tantra from the ordinary practitioners of the Buddhist tradition that we are already familiar with from other traditions.
Who were these people?
Who practiced tantra in this form?
Now, the earliest band of tantric practitioners, the earliest bands, were known as siddhas or perfected ones.
We can call them simply saints, as is often done in writing about the tantric tradition.
As you might expect, the stories of the siddhas depict them as people who have rejected the conventions of Indian society in quite a radical way.
They often are described as living in cremation grounds or in some other impure and dangerous place, and participating in rituals that overthrow the norms of conventional behavior.
You can get a taste of their practice from a story of a tantric siddha that I'm particularly fond of.
It's a siddha by the name of Maitri Gupta, or Maitripa in the abbreviated form by which he's often referred to in the tantric tradition.
I like him, I think, because he's a student.
He comes originally from one of the great monastic universities in India, but he had an experience that took him quite radically out of that monastic world.
Where the story goes, traditional story of Maitri Gupta is something like this.
He's a guy up there studying for his exams, let's say, in one of the great monasteries of northeastern India in Bihar or Bengal.
One of the places that was known for its philosophy and for all of its scholastic activity, cramming for an exam.
Great story to tell my students in class at Boston universities.
Up there trying to somehow fit all of that biochemistry that he needs or all of that Indian logic that he needs into his head before the exam the next day.
And in, through the window, flies a tantric messenger known as a dakini, a messenger figure who conveys some sort of a glimpse of enlightenment that shatters his normal perception of his place in the world.
And she says to him something like this, hey, Maitri Gupta, what are you doing, studying in this monastery, studying for those exams?
Where you need to go is down to south India, where you can study with a guy named Mountain Man.
A little different from the kinds of philosophers he was working with in the monastery.
And so Maitri Gupta gets up and blows off all of his exams and heads on down to south India to a remote, rather wild stretch in the Indian subcontinent.
And he finds a guru, finds a teacher named Mountain Man.
And the teacher says, okay, Maitri Gupta, you want to learn about awakening?
Go on out into the woods, find yourself a flat rock and sit there for seven days and don't eat anything until you receive some kind of revelation and then come back and tell me what it is.
So Maitri Gupta goes out into the forest, sits down on the rock and waits.
It's bitten by mosquitoes, his stomach begins to rumble a little bit, but he's got enough discipline and he's gone enough of a distance to be willing to wait.
Finally, near the end of his seven days, out of the forest comes a wild huntress, a woman carrying a knife and a bow and arrow, and she's chasing a wild pig.
And she shoots the pig with the bow, reaches down and slices off a big chunk of meat from its haunch and holds it out to Maitri Gupta and says to him, here Maitri Gupta, eat this.
Eat the flesh, it's emptiness.
Taste the blood, it's the great bliss.
And Maitri Gupta says, well, this is quite a revelatory event.
I think I'll take this verse back and tell it to my teacher.
He goes back to the teacher and he has a rather complex encounter with him that leaves him feeling that he has understood something about the nature of reality that it was not accessible to him in the intellectual practice of his monastery.
And he then went back to the monastery and became not just a great tantric teacher, but also quite a remarkable philosophy, really, brought both of these two traditions together.
And what's striking about this story for us as interpreters of the Indian tradition is, I think, really a couple of different things.
First of all, the tantric tradition, again, is concerned about direct experience and countering reality face to face, as Buddhist meditators and practitioners had been throughout the tradition.
But he encountered it here in what we have been discussing, what we've talked about as being a radical overturning of the ordinary conventional distinctions in life.
Not just between male and female, not just between wrath and a sense of peace or calm, but in this case, the distinction between purity and impurity.
To understand Indian religion, it's actually important to try to grasp how fundamental that distinction is and how much a person like Maitre Gupta, who lived in the rarefied and rather straight-laced world of an Indian monastery,
would have avoided things that were impure, wild animals, bloody pieces of meat, and especially the people who chased after them and hunted them.
To taste that flesh and to drink that blood for him was a violation of one of the most fundamental prohibitions in his monastic life.
So he experienced directly an overturning of an important conventional distinction for him that led him in an experiential sense into an understanding of emptiness and then became the foundation of an important career,
not just as a tantric teacher, but also as a teacher of the classical Mahayana.
Now this story suggests to us how important the teacher is in a tantric tradition.
Maitre Gupta could not have had that experience if he hadn't been there with Mountain Man and had Mountain Man to help enable this process for him.
Why? In a tradition where insight comes by overturning conventional distinctions and where teaching is dangerous and often secret,
it's important to have a teacher to introduce you to the practice.
Without a trustworthy teacher who has been through that process before, you can be a danger to yourself and to others.
This teacher in tantra is called a guru. It's a word I've used several times. It's a common word even in American English.
In Tibetan it's called a lama and it is in the tantric tradition one of the foundations of Buddhist practice.
You can't begin to study tantra without the intervention and the help of a teacher.
We'll move on in the next lecture to talk more about tantric symbolism, but now we have at least in place some of the foundations of this tradition.
