These lectures are part of the Superstar Teachers series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The lectures on these dates are titled The Developing Adult, Biological and Psychosocial
Perspectives Part 1.
The lecturer is Dr. Haran Kachadorian.
Dr. Kachadorian is Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Professor of Human
Biology and Professor of Education at Stanford University.
An honors graduate of the Medical School of the American University of Beirut, he joined
the Stanford faculty in 1966.
Over the past three decades, some 20,000 students have attended his courses.
He has been selected six times Outstanding Professor and Class Day Speaker by Stanford
Seniors.
He received the Richard W. Lyman Award of the Stanford Alumni Association in 1984,
the Outstanding Teacher Award at the Association of Students of Stanford University in 1992,
and the Dinkelspiel Award for Service to Undergraduate Education in 1993.
Lecture 1.
The Concept and Study of Adulthood
The study of adult development is a relatively new field.
By the 18th century, childhood had already become the focus of specific attention in
terms of development and in the ways in which children differed from adults.
In the Middle Ages, children were mainly seen as miniature adults.
They dressed like adults, and they worked and played like adults, of course, to the
extent that they could.
But now, with new ideas of the Enlightenment, children came to be seen as different than
adults, not simply miniature adults.
By the turn of the 20th century, adolescence became a focus of attention.
We were now beginning to think of adolescence as a special phase of life with its own demands,
with its own manifestations.
In the period before the Second World War, there were some investigators who began to
also think of adulthood as another stage of life.
Freud had primarily focused on childhood as the critical period of development.
The die was pretty much cast at that time, and then what happened during the rest of
adulthood was a replay of the themes that had been worked through and set in place during
childhood.
Yet, one of his major followers, Jung, expanded the idea of development going beyond childhood,
beyond adolescence.
In fact, he began to make references to changes that people went through in the middle of
their lives.
Despite these early attempts to encompass the entire lifespan rather than focus in the
early stages, it really was only in the period following the Second World War that social
scientists began to make more specific studies of adult development, of looking at the entire
life cycle.
In this respect, Eric Erickson played a very important role.
He was a psychoanalyst, yet he had this broader conception of life, of looking at life as
a process that unfolded, that development that went on from the moment of birth to the
very end of life.
Today's lecture is going to address the general concept of what adult development is, how
it progresses, how our adults studied in these developmental terms, and what are the sum
of the theories that bring all this information together and try to make sense out of them.
Now, in the rest of this course, we will make the journey through adulthood in four parts.
In part one, we will deal with the transition to adulthood, roughly the decade between age
10 and 20.
In the second part, we will talk about young adulthood, roughly the period between 20 and
40.
Then we will turn to middle adulthood, which will take in the next two decades or so.
And finally, we will address the issues of late adulthood, including the basic process
of aging, which will take us from age 60-65 to the very end of life.
Now, as we progress on this journey, there are a number of important themes that have
to be kept in mind because they have application to no matter where we are in this progressive
journey through life.
First one is that even though we are going to be focusing on some specific aspect of adulthood,
as I just described, it is impossible to understand any particular phase of life in isolation.
We have to understand each phase of life as part of a general life cycle pattern.
It is impossible to know what exactly happens and why, let's say, during young adulthood
without knowing something about what happened earlier and without knowing what we can reasonably
anticipate to happen later.
So all pieces have to be seen as part of the whole.
Next, every developmental phase is shaped by three sets of determining factors, biological,
psychological, social.
And I'm going to reiterate this over and over.
Hence, we will look at everything from this multidisciplinary perspective.
Third, there is at this point no single theory, no comprehensive overarching theory that's
generally acceptable, which would sort of explain, not just describe, but explain why,
what happens and what are the details sort of underneath the surface manifestations of
what we see people going through, which will then give us a better grasp of what it means
to develop, what it means to be an adult.
But there are interesting theories that address one or another aspect of this process, and
we are going to pick and choose whichever theory makes the most sense with regard to
a specific issue, and that is what we will bring in.
Finally, we have to re-emphasize the fact that every human being is ultimately unique.
Yet if we are going to talk about groups of individuals, we have to generalize.
But when we generalize, it will be impossible to say anything virtually that will apply
to everyone.
So while it is my hope that during much of this course, all of us will be able to recognize
our own selves in what we hear, it will be virtually impossible for us to see ourselves
in what is being discussed, each and every step of the way.
Next, let's turn to several basic principles that once again apply to the entire lifespan
and help us understand the process of development.
The first of these is time.
When we say time, we typically will think of clocks or our glasses or more sophisticated
methods of measuring time, yet that is not to say that we understand through these means
what time is.
The clock will tell you what time it is, but the clock doesn't tell us what time is as
an entity.
And people have thought about and been puzzled by this notion of time for a long period.
Throughout history, all thinking people have been fascinated, in fact, by this notion of
time, which is a maddeningly complex idea.
In ancient cultures, in different times, the way of understanding time, the way of explaining
time was often through fascinating metaphors.
For example, ancient Greeks imagined that there was a river that went around the perimeter
of the world.
This was called Okeanos, from which we derived the term for ocean.
And so this represented the endless circle of time, no beginning, no end.
We just went round and round.
Another symbol of time was the god Kronos, who devoured his children.
And time also devours everything.
You go to Asia and you have this fascinating image whereby a bird every thousand years
flies over the Himalayas and brushes the rock with a feather.
And doing this over and over and over again, ultimately, the huge mountain is worn down
and when that has happened, one day of eternity has passed.
In the Christian tradition, in the Western tradition, time begins with the creation
of the world, as accounted in the book of Genesis, and is going to come to an end on
the day of the last judgment.
Yet in Buddhism, time has no beginning and end.
It is, as scientists now also believe, simply there we cannot talk intelligently about
when it began, when it's going to end, so it is simply like Okeanos is going on and
on indefinitely.
Furthermore, modern conception of time, particularly through the theory of relativity and
similar concepts, are so complicated that for most of us it is virtually impossible
to grasp in a real sense.
When we go beyond these historical explanations of time, we come to the way in which scientists,
social scientists, behavioral scientists and clinicians who study development, who study
in this case the adult life cycle, use time in several three specific ways.
And this is what we need to understand because we are going to come back to these concepts
over and over again.
First dimension of time is chronological age.
That simply says that somebody is so many years old.
Now all societies, including ours, is age graded.
That is to say people are classified as it were according to their ages or age ranges
and where you are on this scheme has a great deal to do with what you can do and what you
cannot do or who you are and who you are not.
So your status to some extent is very much determined by your chronological age.
To say that somebody so many years old tells us a good deal about the station of that individual
in life.
But it can also be misleading.
It can be not very precise, particularly during those periods of rapid transition.
Napoleon was a captain at the age of 16.
Now somebody who is 16-year-old in our society is called an adolescent.
We don't consider a 16-year-old an adult.
Now does this mean that Napoleon was an adolescent captain?
You see, that doesn't make any sense.
Because at the time that Napoleon was 16, you could be 16 and a fully fledged adult
as he must have been otherwise he would not have been a captain in the army.
So chronological time as useful is only one dimension of time and the second is the concept
of social time.
Now it turns out that most of us have some idea collectively and individually of what
is the proper schedule for the main landmark events in life.
For instance, typically we expect somebody in our culture, in middle class society at
least, to graduate from high school at 18, give or take a year or two, to graduate from
college at 21, and so on.
Or to get married during a certain age age, to have the first child and the last child
during a certain age range.
So the schedule, this social clock basically is there, it's not written down anywhere,
but we seem to be aware of it and are constantly checking ourselves against it to make sure
that we are on schedule and not behind or ahead of schedule.
Finally, there is historical time, which essentially says that a group of people who may be subjected
to a major common experience, such as going through the Second World War or being a teenager
during the Great Depression, are going to be marked by these experiences as a generation.
Therefore, if years later we study a group of individuals between the age of 50 and 60,
it becomes difficult to tell whether or not their characteristics are a function of being
in that age group, or are they showing the residues of having lived through those experiences
that we encountered earlier.
This being a generation being marked by some important historical era or set of events
is referred to as the cohort effect.
So much for time.
Now, let us look at a second concept, seemingly contradictory, of constancy and change.
If you go back and look at your photographs of your childhood and sort of do it in a systematic
way as you grow from it being a baby to being an adult, you see that on the one hand it
is the same individual, it's you.
So fundamentally, you don't change, yet obviously when you are a baby and when you are a teenager
or an adult, you are very different human beings.
So the notion of constancy and change has to be kept in mind.
Things are always changing, yet at the same time remaining the same.
When we talk about change, we have to differentiate between change in the sense of a random event
or an event that does not have any sort of predetermined fundamental scheduled meaning.
If I get a haircut, I will look different, but that is not a developmental change.
When we use the term development, we are typically referring to something that has usually a
biological basis.
It is sort of programmed in us, which unfolds in a sociocultural context.
Development in that sense is a much more fundamental notion and has a certain universality about
him, a certain predictability about it, and typically when we talk about development,
this is the type of change that we are going to discuss, even though we will see some theorists
do not think this is an important issue, but they are not in the majority.
Let's talk now a little bit further into the issue of constancy.
In what way are we constant?
Well once you can stop growing at the end of adolescence, you attain a certain height,
that's the height you are pretty much going to keep for the rest of your life, even though
in the later years we may shrink a little bit as it were, which we will discuss later.
But if you become a tall person, you are not going to become a short person as a result
of aging.
We assume that once we have reached the full development of our intelligence, our cognitive
development, as long as we don't get sick and as long as perhaps we do not yield to
the ravages of time in very late in life, we basically are going to retain that.
Similarly, our ability to test on vocational tests to the extent that they are valid, our
personality traits, etc.
These are the kinds of things that, again, depending on the theorists, can be said to
be constant.
Now, we will return to this issue at the very end of this course, because the question of
whether personality remains constant throughout our life or not is one of the key issues
and has been a source of debate over the past century and is by no means settled.
Let's now move on to the next issue of uniformity and variance.
You look at a pair of twins, identical twins, and they look exactly the same.
Practically no variance, especially if we dress them together, cut their heads together,
and make them look the same, which enhances further the physical similarity.
In the other extreme, we look at a dwarf and a giant, two adults, two human adults, yet
they look strikingly and drastically different from each other.
Now, what accounts for these similarities and differences?
Of course, at one level, the change or rather the similarity that you see is very much a
result of genes.
Genes look alike because they have exactly the same genetic endowment if they are identical
twins.
But it is not simply a question of appearance that we are concerned with here, and so turning
more to issues of personality and what makes us behave a certain way we do, we also invoke
the idea of biology and genetics in helping explain, at least to some extent, what is
it that determines the consistency in our personality and behavior.
There have been studies done now that show that things like anxiety, friendliness, novel
experience, life satisfaction remains fairly constant throughout life.
In fact, we are now tracing back the predisposition to shyness to ages one and two, and there
may be a 50 percent variance based on biological factors that may explain leadership, risk
avoidance, etc.
These are simply nibbles we are taking at this issue, and we will discuss these considerations
more as we move along.
Now, biology, I must hasten to add, practically never explains everything by itself.
And there is a very important component of the social environment, reading, and the way
that we bring children up, which we refer to as socialization, which also is a very
important determinant of similarity and variance.
How we raise children, what kind of child reading practice we have, are of tremendous
importance in what we end up with.
Of course, this issue of yes, both are important, reading is important, and biology is important,
but which is more important is one of those unanswerable questions, because not only is
the evidence never completely convincing, there are also very strong ideological commitments
to one or another of these kinds of seeing, looking at the world, because how you look
at the world also makes a lot of difference on what prescriptions you make about practical
issues, public policy, and therefore these debates both are carried out simultaneously
at sort of a lofty intellectual level, as well as a far less lofty political level.
What about the various methods by which we study behavior?
We will not get into too much technical detail, but it's important to get a good sense of
how our people studied, because when we get into the descriptions of data, descriptions
of what we have learned, it's important to know how did the social scientists figure
this out.
Now, one important way of comparing different studies is to look at the way that they manipulate
important factors like age, the cohort, in other words, the year they were born in, and
for example, in the cross-sectional method of study, what you do is you take two groups
of people, let's say a group age 20, another group age 60, and you give them tests of intelligence
or tests of some other kind, or you interview them with the idea of learning about their
personal relationships.
So this is happening at a given time, in a year, let's say this is happening in 1990,
you have two groups, age 20, age 60, one born in 1970, one born in 1930.
An alternative way of studying people is through the longitudinal study, and here the difference
is that you are picking a sample of individuals, all born the same year, let us say in 1970,
so this is a 1970 cohort, cohort means a group of people who sort of move together, in this
case they move together through time.
And then you study these folks when they are 20, when they are 30, when they are 40, when
they are 50, when they are 60, you have a track record of what happens over time.
In this case, study goes on over a long period of time and not just at sort of one sitting
or in a particular year, simply taking whatever time it takes to take care of the study, and
you get very different kinds of results, very different perspective, you learn very different
things as I will explain a little more shortly.
Now the third alternative is the time leg study, and here you choose people to study
on the basis of how old they are, and let us say we are going to do a study of 20-year-olds,
so you study one group of 20-year-olds in 1950, another group of 20-year-olds in 1960
and so on, and perhaps another yet group of 20-year-old people in 1990.
Here you are making multiple studies, but you are not following the same group over
time, they are not getting older, you are always catching them when they are 20 and
therefore you are studying different groups, not the same group over time.
Typically it is either the cross-sectional or the longitudinal study that is conducted,
although more and more sophisticated studies are now using combinations of these, and let
us briefly consider how do the cross-sectional studies differ from longitudinal studies.
Obviously, as we already explained, the period of study is short with the cross-sectional
case because you are going to study people only once, you can take a big sample, and
over a period of time you don't lose subjects because you are only seeing them once, investigators
don't die because they are doing it only once, and the test instruments, the theoretical
issues don't change and there is no cohort effect because you are only looking at a group
at one time, and when you turn to the longitudinal study, you can see now that the time of study
is long, the sample size has to be smaller because it is very difficult to follow a large
group of individuals looking at them over and over, over a period of time you lose some
subjects because they die, they go away, they refuse to study, investigators die, they go
away, the theoretical issues that are important or the test instruments available change,
so you see you are getting two very different types of cuts, and because the cross-sectional
longitudinal time-leg studies have strengths and liabilities, as I have briefly illustrated,
the best study in some ways is a study, a sequential study that combines all these methods
and gets to the problem from a variety of angles.
Of course that is easier said than done because as you make the study more complicated it
becomes more difficult, more expensive, more complicated and so on.
Now so much for how you gather the information, presumably you have gathered the information
with some idea of some theory that you are trying to test, and either before you have
a hypothesis to test or based on what you learn, ultimately we need to make some kind
of an attempt to understand things at a theoretical level, at an abstract level, go beyond figures
and percentages and look at sort of an explanatory sequence, an intellectual framework within
which to understand what is going on.
Now there are half a dozen or more sort of important theories of adult development and
perhaps another half a dozen or more theories that are not as encompassing as kind of overall
theories but look at some particular aspect of development.
I'm going to consider a selection by way of illustration.
Now when you look at these theories and this is going to explain how we are going to select
the ones we are going to pick out to look at more detail, if you look at these theories
you can categorize them based on two important characteristics.
First one is do these theories portray the lifespan, let's focus on adulthood as sort
of one continuous flow which is not broken up into segments, or do they propose that
the stage of adulthood we are looking at has discrete segments through which you pass.
Let me give an illustration to drive this point home.
If you look at a river from its origins in the mountains all the way to its ending up
in the sea, one way of looking at it would be to say this is the same river and it's
one continuous uninterrupted seamless flow of water.
So that is the way that the life cycle, that is the way that the progression of life should
be seen.
On the other hand you could argue that yes it is the same river obviously that's self-evident
but if you compare the river as it is a gentle mountain brook coming through the hills to
the time when it reaches a precipice and drops dramatically as a waterfall and then goes
out into the field and meanders through gently until it finds its way into the river you
are looking at very different rivers as it were in terms of the way they behave.
And so the argument goes yes it's the same river but it has clearly demarcated aspects,
it behaves differently at different times hence the argument that we need to look at
stages.
Of course this idea of the river is just an example it is not proved that there are stages
or there should be stages it's simply a way of illustrating as it were sort of the thinking
that goes into this.
Now second consideration is whether or not the particular theory purports to explain
development as I said earlier as purely a sequence of changes.
Things are different but these differences are not manifestations of some fundamental
plan there is no blueprint biological or otherwise that is being played out.
Things are changing but it is change and it is not anything other than what you see.
Therefore the opposite perspective is to say what you see as change is the reflection
of fundamental developmental alterations.
Typically those who have this view may argue that what is being unfolded is as I said biologically
determined and socially manifested but there are differences in that.
The important thing is that development sees the progression of life as something that
is a reflection of deeper changes going on furthermore there is often the expectation
of maturation that is to say as time goes on things are becoming more sophisticated
better developed and of a higher order.
This is again what we usually associate with the idea of growing up becoming more mature.
Now if you take these four criteria we will pick four theories which show the four possible
combinations.
Now all four of these theories are well known well respected of course none of them are universally
accepted as an excellent explanation of everything and I am not presenting them as the top four
theories or the best four theories but rather each being a good representative of a certain
type.
Now of the first type where there are the claim that what you see happening is both the unfolding
of developmental sequence and this follows specific stages is Ericsson's theory which
I will discuss shortly.
The next stage, next alternative is to say that yes there is development but it doesn't
quite fit stages and here there is really no single theory that out and out comes out
and says this but Valiant's way of describing the way individuals mature and adapt to life
even though Valiant very much follows in Ericsson's tradition of ego psychology he does not create
the same kind of boxed model through which people can be into which people can be placed
and through which people can be seen to gradually advance over time.
So for purpose of discussion we will say with Valiant and the grand study on which this
is this is based to which we will make reference further on is one where it's development but
without stages at least the same sense that Ericsson has stages in his scheme.
Then we move to the two other alternatives where there is no assumption of a fundamental
development unfolding things are not necessarily getting better or worse they are simply different
and here we have the alternative where such a pattern still follows a stage sequence.
And an excellent example of this is Levinson's theory of development and finally a fourth
approach that says there is no development and there is no stage is Perlin's perception
of what happens in adult life and now that we have these four types placed in these four
boxes we can go and take a somewhat closer look of what it is that they are saying is
going on.
Let's begin with Ericsson.
Ericsson more than anyone else established this idea of a life cycle sequence and although
he is a psychoanalyst he went beyond the traditional psychoanalytic expectation that most of what
is really worth talking about is taking place in childhood instead Ericsson's scheme encompasses
the entire life from birth to death.
Second Ericsson and you can see this by following the chart Ericsson divides the lifespan into
eight stages and these eight stages are each marked by a phase specific task.
These are indicated in the boxes that are in the diagonal in other words boxes that
form a diagonal going from the left bottom to the right top of this rectangle.
Now let's not be concerned for the moment what is in these boxes we will come to that
shortly.
What you have in addition to this sequence of boxes that go up in the diagonal fashion
are other boxes above it as it were and other boxes below it.
The boxes above it are the precursors of the stages of major stages phase specific stages
that are indicated in the diagonal and the boxes below it are the residues of the issues
that are dealt with in these boxes.
So what's happening is that at a particular time and when we look at the Roman numerals
on the left that is indicating chronological age with one being infancy and eight being
old age although Ericsson doesn't label these and certainly doesn't attach ages to it and
therefore what you see here for example with the Roman five, Roman numeral five and number
five is the phase specific period of adolescence and to anticipate what we are going to discuss
the issue here is the issue of identity versus identity confusion.
So that's the phase specific task but there is a good deal of preparation that goes on
in the previous stages before things come to a head about the clarification of issue
of identity and having gone through that exercise that accomplishment that achievement of settling
your sense of identity which is incidentally the answer to the question who am I.
This issue of who am I continues to be with the individual as that individual moves on
to subsequent stages of development which now again are defined by phase specific tasks
for that time.
Let's look at more closely now to what these phase specific tasks are and we are not concerned
with the first three four stages that are in the realm of childhood but because it would
be impossible to really understand what's going on let's simply say that it's a sequence
where trust followed by autonomy followed by initiative followed by industry and these
are discussed further in the readings that are assigned for this particular lecture.
The tasks are being accomplished in such a way that the outcome is between the desirable
the sort of the adaptive the mature the healthy outcome which I just listed and the opposites
which go mistrust shamed out guilt inferiority and out of these two that some kind of a mixed
outcome typically is being fashioned.
Then in the case of roman 5 you have the issue of identity and identity confusion which comes
to a head we will discuss this at considerable length when we come back to the phase of transition
to adulthood because identity formation is a key event there.
In the rest which are the three adult stages we are dealing with questions of intimacy
versus isolation generativity versus stagnation and integrity versus despair these two we
will discuss at length at appropriate stages in our journey through adulthood.
Two more important points about Ericsson's scheme one is that the model that Ericsson
draws from is the model of epigenesis.
This is an idea that comes from embryology and just like in embryo life a rather amorphous
looking tissue which doesn't look like anything human or doesn't have a human face but it
simply has the potential of developing into a full-fledged human.
From this already programmed beginning the parts begin to arise according to a schedule
and therefore at predictable times the various parts of the body organs tissues etc are formed
they follow a logical sequence and out of these individual parts eventually come together
an integrated whole.
So it is this model of embryonal development that is Ericsson using and saying psychologically
we have a similar process from the less differentiated the parts arise the parts become more differentiated
they come together and you have this integrated whole.
Even though we are primarily talking about this as if it were a process in isolation sort
of a private journey in fact it is not because none of us live alone and all of us are part
of a social system we could not survive to begin with we could not thrive we could not
live entirely on our own so we are embedded in a social matrix and the most important
social matrix is that of the family and therefore we look at Ericsson looks at development
as a march through time of closely linked individual as well as more distantly linked
individual if you expand the circle and he refers to this as the cogwheeling of generations.
So mother and father who have a child are bringing up the child the child is moving through stages
of childhood father and mother are moving through the stages of adulthood parents are bringing
the child up the child is as it were bringing up the parents so this very much of a complementary
here complementarity here and this is a theory which not everybody accepts and there are
important reservations to hold against because of its methodology and so on yet it certainly
has the merit of being able to pull together and summarize a wide variety of behaviors
phenomena so at least in that sense it is of great usefulness and of course its value
may be beyond that as well even the opinions vary on that.
Now let's see a little more about Levenson's idea here the model remember stages but no
development merely change here the expectation is that the sequence of stages goes between
rapid periods of transition which begin with an early adult transition from childhood adolescence
to early adulthood the midlife transition from early adulthood to middle adulthood late
adult transition from middle adulthood to late adulthood in fact Levenson has only really
worked this out given the sample that he studied which incidentally was an exclusively made
sample because subsequently a female sample has been studied but that information is not
fully out yet but will return to these details what you have then are these periods of rapid
transition that take a short time and between them are the longer decade long periods during
which the business of development is going on at a more leisurely but no less important
pace.
So that's Levenson and valiant fits in this and we will come to valiant much later in
the course but there are no stages and it's the ability of the psyche the personality to
use various defense mechanisms in various combinations and this we need to sort of postpone a discussion
to later on but again the important thing is that life is going on it is not following
a lockstep stage formation but there is a developmental progression from the less to
the more mature.
Finally a few words about in some ways the most radical of these approaches which says
there is no stage and there's no development what you see happening in people's lives
are basically ongoing adjustments to circumstances.
The reason that we see common patterns is because people have common experiences.
Society generates selective impact based on age grading gender roles socioeconomic status
social control determines meaning giving birth retirement and society provides the resources
material a coping style and the like and it's the life strains either chronic hassles or
scheduled events or career entry exit events all of these events as well as unscheduled
events things you don't expect failing in school losing jobs divorce accidents etc.
It's these external events that are impinging on the individual and pushing the individual
sort of back and forth and therefore it's very much of a social environment theory which
is not surprising because Perlin is a sociologist and sociologists are much more concerned about
these larger social forces what's going out there rather than what's going on inside the
head of the individual.
Finally what can we say about predicting what kid is going to be turned or what we're going
to turn out to become what now if we look at the picture of Winston Churchill what can
we say about what is this boy is going to become well Winston Churchill was a boy with
obviously a high level of intelligence a personality which evolved into one capable of great leadership
and of great eloquence and great ability he of course had these liabilities he was far
from a perfect human being and very much going for him was the fact that he came from a very
privileged class in a society at the time where social privileges were very important.
Now all of this prepared Churchill to become somebody but did all of this prepare Churchill
to become Churchill of course not had there been no second world war Churchill would not
have been the Churchill that we have come to know one of the great leaders of the 20th
century in the western world.
So you have the sort of givens there the limitations there if Churchill did not have the assets
he did and if he had serious handicaps beyond what he had then he wouldn't have gotten into
the position that he was.
The givens at the time of his childhood made the outcome possible but not inevitable there
were lots of English boys of Churchill's generation who did not rise to the kind of
eminence that he did.
Let's look at another example let's look at a let's let's consider the childhood of Elizabeth
Taylor everything I said about Churchill in some ways will apply here he had a girl who
must have had a certain level of intelligence certain personality characteristics and in
this case what turned out to be acting talent and from these givens therefore we have eventually
a world famous actress.
Now what she had going for herself which was particularly important for this particular
career path was great physical beauty.
Now we have to be careful that we don't think I am saying that women should get ahead in
life because of their physical appearance and men should get ahead because of their
brains or leadership although traditionally that has typically or more often been the
case than not but once again in this case physical attractiveness makes possible certain
things to happen along with all those other requirements which would not have happened
if that had not been present and finally if you look at the more ordinary example if I
look at the picture of myself taken at the age of five there would have been absolutely
no reason to predict that I would be standing here today and giving you a lecture.
Why this happened how that happened we need not burden you with and we can each reflect
in our own lives what is it what was in our childhood that could explain who we became
and what is it in our present life which we cannot explain in terms of what we know from
our past this is the theme that is going to occupy us throughout the rest of this course.
