In our previous lecture, we focused on the changes that occurred during puberty, primarily
focusing on development of the body and the reproductive system. Today, we shift our attention
to more specifically the development of sexual maturation. Now, in purely evolutionary terms,
there are really three events that matter. You're born, you reproduce, you die. But of
course, at the level of human experience, there is a great deal more to life than these
three events. Furthermore, not all of us want to reproduce, can reproduce, or perhaps should
reproduce. Nonetheless, reproduction is clearly one of the central experiences in life for men
and women, for better or for worse. And puberty makes it possible now for individuals to be
reproductive if they so choose, and sometimes, unfortunately, even if they do not so choose.
We will begin by looking at the menstrual cycle, which is the key physiological event in women,
which makes reproduction possible. You will recall the hormones that we looked at, which had to do
with the actual changes in the body. The same hormones regulate the menstrual cycle. And once
again, we have to look at it in terms of what happens at the level of the hypothalamus, at the
level of the pituitary, the gonadotropins, at the level of the gonads, the ovaries,
estrogen, progesterone, and we're not concerned with the testes anymore. And in terms of the
body part, we have to see what happens at the level of the ovaries and what happens with respect
to the uterus, more specifically, the endometrial lining. Now, these events are complicated in the
sense of lots of things are happening at the same time. And therefore, we need to do two things.
First, we need to understand what's going on at these four levels we will consider,
level of the gonadotropins, FSH-LH, the level of the gonadal hormones, estrogen and progesterone,
the level of the ovary, and the endometrium. After we understand the critical changes that
occur month after month during the menstrual cycle, we need to also understand how these
four events are interrelated with each other because they very much work in tandem.
Now, let's begin with the ups and downs of the gonadotropins produced by the pituitary.
At the beginning of the menstrual cycle, and the beginning is right after menstruation,
actually the monthly bleeding has stopped, right at that point, the level of gonadotropins, FSH,
and LH is both low. Then as the monthly cycle progresses, and typically it takes 28 days,
so let's use that, but normally it can be shorter or longer, levels of gonadotropins
gradually rise, and particularly the level of LH goes sharply up right before ovulation,
which we will see happening in a while when we look at what goes on at the level of the ovary.
Now the trigger for the production of estrogens and progesterones
ultimately comes from these gonadotropins, and as the level of FSH rises, the level of
estrogens will follow, and therefore the curve for estrogen also shows a steady rise as the
menstrual cycle progresses. The critical event in the sequence is ovulation,
and ovulation means that the immature egg of which there are hundreds and thousands in the ovary
is gradually maturing, and in mid-cycle, more or less at day 14, the egg bursts through the
wall of the ovary and try to make its way into the fallopian tube, which is leading towards the
uterus, and if fertilization is going to take place, if sexual intercourse has occurred in a
timely fashion, then the egg gets fertilized. If not, it does not, but we are not concerned with
the event of pregnancy. Now we are only concerned with what happens in the menstrual cycle.
Following ovulation, the particular portion of the ovary, which included the egg, the graphene
follicle, which was responsible for the production of estrogens. In other words, FSH from the pituitary
is making the follicle in the ovary produce the estrogen. After the egg leaves the ovary,
that follicle is transformed into something called the corpus luteum or the yellow body,
and that continues to produce estrogen, but now also starts producing progesterone,
and therefore we see that following ovulation, the level of progesterone now rises sharply.
Well, we were going to look at what happens into the ovary, and we had to do so already in order
to explain what happens with these hormones. But to recapitulate, the egg is maturing in the ovary,
and this process reaches a point when in mid-cycle, ovulation takes place, egg is gone,
but the follicle that contained the egg continues to function like an endocrine gland
producing hormones, and gradually at the end of the menstrual cycle, its function will cease,
and it will sort of disintegrate because it has already fulfilled its function.
Now, what is going on so far is not within the awareness of the woman, because these are internal
changes. What the woman experiences is the actual bleeding, but before that occurs,
there are again a series of changes that are going on, in this case, in the endometrium.
Endometrium is the lining of the uterus, and its thickness very much varies during the menstrual
cycle. Under the influence of estrogen, during the first half of the menstrual cycle, that is from
the stopping of the bleeding of the previous cycle until ovulation, which is the midpoint,
which incidentally is called the proliferative phase, what happens is that the lining, the
endometrial lining, gets thicker and thicker under the influence of estrogen. By the time that
ovulation takes place, this thickness has reached its pretty much maximum size, and now under the
influence of progesterone, the glands that are embedded within the lining of the endometrium
become gradually secretory. These are the glands that produce the necessary nutrients,
and of course, the point of all this is to prepare the wall of the uterus to receive the
fertilized egg, which by that time has developed into a multicellular organism, and which is capable
of embedding itself within the endometrial lining, and that's when the new life begins,
which eventually becomes a baby. Once this sequence progresses, and we reach a point
towards the end of the cycle, where the endometrial lining is at its maximum,
and the secretory glands are at their maximum, if pregnancy occurs or has occurred,
other hormonal mechanisms we need not go into maintain the endometrial lining, which contains
the developing embryo now. If pregnancy has not occurred, then the levels of estrogen and progesterone
gradually drop because they are being metabolized, used by the body, and without the sustenance of
estrogen and progesterone, the uterine lining disintegrates. It sloughs off, and it is this
sloughing off of the endometrial lining, which consists of blood and dead tissues,
is what menstruation is. So menstrual blood is the shedding off of the endometrial lining.
Now this is the menstrual cycle, which is going on at these various levels that we talk,
follows a specific sequence, which you now know, and which has these two critical phases,
separated by ovulation, the proliferative phase, the secretory phase, the pre-ovulatory phase,
the post-ovulatory phase, there are various ways of describing it. But fundamentally,
whatever we call these phases, what is going on is this process of building up, preparing the
uterine lining for pregnancy, and if that does not occur, then getting rid of the uterine lining
and starting the cycle yet again. This experience for most women is a natural process.
In some instances, it entails a certain amount of discomfort. It entails perhaps some tension,
which we refer to as pre-menstrual tension, and it is not entirely clear why this occurs,
but it's very important that, particularly when we are talking about adolescent girls,
is that A, they be prepared ahead of time and understand what is it that's going to happen
when they begin to menstruate. At second, they be made clear that this is a natural process,
this is not in any sense of the term not being well, this is not an illness. In fact,
it's very important for girls to see this in a positive light. This is the fountain of life,
this is what makes life possible, and it is not, as unfortunately, over the years, among other
things, a curse, which is one of the terms that was used to designate the menstrual cycle. It is
not a curse, it is a blessing. So much for what actually happens with respect to reproductive
process in terms of its physiology specifically, and now we will turn to a consideration of sexual
behavior. What do hormones have to do with sexual behavior? We all assume that the upsurge of hormones
is responsible for the activation, as it were, of sexual drive and sexual interactions. There is
some evidence that at some level this may be the case, because if we chart the correlation of the
rise of hormone levels, and let's now focus on the male, then as testosterone levels go up
during puberty, we see the onset of nocturnal emission, in other words, orgasm during sleep,
because now the post-pubescent poi is capable of ejaculation. So we have ejaculation and not
simply orgasm, and there is more self-stimulation, masturbation, interest in the typically opposite
sex, sometimes in the same sex, the experience of falling in love, in other words, the fuller range
of what we associate with adult sexuality. Now is this, in fact, the outcome directly of hormones?
It's very difficult to say, because as we have already noted time and again, biological factors
make activities possible. They create a certain predisposition, but they don't make the person
act a certain way. So there is a great deal of social expectation and all else that goes into
shaping sexual behavior. In fact, there is an ongoing controversy among investigators of sexuality,
some of whom are keen on emphasizing the importance of biological factors, specifically hormones.
Others, we tend to be social scientists, are more apt to highlight the importance of social factors.
And so the counterargument, as it were, is that instead of some sort of biological force driving
these kids to become sexually aroused and making them act sexually, is that society
has written a sexual script for them, which now they begin to enact. They are like actors,
as it were, to whom a script has been given, which says, this is what a person does with whom,
when, how many times, under what circumstances, and so on. Now once again, I tend to take a middle
course and we have to both bring in the importance of these hormonal factors. Remember, without a body,
there is no behavior, yet at the same time understand that these natural biological urges,
however they may come about, are shaped and given meaning by the psychological and social interactions.
We all know, have been through and see around us manifestations of sexual attraction,
romantic attraction among teenagers. Now, this can be both a source of great satisfaction,
in the sense that now children are becoming more like adults, it is part of the process
of growing up. And some of the romantic experiences of this time are so intense that we remember
for the rest of our lives, the sort of bittersweet memories of young love. Yet at the same time,
we become very concerned, rightly so, that the capacity and the interest in sexual activity now
creates an area of hazard, because, as we shall see, unwanted pregnancy is one of the
more serious consequences of sexual behavior which is carried out in an irresponsible manner.
Boys and girls typically engage in sexual activity in a predictable sequence. Now,
let me stop a second and say that we are approaching this topic from a purely descriptive
perspective. There are, of course, all kinds of important social, moral, religious considerations
according to which people have firm beliefs of what teenagers should and should not do,
whether they should engage in sexual activity or not. Now, at this point, we cannot go into
this very important issue, but I just want to highlight that it is a very important issue.
But looking at it behaviorally, if you chart what boys and girls do, you see that there is a
gradual progression from sort of mild sexual engagements, like kissing, like holding hands,
which gradually becomes much more intense, much more overtly sexual, and, at least in some cases,
eventuates in sexual intercourse.
There has been a very important change in sexual behavior over the so-called sexual
revolution, which came about in the 60s, and this change mainly affected the behavior of girls and
not so much for boys. So rates of primarital sex in the 60s and 70s went up by almost 300%.
Now, when you look at a sexually active population in high school, we see that by the 10th grade,
half of the boys have already experienced sexual intercourse, and by the 11th grade,
a similar percentage, slightly over half of girls have experienced sexual intercourse.
Now, when we look at percentages like this, it's very important to understand that we are talking
about averages. Now, averages are a very good description of a group as a whole, but they do
not refer to the behavior of a particular person. So when we say that by age 16, 50% of boys and
girls have already become sexually active in this country, it doesn't mean that every other 16-year-
every other 16-year-old you see in the street is sexually active. It tremendously varies from
place to place and from groups to groups, depending on things like level of education of parents,
socioeconomic status, and other things. So you will go to some high schools where by age 16,
not 50%, but maybe 90% of these kids are sexually active, and then you may go to
another high school where only 5% are sexually active. So we have to bear this in mind. There is
a great deal of variance. For example, if you want to use ethnicity as one of the ways of measuring
this, typically black male teenagers are more likely to become sexually active earlier, and
among females, Hispanic girls are least likely to become sexually active earlier. Now, why these
differences exist is a complicated issue, what we need not go into. The important point I'm trying
to make is that there are these differences, and therefore we have to be very careful not to
generalize from these broad statistics to a particular teenager. Now, why do teenagers engage
in sexual intercourse? If it involves so much potential risk, not only unwanted pregnancy,
but also sexually transmitted diseases, something I'm going to return to briefly later on.
A common sense would seem to indicate that teenagers engage in sex for the same reason that
grown-ups engage in sex, and the most common reason that comes to people's mind is that it
because it's fun, but that is not the only reason. In fact, it may not be the most important reason.
In one particular study, for example, half of women said that the first time they engage in
sexual intercourse, this necessarily did not happen during teenage years, but more and more it is
happening in teenage years. But the first time they became sexually active had to do with affection
for the partner. So the motivation for these women was not primarily sex, but affection for the
partner. And a quarter of the men said that it was affection for the partner, which was sort of the
primary trigger why they became sexually active. By contrast, half of the men said that it was a
sense of being ready for engaging in sex and curiosity, and only 25% or so of the women said
that this was the primary motive. Only slightly more than one in 10 of males specifically said
that it was physical pleasure which they were seeking, which led them into engaging in sex,
and only 3% of the women said this to be the case. So once again, you see that why people do things
is not always so simple and is not always necessarily sort of the common sense answer.
Now let's address the question of sexual orientation, heterosexual, homosexual for a moment.
A simple answer as to why some people are attracted to members of the opposite sex and other people
are attracted to members of the same sex is to say that we don't know. There is now a great
deal of research, but there is no conclusive answer. Does this have something to do with
biological givens? Does this have something to do with the way the brain has been wired? Does this
have something to do with hormones? Or is it a matter of socialization, the way we have been
brought up, the kind of parental relationships we have? There is a lot of evidence scattered here
and there, but as I said, nothing very specific. I said nothing specific, perhaps a better term
would be nothing conclusive. For example, there is some interesting evidence that homosexuals who
have an identical twin, the identical twin in half the time is also likely to be gay.
The proportion is only 22% if it's a fraternal twin and only 11% it's an adopted brother.
More or less similar percentages are present for lesbians even though we know a good deal more
about male homosexuality than female homosexuality. Now this would suggest a genetic basis for
sexual orientation, yet we have to also account for the fact that even with identical twins
only half become gay or are gay. What about the other half? What has happened over time is that
there would be a study focusing on biological factors which turns out to be not conclusive
and we say well therefore it must have something to do with the way that we are brought up.
Then we do a study looking at sibling order or the types of parents, fathers, mothers,
relationships that people have and we say well we can't find anything conclusive therefore it
must be biological. We cannot decide this issue on the basis of inference or elimination. Moreover,
I think we also must be aware that to simply focus on why the people become homosexuals gives the
impression that that is not the acceptable pattern and something has gone awry and so investigators
now more commonly will not talk about the cause of homosexuality or heterosexuality but rather
what is it that defines sexual orientation, be it biological or otherwise.
Now sexual activity is in place. We have briefly gone into what happens in terms of sexual orientation
and the final thing I want to say about this is that same-sex activity is fairly common in
adolescence but in the majority of cases such activity doesn't lead to a homosexual orientation
in adulthood. It is part of the experimentation that characterizes so much of adolescent sexual
interactions. On the other hand the great majority of men and women who are homosexual as adults
trace back their sexual orientation to their youth. So sexual orientation doesn't just come out of
the blue in adulthood. It has its origins earlier in life but early sexual activity during childhood
and adolescence does not necessarily predict what is going to happen later on because as I said
there is a great many more motivations going on in such activity than whatever it is that fixes
the person's sexual orientation later on. Second thing to remember is that we tend to think about
homosexual orientations, heterosexual orientations in purely sexual terms. Actually it turns out
that the first evidence that a young man or woman has these same-sex inclinations is not
through sexual attraction to a member of the same sex but through romantic attraction. So
the first thing that happens is that people, kids feel emotionally attracted. They fall in love.
They have a crush on somebody of the same sex. The sexual component follows the emotional engagement,
the romantic involvement and so on. Another very important development at this time has to do
with gender identity and here what we are talking about is the individual's sense of
masculinity and femininity. These terms are gender and sex are now used interchangeably
and it makes for some confusion. So in a sense we could differentiate and say that sex refers to
the reproductive system, the genital organs being male or female. And we could reserve the term
gender to that sense of masculinity, femininity in terms of gender identity. So if my sense of
myself is that I am a male that is my sex and my sense of myself is that I am masculine,
not in any sort of stereotypical sense, but I am masculine that means that my gender identity
is that of a male and the obverse will be true if I were a woman.
And therefore this self-definition as it were is another way in which as we will see in a
subsequent lecture we answer the question who am I? Now here again there is quite a bit of
confusion shall we say or unclarity and lack of evidence as to how this orientation takes place.
How do I develop my sense of gender identity? Gender identity is one side of the coin, the other
side of the coin is gender role. Gender identity is my perception internally of what I am. Gender
role is mainly defined by how the society expected I should behave as a man or a woman.
The societally defined codes of what does it mean to be masculine or feminine.
Here again the question of is this biologically determined, is this socially determined,
is replayed over and over without a conclusive ending. There is some evidence that the sense of
gender identity is primarily defined by the sex of reading. In other words if I am brought up
as a little girl then my sense of gender identity feminine is the outcome. If I am brought up as
a boy then the other occurs. Now there are fascinating studies that have to do with children born with
ambiguous looking genitalia which will take a little too long to go into in detail but there
are these instances which has made this kind of research possible where there was an option as it
were of bringing somebody a boy up as a girl up either as a girl or a boy. So that seems to lead
to the conclusion that gender identity is determined not biologically but through reading. On the other
hand gender role behavior as it applies to interactions where boys tend to be more interested in
rough and tumble play, they tend to be more aggressive in their interactions and so on and
once again we are sort of talking about traditionally defined ways in which we have expected boys and
girls to behave. The same sort of research seems to indicate that there is a predisposition
which must be present at birth and which would indicate that gender role behavior is perhaps
being influenced by biological factors and in this case those biological factors almost certainly
would be the hormones that we are talking about particularly testosterone. So testosterone
masculinizes the brain as it were and that's kind of pushes behavior in that direction.
One way of kind of pulling all this together is to say that gender identity has a complex origin.
It begins with chromosomes whether your chromosomes have x, y or x, x which defines you as a male or
a female. Hormones during gonadal life exert their influence. Your reproductive system goes either
the male or the female line. During puberty there is another installment and yesterday we saw in
detail how dramatically male and female diverge in some senses during puberty which very much
reinforces the sense of gender identity of masculinity femininity and the reactions of others
and the mysterious way in which the brain is influenced through all this and unfortunately
we have to speak in these rather vague terms. All of this sort of comes together. All the streams
coalesce ultimately to adult gender identity. What are the consequences of this
change we have been focusing during today's lecture? What happens once reproductive maturity
is attained? Now I'm going to briefly address three important consequences that have very
significant health concerns attached to them. Teenage pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases
and the vulnerability for sexual exploitation or the development of patterns of sexual courage.
A million teenagers become pregnant each year in this country. Now we focus on the teenage girl
but we have to be careful not to say that this is simply a problem of girls. Girls don't get pregnant
by themselves so boys, males who are equally responsible for bringing about this pregnancy
should also be part of this discussion. Right now at least for an important subset of
teenage adolescents this activity is alarmingly prevalent. 30 percent of high school girls say
they have four or more partners and in the age group between 13 and 18 four out of 10 are going to
get pregnant, 10 percent are younger than 15 years, 9 percent of girls are going to be
pregnant before they turn 18 and so the the statistics are almost numbing and also puzzling
because this is not the situation in other industrialized western countries comparable
to the United States where teenagers are no less sexually active but they do not get pregnant
in these astounding numbers. So the sequence of what happens is that if you look at nine million
or so women age 15 to 19 half are sexually active more or less the other half are not
of those who are sexually active half use contraception and half don't and that's where
pregnancy is coming from of which a quarter then will become pregnant three quarters won't
and of those who become pregnant half will give birth to a child and half will have an abortion
in rough figures. Now the second very important consideration has to do with sexually transmitted
diseases. Now this has always been a concern but more recently very much more so particularly
with the catastrophe of AIDS and here again the statistics are numbing one in four teenagers
will contract the sexually transmitted disease in high school every 30 seconds a teenager is
infected with a sexually transmitted disease. I must point out that the overwhelming majority
of sexually sexually transmitted diseases are the sort of milder kinds of clay media herpes
genital warts I'm not saying that they are not diseases or should not be concerned about
but we are really not talking about syphilis we're not talking about AIDS but we are talking about
still problems that unfortunately in both viral conditions once you have it you have it for the
rest of your life and therefore we should not make light of them. Now AIDS so far has claimed
relatively fewer lives in teenagers so that only 0.7% of the total number of AIDS cases
over 300,000 in the nation are in this age group that we could call teenagers
but because there is this 10-year period between infection and the start of actual AIDS
that's not a fixed period but could be as long as that you can see that AIDS cases that appear
among individuals who are in their 20s the infection must have occurred 8-10 years 5-10
years earlier and that puts it in the age period of adolescence so this is an issue of
concern and growing concern because numbers of cases are doubling even though again they are
relatively small and furthermore there are some other interesting differences in that for instance
among the general population the ratio between male and female is 9 to 1 but among teens the
ratio is 3 to 1 between male and female so female teenagers are more vulnerable than women out there
now when we look at the prevalence of AIDS among college students in a somewhat older group here
again the rates are very low but still among college students the rates are 10 times that of the
general population even though we are here dealing with a group that is more highly educated and you
think that as a result of that they will be more sophisticated in terms of knowing what is it that
they need to do abstinence being the one absolutely sure way and safe sex use of condoms and other
precautions that one takes in terms of one's partners and so on so forth greatly reducing but
not eliminating the chances of infection finally another problematic issue has to do with sexual
exploitation and sexual coercion children of course are vulnerable to sexual abuse and as are teenagers
now teenage girls who tend to be sexually victimized furthermore have been shown to have
a number of risk factors which kind of increase the likelihood they do not necessarily say a girl
in these circumstances is going to be sexually abused but they increase the likelihood and these
have to do with there being a stepfather in the house or there being a father who is not
affectionate towards the daughter or having a mother who is also a distant sex punitive in other
words has very harsh standards of what should one do and not do sexually or his absence or has not
graduated from high school a family that is relatively poor and these are girls who have
less than two friends and so all these factors for whatever reason increase the likelihood
of being sexually abused and the more of these factors there are than the greater the likelihood
so they have sort of a compounding cumulative event now teenagers are not only victimized and girls
are not the only victims boys are also victimized as teenagers sexually and in the majority of
cases the offender is a male only less often is the offender is a female of a older years
in both instances but teenagers themselves are sexual victimizers of other teenagers and children
it is appalling to recognize that the patterns of interactions and for the moment let's simply
talk about male and female the patterns of interactions where again typically it is the
male who is the offender and the female who is being victimized which we subsequently recognize
in adults as various forms of sexual harassment sexual coercion and ultimately rape violent rape
the seeds of these behaviors can often be detected in the behavior of adolescents
the again for whatever reason people behave the way they do in these circumstances
these attitudes these attempts to use coercion to get what you want or to simply use sex to
demean and humiliate and hurt another individual in more perhaps attenuated and sometimes not
in attitude and attenuated ways these tendencies are already taking place which points to the
importance of using this period of time making sure that individuals are helped to develop into
the kind of healthy sexual individual who has good physiological function satisfying
relationships is able to identify the right person and the right time and the right relationship
to engage in sex can do so responsibly and consistent with his or her moral principles
sex is consensual not coercive and safe so adolescent sexuality is not just a collection of
bad news but should be seen as a positive force but one which needs to be harnessed which needs
to be regulated which needs to be restrained if necessary and and therefore leads on to the
further happiness of the individual rather than his or her misery
