Lecture 4 Transition to Adulthood, Intellectual and Emotional Development
The changes of puberty, the maturation of the reproductive system which we have been discussing so far,
entail dramatic changes. Kids are transformed in front of our eyes from being kids to becoming adults.
What we are going to discuss next in this lecture having to do with cognitive, intellectual and moral development doesn't appear so dramatic.
The changes are more subtle yet no less important.
Just as the changes of puberty transform the child into the reproductively capable and active adult,
the cognitive and moral developmental changes transform the child into the psychosocially developed adult.
Children are pretty much trapped in the here and now and they have a short memory of the past and they don't know right from wrong.
They have to move through adolescence into an adult level of functioning where in addition to the present and the past they can think about the future
and they have a sense of right and wrong by which one hopes they regulate their behaviors.
So we have now the opening up of a world of possibilities to think about not only what is happening now but what may happen and what the alternatives are.
And a complex way of thinking which is going to result in a greater awareness of the self, of others, of social relationships and social obligations.
Now first we will address the question of cognitive development and then we will move to social cognition.
I'll have a few words to say about schooling and then we will move on to moral development.
The word cognition comes from the Latin to know and simply defined it refers to the mental abilities involved in receiving, organizing and interpreting information.
In short, making sense out of the world.
Now cognitive abilities sometimes I refer to as quote intelligence which has become a loaded word and therefore I am generally going to stay away from it.
But whatever particular terms we use, we generally understand this process as a way in which we are able to learn, to solve problems, express ourselves and are able to effectively deal with others.
This is not simply a question of doing math equations, there is also the matter of social competence of equal importance.
And all of this is made possible through this complex process of cognitive development.
The most important, most influential theorist in this field during the recent past has been the Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget.
Now Piaget has a model of how we learn and again rather simply explained it has two important pieces.
One is that we interpret what we encounter in terms of what we already know.
A kid has a dog, knows a dog as an animal that has four legs and moves about.
A child sees another animal he has not seen before, a cat.
Cat also seems to have four legs and moves so is like a dog, the dog is an animal therefore the child infers that the cat is another example of an animal.
This is interpreting the new on the basis of what you already know.
The second important principle is to modify what we already know in the light of new experience.
The child sees a toy dog that looks like a dog has four legs but is lifeless.
So the idea of an animal has to be now to be modified into that of a toy.
So now you have the idea of a toy dog.
And this process of accommodation complements the way that we make sense out of things and learn and develop cognitively in terms of assimilation.
These cognitive functions are present at birth. This is part of the characteristic of the human brain.
So once again we are beginning with the biological given that makes things possible.
Human beings speak, we have language, animals communicate in various ways but they do not have language.
And we have language because the human brain is capable of speaking but children also have to be taught a particular language.
If you don't teach the child the language the child doesn't learn how to speak.
So you see here the biological given which must be made into functioning appropriately with the necessary environmentally induced, socially environmentally engineered ways of implementing what the brain can do.
Piaget says that cognitive development proceeds in stages. Now we are back to the business of stages.
And very briefly in terms of childhood stages the first one is the sensory motor stage which roughly takes place between the ages of 0 to 2.
And here it is the infant's active sense of search for sensory and motor experience that is the trigger for learning.
Child brushes accidentally the hand to the mouth and then will intentionally rub the hand against the mouth.
The child now has learned to control his own behavior in a way that influences himself or herself.
Or the child incidentally hits the rattle hanging over the crib, it makes a noise, the child now hits it again and now the child is doing something that has an impact not on his or her own self but on something out there in the environment.
And through this process the child develops a mental representation of the world of what's out there.
And it is part of this process that sounds eventually are learned to become a meaningful language through of course a lot of fits and starts.
The second stage is the pre-operational stage which goes on between ages of 2 to 7.
When mental operations are now more organized kid adds blocks on top of each other and then learns how to pile other objects so derives this notion of adding things up.
But this is very concrete in the sense that it is very dependent on external objects.
So the child is manipulating external objects and the thinking process is very much tied to what these objects can and cannot do.
In the next stage the operational concrete operational stage which goes on from the ages of 7 to 12, there is greater capacity for flexible thought and considering the multiple aspects of the situation yet it still remains pretty much concrete tied to things.
Okay, now this is the sort of background of where the child has been by the time he or she reaches age 12 which is what we are interested in because that's when the cognitive development of adolescence now really goes into swing.
As a result there is a important dramatic sea change in the thinking capacity of the adolescent. This doesn't happen overnight but it happens during the period following roughly age 12 or so.
Now thought becomes much more complex and more importantly the person now becomes capable of abstract thought not just concrete thought but abstract thought.
Not only think about things but think about ideas.
Ideas you can put your arms around an idea. You have to comprehend it mentally.
And this is therefore a major transformation in the expansion and the capacity of our cognitive apparatus.
These ideas are increasingly complex and thinking also becomes recursive. In other words you think about thinking.
So the thinking process itself now becomes the object of contemplation. You can see here the beginning of what eventually is going to become philosophical thought, scientific thought.
If the individual remained at the level of this concrete thinking of childhood there would be no scientific thought. There would be no philosophy.
In addition now there is as part of this additional complexity is the capacity to handle more things simultaneously at a time.
There is greater development of inductive and deductive forms of logic.
In the case of inductive logic you start from particulars and go to the general. In the case of deductive logic you infer from the general to the particulars.
When it rains and the ground gets wet, the trees get wet, the cars get wet, people get wet you can infer from this through inductive logic that rain causes wetness.
It's sort of the conclusion. In deduction you start with the premise that rain wets things and therefore you can say if it rains the ground is going to get wet, cars are going to get wet, I am going to get wet, you are going to get wet.
So these both of these again are another facet of the increasing complexity of adolescent thinking.
A corollary of this is as I noted earlier is thinking about future alternative. This future orientation is very much a characteristic of adolescent thought development and is a powerful tool that helps in problem solving.
Because in problem solving you have to be willing to consider alternatives before you actually try them. You have to be able to say what would happen if I did such and such?
You can't always try it out. You have to be able to anticipate. This leads to a broader perspective whereby the individual is able to differentiate one's own self, one's own personal view from the views of others.
The child is not quite capable of doing this as well. Of course increasing knowledge which now becomes possible to accumulate itself becomes a powerful tool for better problem solving and a broader perspective on the world.
So you can see all these elements sort of cascade together in transforming the rather elementary limited thinking of the child into the more powerful, more focused, more sophisticated, more versatile thinking of the adult through adolescence.
This is a development which like puberty doesn't occur overnight. It takes time and like puberty the necessary social environmental conditions, supports, nurturing are essential if this is going to happen.
Biology only gives you the potential. It does not guarantee the outcome.
What is social cognition? This follows from some of the things we have already said, but basically cognitive maturation in this area leads to a better understanding of social experiences and relationships, not abstract mathematics.
Choices now in terms of social interactions become more complex. Life becomes more complex. Therefore life becomes more bothersome.
So the adolescent cannot go on doing business the way he or she was. Now things have to be done in such a way that the points of use of many more people have to be taken into consideration.
And one is of course increasingly held accountable for taking other points of use into consideration, something we are going to expand on when we turn to the question of moral development.
There is a greater awareness of the discrepancy between the ideal and the real, between what is and what could be.
Kids generally, unless they are abused and badly treated, do not complain about whether their parents are well off, not well off, educated or not educated of a certain type or another because they don't know any better.
They simply accept what is for what ought to be.
In adolescence, there is now a realization that things need not be as they are with respect to your own home. Let's use the same example, but there are other people, other homes where things are done differently.
Now this may be one of the key reasons why adolescence sometimes, and perhaps typically in a mild way, has this sense of disaffection, rebellion and not willing to accept things for their talking back.
You see the sort of cognitive development makes possible now a new set of demands, expectations and creates in turn new problems.
And therefore the gains you make do not always lead to a calmer, quieter life, sometimes they complicate life.
They are able to look at things in a way that sort of pull the essential elements.
A child will say, so and so has nice hair, nice looking trousers, shining shoes, in other words you enumerate various characteristics which describe an individual.
But the teenager will be able to say, Johnny is neat.
Now, neatness does not refer to hair or feet or clothes, it refers to a general condition which as such doesn't exist, it's an abstract notion.
You see it is a very powerful tool of summarizing a lot of information.
So if you want to say that Jane is neat, that immediately tells the other person a lot more than if you were to say her hair is neat, her shoes are shining, her clothes are clean and so on and so forth.
So this is yet another way of how this ability to abstract things becomes possible in adolescence.
And from this also flows the ability to be more objective, to know what reality is as against what you wish it to be.
And this now again will lead the adolescent into a better role taking capacity, that is to say they are in a better position to take the place of another and say what would it be like to be in this person's shoes.
Now we all know adolescence and our feeling is that adolescents really don't act like this, they don't put themselves in other people's shoes, that they are very self-centered and so on.
That's because these take time. We are really now talking about these processes once they reach a level of maturity and usefulness and during this transitional period adolescents are sometimes acting like children, sometimes acting like adults.
They are on this interesting bridge between the two, this is why their behaviors are not always consistent.
The question of schooling is important because the primary socializing agencies in our culture are the family and the school.
Now the family is critical because in some ways the family decides what school you are going to go to.
And I cannot emphasize enough the tremendous impact that what school you go to is going to make on what becomes of you in terms of your career choices, your personal life and everything that flows from that.
We are going to talk about the importance of the family in the next lecture when we talk about the development of the sense of the self and one's relationship with others.
So the family of course is of critical importance, that's where the early socialization takes place.
In fact some theories like Freud would pretty much say that what happens in this crucible of family interactions over the first two, three years of life pretty much sets the tone, casts the mold for the rest of your life.
But even if you don't take such a kind of a deterministic position that things really get locked in place over the first two, three years, there is no question that early family experiences,
the way that parents interact with their children, the way that they interact with each other is of critical importance in fostering this issue of cognitive development.
A home full of books where it is understood and encouraged that one should talk, one should speculate, one is heard, one is spoken to, one is intellectually stimulated.
All of these things are of great importance to how the child, when the child goes to school, is going to fare in that place.
So we have a tendency to blame schools for all of our failings in the educational system, but we don't often realize that schools can only work with the capital that they are given.
And even though the role of the schools are critical, all that happens before kids go to school and during they go to school, which obviously they typically continue to living in some kind of home situation, remains of great importance.
Once school is in progress and here again, we have to ideally start the story with childhood but that is beyond the scope of this course so we have to sort of focus on adolescence.
But as a way of introducing ourselves into this area, we have to think of schools as learning environments.
Nobody teaches anyone anything. You only learn. Others make it possible for you to learn, but they can't teach you.
You have to learn. So the school is a learning environment and so the question is what to learn, how to learn and equally importantly to develop the self-confidence that I can learn.
One of the important differences between students who are to do well, who go far and those who don't, sometimes is traced to this whole issue of do you feel that you can learn?
And if you don't, if you really feel that you can't learn, that you can't graduate from high school, then you can't do this, you can't do that, this becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.
So what passes sometimes for lack of intelligence has really nothing to do with intelligence. It has to do with the psychological sense of I can master this, I have the ability, I am entitled to do these things.
These are very important considerations when we look at the enormous disparities between social class backgrounds, poor kids, middle class kids, good schools, bad schools, who learns, who doesn't learn.
And we have to understand that a good deal of important considerations are going on here rather than simply rely on some abstractions.
Is the IQ high? Is the IQ low? As if that were the one and only explanation for what's going on.
Now, schooling has become increasingly important over time, particularly during this century.
At the turn of the century, most people in this country did not finish high school.
At the turn of the century, finishing high school was the equivalent of being an educated person. This obviously is no longer the case.
It is as if now going to college has become the equivalent of graduating from high school at the turn of the century.
In addition to what you learn, the content, the substance, schools have an equally important role of certification.
That piece of paper that says you have graduated from high school or you have a college degree is very important.
And sometimes it's misleading, we saw.
When somebody is being hired, it is not unusual that somebody may be more competent, but because he or she lacks that piece of paper or certification, somebody else less able may be hired to do a particular job.
Because our expectation is that certification is a reflection of competence.
Now, to give the benefit of the doubt, we've supposed most of the time it is, but not necessarily all the time.
We are going to discuss with young adulthood the tremendous importance of what career path you embark on.
And that is going to make obviously a tremendous difference of the nature of life you are going to have for the balance of your adult years.
Social disparity in terms of class differences, economic differences, now make a staggering difference in schools.
This is again one very important way in which the United States is different from other comparable western industrialized countries.
If you go to Europe, even though every country will have disparities, the disparities are nowhere as dramatic as in this country.
Where the difference between a really truly first straight school and one that is at the bottom of the barrel is absolutely amazing.
Certification coming back is deemed so important that we are now graduating some kids from high school who can barely read and write.
But if they have warmed the chair during the requisite number of years, we say you graduated from high school.
Now that can be helpful to that individual with respect to certification, but it doesn't carry the necessary competence that goes with it.
And not to oversimplify, the better off the community, the better the school.
This is why all these attempts at busing and creating sort of ways in which people have taken from disadvantaged environments to better schools and all the problems that these things create.
You see the complexities and the concerns, all of which are really well taken because what school you go to is critically important because education is like a ladder.
It's a system that has stages and once you get on a particular ladder, it's not so easy to shift tracks.
So people by choice or otherwise in some ways are tracked fairly early and therefore by the time you reach adolescence, by the time you go to high schools,
a great deal of water has already flown under the bridge and even though fortunately this country still has a great deal of openness and flexibility
so that the exceptional individual or the perhaps not so exceptional individual with a little bit of help may be pulled out of a dead end path to something that is more promising, but more often than not this does not happen.
To project a little bit ahead in terms of career choice, first job, there are three factors that have been shown over and over to determine what kind of first job somebody is going to have.
And the most important at the top is family status, family status.
Second is IQ or some measure of cognitive competence and the third one is years of schooling.
Now these three factors do not continue to be the most important as you change jobs later on, but of course your first job, like the first school you go to,
are very important also in determining what you do next, even though there can be dramatic leaps and bounds from a dead end job to something much more rewarding.
We are going to have a lot more to say about all this when we begin to talk about careers which typically are a process that goes underway in young adulthood for middle class families more often than not.
And therefore if a kid drops out of school at age 16 and starts working someplace, then in that instance that career path is already pretty much set.
Now this comes back to how do you become an adult, when you become an adult, and we can see that there are going to be enormous differences in the life cycle pattern, in the developmental pattern of,
I may have said this earlier, somebody who drops out of school takes whatever job is available, if there is a job available, or has a child and sort of is in a way pushed into the adult stream before being fully ready in this day and age to be in that adult stream,
if that person has ambitions of going in a particular direction. Not everybody in this world has to become or can become a doctor or a lawyer or some other kind of professional.
There are perfectly honorable jobs and professions that have nothing to do with these higher degrees and so on.
But assuming that people want to get ahead in life and improve their lot, these things become especially significant.
Now finally we turn to the question of moral development.
In all cultures, in all societies that we know of, by necessity there has always been some code of behavior that tells people you can do this and you cannot do that.
The alternative would be chaos, and that certainly cannot be tolerated.
Of course society is also very greatly in how they define these standards of behavior.
And interestingly, societies differ even more in how they enforce these codes.
When you do a study of, for example, sexual morality of what is considered to be morally permissible and morally not permissible in terms of sexual behavior,
even though you encounter a great deal of variance, if you take broad range of societies, like 300 different societies,
before most of them became westernized, kind of homogenized, let's go back some 50-100 years,
you will find that there are quite a few differences, but the main differences that set these societies apart from each other
is not the differences in the law, but how it's enforced.
And therefore, more permissive societies are permissive because they allow people to get away and not do what one is expected to do,
and restrictive societies try not to.
That is a more important determinant than what is sort of on the books.
Traditionally, we have assumed in the West, and I suppose this is true in other cultures as well,
that there is something called the conscience, which is the inner moral policeman,
the guard that says, you can do this, you cannot do that.
And traditionally, the assumption is, from a religious perspective, that this conscience is in some ways innate,
but becomes active during puberty.
I don't know of any religions where children are held responsible for the moral value of their acts.
Children are usually not judged in moral terms.
And the notion in Judaism of the Bar Mitzvah, or in Christian traditions of the First Communion,
or rituals like this basically say, you are now in a position where you are going to be responsible for the morality of your acts.
You will be held accountable.
Now, of course, interestingly, in the past, let's say when these laws were enacted in the Old Testament,
these were also the ages when people stepped from being a child into the role of being an adult.
That is no longer the case.
Now, it takes much longer for people to reach adulthood in a psychosocial sense,
yet these expectations that in adolescence you are now responsible for the ethical consequences of your actions is a fairly consistent given.
Now, of course, unlike social scientists, these religious traditions do not go into lengthy explanations of cognitive development or what happens and so on and so forth.
The assumption, however, is there that you now have the necessary equipment to make these judgments.
And therefore, at some level, the ability to exercise moral judgment is dependent on having the necessary self-awareness and mental capacity of doing so.
Most of us, of course, still assume that this is what it is.
This notion of a conscience, we may not exactly know how it comes about, what happens to it, but it's the inner voice that says, do it, don't do it, this is right, this is wrong.
And again, the assumption is that this is something inculcated in us through society as part of our socialization process,
presumably through our families, through our churches, other religious institutions.
So in a way, even though one could say the need and the capacity for exercising ethical judgments is there, what particular system you are going to use has to be brought in from the outside.
And the question now is, how do you make something that you take from the outside your own, or do you?
This is where the interesting notion of cognitive development being the driving force of moral development comes in.
Before psychologists over the last several decades were able to elaborate this notion of moral development on a cognitive model,
the more prevalent perspective on the development of the conscious came from psychoanalysis.
And in the psychoanalytic scheme, conscience is the outcome of the early phases of psychosexual development, and specifically the result of the development of the so-called super ego.
Very briefly, we in this particular model, you have a sort of a three-part mental apparatus.
The id, which is the conglomerate of the impulses, of the drives, of what used to be called the instincts, what makes you want to do something,
perhaps exemplified based on my best of all through the sexual urge.
And then you have the ego that is sort of the executive head, which is trying to keep the demands of the id to some extent satisfied,
yet within the constraints of what's allowable and what the consequences are.
And from the ego, you are then deriving gradually the super ego,
which becomes, which is the result of the internalization of the values that are transmitted to you in terms of what can and cannot be done.
So in this scheme, it is in the sort of as a result of the edipal phase of development,
that as the three-four-year-old child comes out of successfully resolving those conflicts involving the parents,
the super ego begins to operate in a normative sense of development.
Now like everything else, things always don't happen on schedule,
and so you end up with some people who really never develop an adequate super ego,
who do things that are very harmful, yet they don't feel guilty about it.
The other side of the coin is that you have some people who feel guilty over things that they have no reason to feel guilty.
So there is excessive guilt and there is inadequate guilt,
but these are the abnormal variants of sort of the normal sense of guilt,
which most reasonable people will agree should follow, in other words,
should follow from a transgression that is generally understood as something that ought not to be done.
Now the cognitive model I'm going to discuss comes primarily from a work of a psychologist called Kolberg,
and Kolberg also has a stage model.
See the stage model keeps coming back,
because particularly in this instance where the basis of the moral development is cognitive development,
and because Piaget's notion of cognitive development is stage-based,
in some ways the tradition is driving the same system.
Kolberg says there are three levels of morality,
pre-conventional, conventional, and post-conventional,
and each of these three levels have two stages,
so you have three levels and six stages.
The first stage of level one, pre-conventional level of morality,
is driven by the idea of punishment and obedience.
It is an externally based system,
which essentially says certain acts have unpleasant circumstances.
You steal, you will get punished.
It's as simple as that.
If you don't like the punishment, don't steal.
Stage two becomes more of an instrumental relativistic orientation,
and now there is a shift to doing what satisfies one's needs over others,
but still staying out of trouble.
And here the idea of fairness is basically a very pragmatic one.
Fairness is you scratch my back, I will scratch your back.
So there is more reciprocity,
but again, you see everything is very much keyed to the external consequences
of what may or may not happen.
When you move to level two of conventional level of morality,
now group expectations and values become more prominent.
So we are moving from sort of the externals to the group values and expectations,
and you would have guessed this from the word conventional,
because convention means doing things the way things have been always done.
In other words, what is considered to be sort of normative expected behavior.
Stage three, in other words, first stage of level two and stage three in the larger scheme,
depends on an action being evaluated by the kind of person
who is likely to perform such an action.
Nice girls behave this way, nice boys behave that way,
and therefore in order to be a nice boy or a nice girl,
which is the right kind of boy and girl one ought to be,
one behaves a certain way.
So at this level of moral function, you basically follow convention.
Stage four, which is part of the conventional level,
is the sort of extension of this to the notion of law and order.
Here you have the law abiding citizen who does things
because the law says that you ought to do it.
But there is no questioning of the law.
There is no questioning of the law with respect to whether or not
it is generally fair or unfair.
If the state says slavery is allowed, then slavery is more.
Not only is there no questioning of whether the law as a whole is fair or not,
there is also no questioning whether the application of the law to a particular instance is fair or not.
You can imagine situations where in general you would say one ought not to do this.
For example, one ought not to kill, but other instances where in self-defense
should a person be permitted to break that law.
This is the kind of lockstep into which the conventional level of morality places people,
and they are folks that are predictable to the extent that they follow this stance.
You know what they are going to do because they are going to do what social expectations are and what the law says.
Now, level three is the post-conventional or also referred to as autonomous or principled level of morality.
And here the first stage, which is now stage five, invokes the notion of a social contract.
Now, the difference between the social contract and the law is that the law is imposed on you.
The social contract implies that you are a willing participant, that you are a partner with society,
saying for the privilege of being a member of this group, I will abide by the following rules
and you and I will, figuratively speaking, will come together and make the rules.
So this is the notion of a democratic society where each person has a voice
and which collectively people will come together and fashion the laws.
That is the nature of the social contract, of what is right and what is not right to do and you abide by it.
Not because you are going to be punished, not because that's expected of you, not because that's the law,
but because you have willingly been a participant in the formation of this contract.
Finally, Colbert says that the stage six, the highest level of moral development,
adheres to universal ethical principles, of which perhaps the best known and the most widely referred to is the Golden Rule.
Here, what we have is not doubt-shelt-to-this or doubt-shelt-not-to-that with respect to specific behaviors,
but a principle that says treat people as you want people to treat you,
do to others what you want others to do to you or don't do to others what you don't want others not to do to you.
And this now opens a whole panorama of the need to exercise moral judgment based on the particular circumstances that you are facing.
It does not have the advantage of your being given a script by which you can play the game.
The price for freedom is that it makes life more complex, but the benefit of freedom is that you are free.
And so the adolescent, one of the important transitions he or she is going to make is to become this kind of free, autonomous adult.
Thank you.
