In our previous lecture, we looked at the institution of marriage, what are the various
reasons for which people marry and what are some of the problems that seem to plague this
institution of marriage. And we made reference to the large proportion of marriages that end
up in divorce, something that we are going to return to shortly in this lecture. Now,
the big question is, if marriages are so likely to fail, if even marriages that do survive
are so plagued with problems, and without discounting the fact that there are also wonderfully
happy and harmonious marriages, if we agree that this is a difficult institution, it's
a difficult contract, it's a difficult business to make work, why do so many people continue
getting married? A simple answer to this question is, what is the alternative? So when you look
at the alternatives to marriage, to most people, they must seem even more problematic than not.
We are assuming that generally people are rational human beings, they don't always act
intelligently, but they are generally rational human beings who know what they want. This is
giving human beings the benefit of the doubt. Now, one alternative, of course, is cohabitation.
And now, several million couples, usually young adults, live together without getting married.
But, cohabitation, except for the fact that the couple is not legally married, and this kind of
relationship is not, let's say, sanctioned traditionally by the church or religious
organizations, the rest of it, for all intents and purposes, cohabiting couples have exactly the
same kinds of problems that married people have, which is a reflection of the need to adjust to live
with somebody and everything that we discussed. Now, in addition, cohabitation puts a number of
additional risks and burdens, particularly on the woman, because clearly all things being equal,
it's easier to walk away from a cohabiting relationship than from a marital relationship.
And to the extent that more often than not, women tend to earn less and be more dependent
on men than vice versa, even though this is rapidly changing. And considering the fact that the older
they get, the likelihood of finding a desirable marital partner becomes relatively more difficult
for women, time works against them. And therefore, marriage, perhaps, provides another level of
security. At least there is a certain financial obligation entailed. There is legal protection
more attention paid to children. This is why cohabitation has not taken the country by storm.
And in most instances, people who live together do so either as a prelude to marrying that particular
individual, it's like a trial marriage, or they try out the state of being married, as it were, to
decide whether or not it suits them or not. Now, so with all due regard to specific individuals,
perhaps a significant minority for whom cohabitation is the answer for personal, practical,
ideological, whatever reasons, the fact remains that that does not seem to be the answer to the
rest of the overwhelming majority of people's expectations of what marriage should consist of.
So this brings us back to say, this is a tough situation. How can we make the best of it?
How can we make the most of it? So in this lecture, the last lecture of the young adulthood
segment, we are going to revisit this question of what is it that accounts for marital satisfaction?
And what happens when the relationship breaks up and the result is divorced?
There have been studies of marital satisfaction. And if you plot this on a curve, typically they
go something like this. A level of satisfaction is high when people just get married. And then
it declines when the first child appears on the scene. It continues to decline as the children
are preschoolers, sort of hits bottom when kids go to school and are adolescents. And then as they
become older, adolescence levels of satisfaction rises. As children leave home, it continues to
rise. And in the later years, when people are no longer living or caring for their children,
the children are on their own, presumably doing well and they are retired, levels of satisfaction
go back again. That this would seem to be closely tied to the question of having children. And to
some extent, that is true. Because having children puts enormous restraints, enormous burdens,
enormous responsibilities, enormous restraints on people's freedom. So to some extent, that is
happening. On the other hand, children, of course, are a tremendous binding force that
bring and keep couples together. So we cannot ascribe this entire curve to the what's happening
with the children coming and going, although superficially, that is the way it may seem.
There are also other things entering the picture. Other things are simultaneously going on,
having to do with their sexual relationship, with their levels of intimacy, career concerns,
and whatever else is cooking in the pot that must also have some explanatory power in explaining
this curve. What are when we look at couples who say that they are satisfied with their marriage,
they have high levels of satisfaction. Now, we must understand that like everything else,
there are growing pains, maintenance pains. So we are not trying to talk about some sort of
idealized marriage where there are no problems, where the sun shines all the time and everything
is wonderful. We are talking about real people trying to make the best of an understandably
challenging situation. Once more, let's make a catalog of factors with the understanding that
none of these will apply to everybody. So in terms of relating our own personal selves to these
lists, we have to sort of pick and choose. First, let's begin with personality. Obviously, you are
marrying an individual and in this case, we have to focus on the partner, the choice. What
sort of person is this? One important consideration here would go under the very broad category of
psychological health. You can phrase it in other ways. It's very important that the person be
not burdened with some serious type of mental illness. People who have very severe mental
problems in the form of either very severe depressions or very severe disturbances of
their thinking without having to go into sort of clinical entities make it very difficult to
live with these individuals. Now, there are faithful spouses who out of commitment, out of love,
do wonders caring for spouses who are not mentally well. But there is no question that
that kind of burden puts an enormous strain on the marriage as do neuroticism, neurotic problems
when it goes beyond the ordinary quirks of personality where it becomes really difficult
to do business with the other person because they have these very strong peculiarities,
forms of behavior that are difficult for them and that are difficult for others who are living
with them. We will amplify these sort of the psychological component and how personality
changes and what all these things are in our last segment when we deal with the late adulthood,
sort of at the very end of the course as a way of pulling all these strings together. But meanwhile,
let's sort of superficially touch upon them. So severe psychotic problems, severe neurotic problems,
severe characterological problems, the kind of person you are, you may not need to have sort of
a symptom of mental illness or emotional illness, but sometimes the kind of person you are is the
difficulty. For example, people who are excessively suspicious, paranoid, people who are very rigid in
terms of their personalities, a lot of these put additional strain and the absence of these
make marital satisfaction more likely. But mental health is not simply the absence
of psychological problems. You have to have positive qualities in place. You have to have
mature ego defenses, again something we will discuss in greater detail. For example, it is
preferable that when you sense that there is a problem or there is a conflict, if you
do not want to deal with it, it is better to suppress it. That is to say, make a conscious
decision that I am not going to deal with this now as a voluntary act and you are aware that you
are doing it, rather than repress it, which is another mechanism where you simply push it under
the carpet without even knowing that you are doing that, because that is going to come to haunt you
and is going to trouble you because you do not have mastery control over it, because you are not
even aware that you are doing that. That is simply one example. The ability to empathize with the
other person. Some of these things are going to be repetitive, what we have said earlier, because
they keep coming back from different doors and windows. Putting yourself in the other person's
position. Sometimes you are supposed to have learned in adolescence as you are passing into
adulthood. Self-restraint. Simply because you are right, simply because you are right to be angry,
simply because you have been wronged or unfairly dealt with by the spouse, does not entitle you
to blow up to high heaven. Once again, people who make successful spouses are those who can
modulate their response. Being right is not the only thing to be considered. The impact of how you
react to being wronged is also an important consideration. So people who can restrain themselves
and not simply fly off the handle uncontrollably, once in a while one can help that, but do that as
a regular reaction, again interfere with marital satisfaction. The ability of husband and wife,
and I'm going to use marriage as the model, the same thing applies, I don't want to keep repeating
this, whether you are cohabiting or in same-sex relationships, that's not the issue, it's the
partnership we are talking about. The ability to read each other as it were, to sort of understand
what the person is saying to you, to understand, to hear what the person is saying, to be able to
read the meaning between the lines, not only to react to the letter of the communication,
but to the sentiment under the communication. Not only simply what is being overtly stated,
but what is being suggested. All of these things are important contributors to marital satisfaction.
The ability to maintain a certain sense of autonomy, as well as being able to come close to the other
person, be able to be alone, be able to be with somebody, have intimacy, yet not lose the sense
that ultimately you are also alone. Consistency of character, it helps to be able to predict
how a person is going to behave, but it's very exasperating to live with somebody who is so rigid,
so predictable that that person is like a robot, and therefore you need both consistency as well
as flexibility. Now these are some of the ways in which, and that we can talk about this till the
cows come home, these are some of the ways in which personality features contribute to marital
satisfaction or detract from it. Other factors have been known to enter into this. Interestingly,
the time that you get married, for example marriages that are contracted between the ages of 20 and
30, have a higher viability than those that are undertaken earlier or later, and one of this
has to do again with this notion of a social time. You will recall when we were beginning to talk
about how you measure time, there is a certain sense of a right time to do things, because
people collectively having done it over and over at a given time, at a given place in a particular
culture, getting married at certain ages makes more sense than others for most people. Now there
are very important exceptions. There may be excellent reasons why you want to get married,
not between 20 and 30, but you want to get married at 40, 50 or 60. We have to allow for that kind
of, perhaps even earlier years, perhaps 17 and 18. Simply because two people get married at 18
doesn't mean that their marriage is doomed. They may make a tremendous success out of it. Yet all
things being equal, age at which you get married makes it easier or handicaps you for whatever
reason. That's simply the correlation out there. Parents are very important. Even if we are
emancipated on our own, we are still carrying the benefits of the burdens of the generation that
raised us. For example, couples who typically express high levels of medical satisfaction
are less likely to have divorced parents, although some divorced parents certainly have children
with very high levels of satisfaction. Or if they are not divorced, the level of conflict in the
parents marriage also tends to be lower. Parents tend to come from more affluent or at least
comfortable, more educated social classes, something that's also going to be reflected in the lives
of these individuals. Generally, poverty leads to greater divorce rates than not. Maybe this is
simply the result that these people have a very hard life, and the additional burden of making
a marriage work simply makes it harder. We may not always understand exactly what happens.
There may be other factors, psychological and socially involved, beyond the question of the
practice, the practical aspects of how much money do we have to keep this family afloat.
But those are very clearly linked to this. The rest pretty much fall in place. Intellectual
shared values are shared political religious values. Involvement in religious people who
generally are serious about the religious beliefs, they are practicing of the religion,
are less likely to get divorced and more likely to express higher levels of medical satisfaction.
Now here we have to be careful because people, for example, for whom divorce is not acceptable
and who may feel that this is the only marriage I'm going to have,
may put the best face on it. And therefore, self-perception is not always a reflection of
exactly how you feel. So these things sometimes are not what they exactly appear to be. But on
the face of it, sharing of a common religious belief, being serious about it, do lead for this
kind of greater cohesiveness and the feeling that this is a partnership
in which we are invested very heavily and something beyond our personal selves are involved.
I'm going to delay the question of conflicted gender roles, traditional versus more contemporary
roles of division of responsibility for the second half of this lecture. But this has now
become a very central issue in the marital satisfaction, determining marital satisfaction,
particularly among young adults, the kinds of people that I discussed when we talked about
the career track and the particular study that I refer to that I myself carried out.
Now life circumstances, health is very important. If one of the spouses suffers from a significant,
serious chronic ailment, that puts an additional strain on the marriage. It doesn't mean it can't
be handled. It doesn't mean it can't be negotiated. Sometimes these adversities lead to greater
strength and greater commitment. But again, all things being equal, you know, this is one more
burden on the beast, this institution that has to survive, which makes it, which makes it more
stressful. Simply mentioned without having to discuss again, this mysterious chemistry of love
having it there, dealing, dealing, maintaining it, dealing with its ups and downs, clearly is the
cement that is going to not only keep people together, but lead to higher levels of marital
satisfaction. Now, since it's impossible not to have conflict, the difference is not only whether
people have conflict or not, but how they deal with the conflict. So those who report high
levels of marital satisfaction are the couples who have found ways of getting rid of the poison,
metabolizing the sort of noxious toxic products that are inevitable by virtue of living together.
And there are various ways of doing this. They deal with avoidance, sort of sweeping things
under the carpet. There is something to be said for not going to war on every issue. On the other
hand, if you consistently and systematically refuse to face problems and deny that problems are there,
then that's not going to work out either. It will do damage without you being aware of it and sort
of constantly come to hold you. Ability to resolve issues through compromise, through accommodation,
through give and take, through better understanding is of course the preferred method, but it's not
easy. And when conflict becomes inevitable, those who manage to maintain good marital harmony are
those who can also avoid doing damage to the relationship while they are trying to resolve
the problem. One of the ways in which marriage counselor etc. frequently say is that it's one
thing to criticize a spouse for what that spouse does rather than for who the spouse is. So there
is a distinction between saying I am not happy with the way you have done such and such. I would
rather that you did such and such rather than make a frontal assault on the individual and say you are
a lousy wife or a miserable husband because then what are you going to do? You know that that is
kind of a you have gone ballistic now. It's a total declaration of war. You are expecting the person
to become somebody else and most of us can't. One of the confounding factors here which again we
need to point out is that these things are both cause and effect. In other words, if the above
are true then the result is greater marital satisfaction. But you could also say that people
who are highly satisfied in their marriages behave this way. So it's a chicken and egg problem and
the sense is that they probably reinforce each other. Push comes to shove, relationship breaks up,
we have divorce. The rates of divorce we all know have have gone up spectacularly over the last
half a century let's say and have now become pretty much stabilized. This figure of 50% is
misleading because it doesn't mean that every other person is divorced. It means that every
other marriage ends up in divorce because there are some people who get divorced repetitively,
they inflate the figures. So in terms of actual individuals not every other person but more like
every one out of seven or eight individuals is divorced in this country. At one extreme we had
the situation historically where divorce is prohibited and absolutely simply is not an option.
From there we move to a situation where adultery and consummated marriages, some very specific
circumstances are adequate causes for divorce from a legal perspective. Now we have moved the
situation of no-fault divorce where basically all that is necessary for one of the spouses to say
I simply do not want to stay in this relationship. You don't have to prove anything in terms of
whose fault it is and this makes of course divorce legally much easier but it has not entirely solved
the problem of the consequences of divorce. For example following divorce there is a clear
differential impact on the man and the woman. In purely financial terms the man's income is likely
to go up, the woman's income is likely to go down. In 85% of cases the mother gets custody of the
children which is in some ways wonderful because you have the children but then you have the burden
of caring for the children. Child support tends to be erratic and typically inadequate. So even
though a lot of this burden of divorce has been lifted off people's chests the consequences still
are very significant. Now speaking of the burden of being divorced here again in history we have
moved from a time when divorce was something shameful and it reflected personal inadequacy.
The divorced person was singled out as something wrong with him or her. From there we have moved
to saying that divorce simply is a failure of the relationship. This is sort of the counterpart of
the Norfolk situation. She's wonderful, he's wonderful but they are not meant to be for each
other. It's the partnership that has gone bankrupt and interestingly some people now refer to divorce
not as a failure but as a relationship that has been completed. So it's not that something went
wrong but something came to an end as if that marriage had a natural life and it has finished
and then you move on and do something else. Now these are both reflections of our chain
circumstances as well as interesting uses of language to put the base, the face on what it is
that inevitably we need to face. While we are talking about impact let's say a few words about
the impact on children something that is of great significance and here the information,
the research is a little conflicted and so the extent to which children are damaged or not damaged
it continues to be a source of contention. Now one important qualification here is that you
cannot simply take children who come from broken homes and study them as such because who are
who are you comparing them to? The choices are not between children from divorced homes or children
from divorced marriage families as against children living in intact and happy families
because that's not the alternative. The choice is between what is the impact of children,
impact of divorce on children as against the impact of unhappy marriages in the lives of children
who remain in the marriage. That is much tougher to measure and if we don't know that we cannot
really evaluate the proper price of divorce which no doubt is there. Very briefly the impact tends
to be more on boys than girls right away. We are talking about divorce happening when kids are still
young but girls seem to pay the price a little later in the form of having more difficulty
establishing intimate relationships and the like. Children are often if they are going to be upset
by the divorce are upset during the first couple of years and then gradually they sort of make their
way into into the mainstream and there is good evidence that there is a higher likelihood of
deviant behavior socially deviant behavior in children from these single parent families because
perhaps single parents for whatever reason are more likely to give much more autonomy to their
children so there is less of this parental control regulation instruction. Now of course these are
general statements that probably if true will apply to large numbers of individuals but not
necessarily to a particular family or a particular child. Why do people get divorced? A big range of
reasons given which can be subsumed again this is what people say is not necessarily what is going on
but the reasons given by women that are in the highest percentages in the 50 60 70 percent
in walk things such as poor communication we were incompatible I was basically unhappy
and these are called words for a great deal more than what the words convey and interestingly
men say comparable things. Now if you take this big bulk of these rather vague
although strongly felt sources of dissatisfaction more specific reasons abuse is cited by women
in 50 percent of cases in the form of emotional abuse and a quarter of the women say that they
were being subjected to physical abuse. Now what these terms mean again are going to vary a great
deal from one person to the other. Emotional abuse may mean that the husband was yelling at her
or it may mean sort of a sinister orchestrated attempt to drive the person crazy. Once again
physical abuse can range across I'm not minimizing it but the severity of what is being complained
about varies a great deal. Now men interestingly complain of emotional abuse in a quarter of cases
but insignificantly in terms of prevalence with respect to physical abuse it is present but it
is not certainly anywhere like 25 percent. Sex is another specifically cited issue women's in
almost 30 percent say sex was an important problem men in approximately the same percentage
complain about that 25 percent of women cite infidelity on the part of the husband only 10
11 percent of husband cite infidelity on the part of the woman and then there are a cluster of other
issues alcohol abuse 30 percent of women say they got divorced because this was a significant variable
finances another 30 percent in-laws 10 percent and the men will cite interestingly alcohol
in terms of their own alcohol abuse as a as a significant factor in 10 percent of cases
and 15 percent say women's liberation ruined our marriage whatever it is that they mean by that
now these are not mutually exclusive reasons and so it's a mix of these things that according to
people's own self-reports means that at some point this marriage is no longer tenable.
What has happened in recent years which probably is responsible at least in part for driving the
divorce rates is that legally divorce has become easier as greater number of proportions of people
have become divorced than the stigma of divorce has become diminished if lots of people doing it
than you are less inhibited doing so yourself and an interesting shift has taken perhaps this is
past past the 60s 70s the sexual revolution and and sort of the important social shifts that
accompanied that whereas in the past the traditional sort of expectation was that in a marriage you
sacrificed yourself you bent over backwards to enhance the spouses needs and and and so on
and the shift now is to making sure that your own personal aspirations and needs are satisfied
so you have a clash between your responsibility to yourself and your responsibility to the other
now you can see that you may opt for one or the other but the two cannot be completely compatible
you can simultaneously when push comes to shove primarily attend to your own needs or attend
to the needs of your spouse and the second consideration is a direct reflection of the fact
that women in very large numbers as we saw in earlier lecture have now gone into the labor force
and they are doing the jobs that traditionally men did including going into the elite professions
in more or less the same numbers in this ratified group we talked about yet despite that they still
continue having primary responsibility more often than not in caring for their children
although the question of household chores as we will see is more of a division of labor arrangement
where there is shared responsibility but once children appear on the scene typically it is the
mother who steps forth either by choice or by force of circumstance and takes on primary
responsibility now let's trace back briefly how this business of division of labor what men do
what women do has come about if you look at the information gathered by anthropologists from
hundreds of cultures many of these cultures no longer exist in this original form in which
they were studied they were non-western cultures preliterate cultures but it's a huge segment
you can see that there's a very clear division of labor in that if you look at for example
in the aggregate let's say talking about subsistence activities what men do in a large proportion of
cases the hunting or tapping of small animals and fishing are activities that are almost always done
by men at the other extreme you have activities like grinding grain carrying water cooking that are
much more almost exclusively done by women and then there are activities that can be done by
either sex such as preparing and planting soil tending and harvesting crops bearing burdens
you move to the realm of the manufacture of objects and you have an overwhelming predominance
almost exclusive practice of men manufacturing weapons or working with metals or working in wood
and bark on the female side you have a predominance of women who do the manufacture and repair of
clothing pottery making weaving in the middle where it may be either sex you have housebuilding
you have the manufacture of ornaments now some of these differences are not difficult to explain
because in a way they are reflections of the kinds of basic biological differences we talked about
men being given their physiological capacity for the lifting or the carrying or the ability to
make these big bursts of energy are drawn by necessity to activities where this kind of physical
labor is involved now if you also concede the fact and there is enormous evidence that this
is the case men also generally tend to be more aggressive and therefore they are the ones who
almost always do the fighting the warring the hunting so that in some ways it is not surprising
that men not only fight wars but they manufacture the weapons that they use in fighting wars
however these physiological differences are not sufficient to explain a great deal of the
distinction that is nevertheless there so we have to look at some other explanations either
a historical explanation that's the way it was done in the past and that is the way it is done now
or a structural explanation saying that these division of labor between male and female is a
reflection of some more basic underlying condition or a functional one that this is it works this
is the way it works best because they roles become complementary it's a shared responsibility
or a reductionist explanation which harks back to what I said earlier the assumption that there
are basic physiological psychological differences between men and women and people tend to do
what they can do best and that there is a political explanation that in patriarchal societies which
is the predominant forms of societies women have been exploited and have been shunted into those
activities which keep them at home which do not allow them full participation in public life
which basically keep them away from exercising power and leadership which are tied to certain
jobs and professions in various cultures now is this going to change because there is a great
deal of interest in moving away from this traditional division of labor model for one thing the
workplace has changed tremendously even warfare has changed tremendously when when when people
fight they are not now swinging heavy clubs they are sitting in an airplane and pushing buttons
and for that you do not need to be able to have the physique of a gorilla and so the argument
goes that as we become more technologically sophisticated sort of pure raw muscle becomes
less and less relevant about what people do furthermore if you are going to be a lawyer a
doctor one of these highly paid highly esteemed career professionals then obviously there is
nothing men can do that women cannot do so once more the purely sort of physiological explanation
makes no sense yet attempts to change this have consistently run into difficulties one important
experience was in the israeli kibbutz which was founded on on the principle of of gender equality
and these were set up in a way to eliminate so far as possible these gender differences everybody
was supposed to do everything yet interestingly with that starting point gradually over a period
of time men gravitated to driving the tractors doing the heavy labor doing the work outside of
the home and women ending up ended up taking care of children taking care of the house cooking and
now instead of simply taking care of their own children and doing all of these things a little
bit at the time they ended up with full-time jobs of taking care of children or a full-time job taking
care of the cooking and so on and this made them acutely unhappy so there is a there is a dilemma
here whereas ideology may say to do something and then reality sort of stares this ideology in the
face perhaps again if you want to give a political explanation men have a way of sabotaging the
ideology so that underneath all the talk about equality and so on maybe that is not what exists
but this now becomes very much a question of interpretation and opinion a few words about
the young ambitious career-oriented people we we saw with respect to career choice and
career trajectory lecture the sort of educational elite moving into the professional elite when I
so looked at these couples these individuals it was very clear that women have had no trouble
moving into the professions where typically were male and they were doing fine so in the workplace
they had already attained for all intents and purposes pretty close parity yes maybe there
was still a question of a glass ceiling but most of them didn't feel they were particularly
handicapped by that perhaps they are still too young perhaps the glass ceiling is going to
they are going to hit the glass ceiling as they continue to rise through these institutional
hierarchies because despite all the changes the the sort of the top key leadership in this country
in most of the major enterprises still if not exclusively still predominantly remains male
what was clear is the difficulty of reconciling the demands of work and family now here as I
here again as I alluded earlier simply being married doesn't seem to create a lot of problems
these couples didn't have any didn't have much difficulty to say you cook I clean you do this I
do that and and generally that worked out fine now there are a number of interesting sort of
gender differences that seem to come forward which are almost comical men are very good at
doing things in an orderly fashion but they are not very meticulous when it comes to cleanliness
so for example if it's his job to put the living room in order she comes home and the chairs and
the couch and everything else is in place but there is dust on the table top and and so she
either says something or or mutters under her breath and begins to dust the surfaces and he says
but what are you doing I already took care of the house and she says well you haven't taken care
of it well so he says well if you don't like the way I do it you do it now that's the prescription
for an argument on the other hand you have the real problem which arises when a child comes forth
and here because the child's needs take priority over anything that the parents have to do
somebody has to take primary responsibility and even though these people can well afford with
a hundred and four thousand dollars a year can well afford to pay for good child care good child
care is very difficult to find so that is one thing that holds them back and even if they do
the woman still has to fret about what's going on much more so than the male these are very engaged
fathers these are not fathers who don't care but it is the fretting is still done by the woman
and so therefore clearly this becomes more of an obstacle in their devoting their entire time their
entire efforts to the issue of their careers if this is what they want to do and not all women
need want to do that they do not feel that they need to do that so some 12 percent of these women
in their early 30s were staying home exclusively taking care of their kids and virtually all of
these women have had a career like a male career before they chose or had no choice to in fact do
this the problem here is not that somebody's staying home taking care of children I would argue
that that is a highly desirable a highly rewarding and a wonderful way of spending your time the
problem arises because of the asymmetry the problem arises because there are very few men
who are willing to do that if men in this category and other categories were willing to
consider full-time child-reading parenting function as one of the options then we would eliminate from
this equation the problem of gender disparity so we will be no longer dealing with the question of
asymmetry and gender disparity we would be simply dealing with the fact that here is one option from
any options that you can choose and some men and some women would want to be full-time parents
maybe they would want to alternate but it wouldn't be like people women in this case are primarily
either by choice or by force of circumstances being segregated in then one area the way these
people with tremendous resources at their command are dealing with it
are four ways and let me simply enumerate them we don't have time to discuss in this lecture we
may return to the replay of this in a subsequent phase of life one is separation you either raise
children or you pursue a career and this option as I said is typically taken by women second is
accommodation you will take a kind of job and you will work hours that make possible to do the
best of a difficult situation now people do wonders about this but they live very harassed lives
they don't have a moment to themselves yet accommodation is one of the most positive ways
in which two people manage to make the enterprise going and the kids are well cared for next stage
is compromise and here the difference is that somebody is paying more of a price than they do
in accommodation and if that doesn't work the final alternative is conflict and conflict is
sometimes resolved to a satisfactory end and some couples very nicely managed to get out of this
conflict having redefined their positions or it becomes sort of a festering sort that continues
to affect satisfaction with people's marriages and careers and the attempts to integrate the two
and the last one of course is that it leads to a breakup either either a relinquishing of
one's aspirations in one careers or the frustration of one's aspirations to be a good parent
or failure to integrate the two this is now no doubt a very serious problem and I am hopeful
and confident that with the passage of time this and subsequent generations will have to find a way
of reworking and redefining how to go about this because the present way of doing things is simply
not sufficiently adequate
