In this lecture, which will be the last installment for the section on midlife, we return to the
theme of sexuality, a theme which we first addressed in connection with the changes in
puberty and adolescence. And of course, it is a theme that continues, has continued and
will continue through the entire lifespan. But I have picked this particular spot to talk about
function and dysfunction because some of the difficulties that individuals in midlife confront
have to do with sexuality. But it has to be understood, of course, that sexual difficulties
are also present in young adulthood, where typically they take the form of the inability
of some women to be sexually aroused and reach orgasm. And typically for the males, it takes
the form of premature ejaculation, where orgasm occurs earlier than the person or the partner
wishes it to occur. Furthermore, as we move into the later years, there are going to be
difficulties in sexual function for some people. Men are going to have more problems with issues
of potency. Women, men supposedly are going to experience more likelihood discomfort because
of the drive vagina and so on. So once again, for both convenience as well as timeliness,
this is why we now turn to the issue of what happens in the sexual lives of men and women
as they are going through this period of midlife transition. I want to take a little bit of time
at the beginning to review briefly what happens physiologically. How does the sexual apparatus
work? Because we need to have some understanding of these questions in order to more fully understand
what happens when things don't work. This research is relatively new. Most of it was instigated
by the work of Masters in Johnson a couple of decades ago. And even though this is a culture
which is suffused with sexual images and themes in advertising and everything else, we remain
largely innocent of any real knowledge of sexuality in most instances. And so what we see here are
simply the beginnings of a true understanding of what happens. Now, Masters in Johnson described
the sexual response cycle, the sequence of stimulation and response in the form of a sort
of a mounting excitement in arousal level, and which is followed by a period of sustained
excitement, which culminates in organism, which in the case of the male, is followed by a
refractory period during which the male cannot be aroused. It's sort of an obligatory period of
rest. And that orgasm is then succeeded by a period of resolution during which things go back to the
way they were. The female pattern is fundamentally similar, but not identical. Female sexuality
generally is more varied, is more complex, is more subtle, and is less kind of lockstep,
pattern which tends to characterize male sexuality. So the first way in which female pattern
follows male is that you have the same sequence of excitement, plateau, orgasm, but in this case,
there is no refractory period. And resolution then follows. The consequence of the lack of
refractory period is that women are more likely to be able to experience orgasm successively
without this obligatory period of rest. They always don't, they do not necessarily want to,
but they have this physiological capacity. This is referred to as the woman being multi-organic,
which is a little misleading because she's not having more than one orgasm simultaneously.
It's the sequence which is without this break. The alternative ways in which orgasms occur,
and here we are discussing and describing orgasms, not the pattern of a particular woman. In the
second instance, the phase of orgasm and the plateau phase merge together so that you have
this, the combination of an intensive experience which is followed by resolution. And the third
alternative is the plateau phase is bypassed. So excitement goes up in this kind of saltatory
jumping fashion, culminates in orgasm, and then it comes down. So this is what you have basically
in both sexes with the variations I refer to, a phase during which arousal is mounting,
reaching a peak, and is being followed by orgasm. There are two basic physiological
mechanisms that explain all of these occurrences and the changes that I'm going to discuss in
somewhat greater detail. The first of these is vasocongestion, which simply means that more blood
rushes into tissues than is drained from it. And this is what explains the process of erection,
which is simply a hydraulic phenomenon. It's very much like a water hose, a garden hose,
where you turn the water on, and the rubber hose becomes stiff because water is rushing through
it. Even though it is more obvious in the male in the form of erection, precisely the same mechanism
occurs in the female, which is manifested by engorgement of the vaginal opening, the clitoris,
the sort of tissues that correspond to the male organs, and also vaginal lubrication,
which is typically the first reaction which the woman experienced to sexual arousal.
So vasocongestion will explain what's happening for the excitement phase. Then increased muscular
tension, or myotonia, as Masterson Johnson called it, is a process whereby smooth and sometimes
the voluntary muscles gradually increase in tone, and as this muscular tension, this neuromuscular
tension reaches a peak, that triggers the orgasmic experience, which is manifested in the form of
0.8 second contractions, which are again the same in the male and the female. Now, all of this
doesn't sound very much fun, 0.8 second contractions and so on. This is obviously not the way that we
experience, subjectively, this tremendously pleasurable sense of orgasm, to which of course,
you know, people go to great lengths to achieve, but this is what's happening at the level of
the machinery, so to say. Now, what are more specifically the changes that the male and the
female organs undergo in this process? I will describe only on the key features, there are
a great more details we don't need to go into. During the excitement phase, the obvious change
is one of gradual erection, which doesn't occur instantaneously, and of course, how fast it
occurs is something we will talk about, because that is age dependent. But there are other changes
as well, and that include the scrotal sac becoming more compact, taking on the appearance that it
does when you are exposed to cold, and the test is being pulled up and being pushed against
the abdominal cavity. During the plateau phase, erection is now set and is not likely to be lost
as easily because of distraction or some other reason, and the changes I just described, namely,
the test is being pulled against the abdominal wall is more complete. Incidentally, this is
something that Aristotle had noted years ago, so some of these discoveries really are not brand
new, although of course, people didn't know what to make of that particular observation.
During organism, there are these 0.8 second contractions, during which of course, the point
of these contractions is to push the ejaculate, which consists of sperm from the testes and semen,
the product of the prostate gland and other related glands, I briefly discussed this earlier,
and the idea is to push this ejaculate through the urethra to the outside. Now, sexual intercourse,
to focus on that for the moment, is engaged in for a wide variety of reasons. This is self-evident,
and reproduction is only one of them. In fact, most of the time, we engage in sex
would not the intent of reproduction, nor the consequence of reproduction.
So sex serves many more functions than reproduction, whether it should or not, of course, is a subject
over which people disagree, but that's not the point. The point is, however, that biologically,
we can only understand the shape and the functions of the sexual organs in terms of the reproductive
functions, because during the process of evolution, these organs have been shaped and selected to
maximize the chances of reproduction. So in that sense, the sort of the biological logic of what's
going on is, in fact, reproduction-based. The next issue of what happens in the male is that
following orgasm, tissues go back pretty much to the way they were. Therefore, the sort of the
circulatory system regains its normal rhythm, and the extra blood is drained from the penis,
so you simply have the kind of normal resting state, and everything goes back to the way
that it was. When we look at the female, fundamentally, the same changes are evident,
except for due allowance to the differences in the anatomical structure of the female,
and here, the first reaction during the excitement phase, which is the result of
vasocongestion, is vaginal lubrication. There is also increased redness of the skin in this region,
and during the plateau phase, these are intensified, and another interesting change takes place in
that the outer, the opening of the vagina becomes very congested, and therefore, sort of tighter,
whereas the inner side of the vagina, the inner third, where the uterus opens into, it expands.
Why? Because should ejaculation takes place intravaginally, this is where semen is going
to be deposited, and the tightening of the outside opening is a way of preventing semen from flowing
out, but in terms of the experience of the woman, the intense orgasmic experience that she's going
to go through in the next phase is typically felt in this region of both the clitoris as well as the
congested region of the opening of the vagina. During orgasm, the same kind of 0.8 second
contractions, in this case, incidentally, also including the uterus, also the other
sphincters in the region, the anal sphincter in both sexes. So we are talking about not just an
isolated response, but a general response. During the resolution phase, things go back to the way
they were. I have simply focused on the changes that occur in the genital region, but we must
understand that this whole process involves the entire body. The heart rate goes up, blood pressure
goes up, respiration changes, there is a sort of a perspiratory response, so sex involves not just
the genitalia, but the entire body, and of course not just entire body, but the entire person,
the entire individual, so it is a total response. Okay, this is the way that the system is going
to work if things go fine. Things don't always go fine, so the question is what happens when they
don't. First, let's look at the impact of ordinary changes that are the result of growing older.
Now in the next installment, when we begin to talk about late adulthood and biological changes
in late adulthood, one of the principles we are going to consider is that even though aging does
not have to produce dramatic effects on what we can and cannot do, generally it involves a slowing
down, in a sense a shrinking of the reserve we have in our physiological systems. So in this case,
as the person enters midlife, and particularly in the later years beyond midlife, the changes that
occur take the form of the following. For example, the older male needs more time in order to attain
an erection, and the erection may not be as hard as in his younger years, and he is more likely to
lose the erection if he gets distracted either from some external stimuli or because of whatever is
happening in his head. Organism, while remains intensely pleasurable, is not as dramatically felt,
may be shorter, and the amount of fluid, that amount of semen that is ejaculated is smaller.
So all of these things significantly modify the experience, but they do not ruin it,
and therefore it continues to be pleasurable, but in a somewhat different way. The same thing with
respect to the woman where the primary impact of the menopause is this vaginal dryness and lack of
vaginal lubrication that we talked about. Easily taken care of through some kind of
water solution lubricant, and of course if the woman is on estrogen replacement,
then the lubricatory response is not reduced. Against this background where the system is
slowing down, it's less dramatic as before, but perfectly doing fine. What happens to sexual behavior?
Now if you look at an aggregate of people across time, this is from the old study
done by Kinsey, 50 years old and leaves a lot to be desired, yet interestingly still is one
of the most comprehensive studies that were ever conducted, and we don't need to be particularly
bothered by the specific numbers which may no longer be true, may not have been true in the
first place, but what is I believe still significant is kind of the general pattern that it describes.
So when we plot a graph showing age groups and the frequency of orgasm, the number of
orgasms per week from whatever source, we're not talking about sexual intercourse now, from another
source, we see that there is a difference between the male and the female curves on two counts.
One is that with the male, the peak, the average, roughly somewhere around three a week,
is already in place by the time the boy is 15 years old, and lingers there at that level
till he goes to about age 30, and then this output, the number of orgasms total from all sources,
seems to inevitably and inexorably go down, so that by the time the person reaches age 80 or so,
it is that curve has hit zero. Now this is true for people in the aggregate as an average,
but it is not true for a particular individual. So you may very well have somebody who is 60 years
old who fits on this curve where the age says this person should be 35, and you may have somebody
who is age 35 whose outlet fits the curve where the person is supposed to be 70, and therefore we
have to realize that there are very important individual differences, yet in the aggregate
probably it will hold true. When you look at the curve for females, the number is the median is
lower to begin with, it's less than one, and goes to a peak, and the peak in this case is in the 30s,
which is sustained, and then it gradually comes down. I would guess that it is the female curve
that would look more different now if we redo this study than the male curve, because changes
really have affected female sexual function much more so male sexual function, not at the level
of basic physiology, but here we are talking about sexual behavior and outlet and not just
physiology. So this means that there is inevitably, based on numbers, a reduction in
sort of the total amount of sexual activity that people engage in, particularly as they go through
the older years, midlife, and on, but this does not necessarily mean that this is due to hormonal
changes. Why we already dealt with this issue? There is no persuasive evidence that the menopause
in and of itself results in a hormonally based reduction in sexual drive in midlife women.
It is true that some studies show a definite decline in sexual interest and sexual responsiveness in
menopausal, post-menopausal women. Other studies don't, and there have been some instances where
certainly there are women who feel that there is an increase in upsurge of sexual interest and
responsiveness during menopause. Now these very much, these various outcomes are very much there,
but it's very difficult to pinpoint it to either hormonal or other changes. In fact, from everything
we know, despite the fact that women are so locked into this hormonal system of the menopause,
the chances are females are much less dependent on hormonal factors for their sexual responsiveness
and behavior than are men, and women are much more subject to psychological and social factors.
So that's what drives the female system, whereas males appear to be far more dependent on hormones,
and here the evidence is compelling in that if levels of androgen fall below a critical line,
then the male will inevitably almost go into a decline, and this is going to first of all take
the form of decline in sexual interest. There will be a loss of sexual drive, which will follow by
loss of seminal emission, which will follow by disturbances with erection, erections that occur
during nighttime, during certain forms of sleep, which we are not aware of, referred to as nocturnal
penile tumescence. It's the fancy way of saying you have an erection at night. Yet paradoxically,
even in these instances, males do not fail to respond to erotic films. Now why should this be so,
is a puzzle, and whether or not there's a difference in the way they respond to tactile
simulation is also not clear, and of course the decline in sexual activity, when now we are talking
about sex that involves somebody else, also in turn depends a little bit on what the partner is
doing. Now there is no question that this is the way males will typically respond to androgen
withdrawal, but as we saw earlier, whether the decline in androgen level in the male,
which occurs with aging, amounts to this necessary level of androgen falling below the critical
line is the question, and the answer is that probably in most instances it is not, but we simply
do not know enough about this to be dogmatic about it. So the summary of all this is biology is
important in what's happening in the changes in the male, probably much more so for the male than
the female in a direct way, but also important for the female because of the consequences
psychological and social to the changes that are that the woman is going through the menopause.
Now what are some of the biological considerations which must be kept in mind when we are talking
about the ordinary changes in people's lives? Now I have not yet moved into the realm of sexual
dysfunction, although the boundary is very fuzzy, what is normal sort of up and down of ordinary
life and what we call dysfunction ultimately it has to be arbitrarily as defined by the person
or the doctor or somebody else. First to think about is health. Now under health a very important
consideration is stress. Stress is the enemy of sex for perfectly good evolutionary reasons.
When our character the nature of our brain etc. was being shaped which we have a long
ancestry as primates, as mammals, adaptation requires that if you have a tiger on your tail
and you are running for your life reproduction is the last thing that you should worry about
and therefore when stress is high up the reproductive system shuts down and one of the
ways this is manifested is that stress interferes with the person's ordinary normal sexual response.
Illness is another potential threat. Not every illness and all kinds of illness but certain
types of illness I will elaborate this further as we go along clearly can knock the system off.
Drugs are notorious for causing disturbances for perfectly understandable reasons. Now we
haven't gone into the explanation of the hormonal and the nervous mechanisms that control these
sexual reactions. Let me simply say that this is a reflexive phenomenon which involves the
functions of the spinal cord so for some extent it is sort of automatic and in the spinal cord
it is the autonomic nervous system that is affected that is in issue that's where the
centers are that in fact trigger erection and ejaculation both sexes and for example when you
give somebody an anti-hypertensive drug you are trying to modify the functions of the autonomic
nervous system which is causing the hypertension and in the process of bringing the blood pressure
down you also interfere with the function of the autonomic system which is necessary for the
proper functioning of the sexual system. So the side effect is very clearly linked to that
and this is perhaps one of the more dramatic examples I'll give more examples when we go on.
Effects of aging we have covered we will talk more about this this idea of organ reserve is
something I will elaborate in the next in the next unit when we talk about effects of aging
changes in response cycle I covered and sex hormones is something that we have also considered
but I'm simply enumerating them as a review and the third part here which requires special emphasis
is sexual activity. It so happens that people who remain sexually active are the ones who are
most likely to preserve their ability to remain sexually active and this is true throughout the
life cycle including midlife and later years. So if you forget everything that I have to say in
this lecture one thing to remember that here the rule as in other things is use it or lose it.
Now there is here a confounding variable I am suggesting that people who continue to use it
retain it it can also be true however that it works the other way that is to say those who have
retained it are the ones to use it and I think it works both ways use perpetuates use and use
depends on the ability to use. How about the more general and more nebulous area of psychological
considerations? What accounts for this reduced sexual activity the sliding down of the curve if
it's not purely hormonal or not hormonal at all or partly hormonal and what is it?
Let's start with sexual interest. Why is it that couples who are otherwise perfectly compatible
they have satisfying sexual lives nothing is going wrong over long periods of time presumably
especially as they're going through midlife I mean this block of 20 years they seem to lose
interest in sex they don't do it as frequently and what does this have to do with habituation?
Habituation the fact that you are doing the same thing over and over with the same person.
Now here is an interesting dilemma because in order for us to be able to lose ourselves
to freely engage in sex we need the kind of secure safe warm loving committed relationship
for most of us at least in order to perform and function yet at the same time this kind of
familiarity seems to lead to some loss of interest. There have been experiments
made with animals where it is clearly shown that if you put a bunch of rats together they will
copulate actively and then gradually will sort of lose interest you introduce some new partners
into the cage and they come to life and this is known as the Coolidge effect of all things named
after president Coolidge and based on a probably apocryphal story which goes something like this
president Coolidge and mrs. Coolidge are visiting a chicken farm and they are taken individually
on a tour and mrs. Coolidge comes across this rooster who seems to be copulating ceaselessly
and the and the manager is asked how often does this rooster do this you know five six times
manager says oh no 40 50 times and mrs. Coolidge says tell it to the president
and now it's the president's turn and he is brought to the same place the rooster is still at it
and the the manager says mr. president sir mrs. Coolidge told me to tell you that this rooster
here copulates 56 times etc. president says that's very interesting with the same hen there's no
sir with different hens he says tell it to mrs. Coolidge the point of the story is that
perhaps more so for males than females the variety of a new partner sort of jazzes things up but
this is of course highly problematic because in most instances in a committed relationship
the the partner does not tolerate the introduction of a new rat into the cage as it were using the
same sort of experimental metaphor so therefore you have to find some other ways of of changing
the scenery as it were and manipulating the environment without changing the partner then
there are questions of courtship which we go to great lengths early in a sexual relationship
which then we sort of abandoned and there is very much of a taking for granted well this is my
wife and my husband i don't understand i don't need to stand on my head this is part of our
obligations this is the attitude that eventually makes sexual intercourse you know something
like taking a bath it's nice it's comfortable but nothing to go wild over other psychological
considerations have to do with age gender status and we don't have time to go to go into all of this
but all of these issues really have important bearings on whether sexual interest persists
or not competition from work from other interests young two career families at the peak of their
sort of physiological sexual capability when they come home at 8 30 and they are absolutely
exhausted from the efforts of the day and they are worrying about the next day
that is not a very good setting in which to have a very highly fulfilling and exciting
sexual activity because you have to sort of squeeze it as it were between other things
now conflict within the person between two people poor sexual communication the inability to say
this is what i like this is what i don't like do this and do that i don't mean in a
some of a you know traffic directing manner but in a more sort of sensitive fashion these are all
again obvious common sense ways in which we fail to function properly and that in a way
undermines from a psychological perspective our ability to keep sex alive the question of
enhancement what to do there are lots of books out there and books of this sort usually end up on
the bestseller list that purport to coach you how to do it how best to do it setting technique
fantasy for some people uses of machinery like vibrators and so on and so forth i mean there is
no to end to people's interest and willingness to to incorporate things to keep this sexual drive
alive and here probably what is required more than anything else is first of all the willingness
to be a little bit more inventive to give some thought to what is going on not to
routinize manners on the other hand whether you have a candle on or a searchlight on or the scent
of a lemon or a tomato or whether it you listen to the music of a b or c these are highly individual
things and people really can figure these out very nicely for themselves only if they would try
and i think these books are useful because they give the permission as it were for people to try
so you don't look like you are kind of reinventing the wheel yourself this is simply a sort of a
superficial pass at this very complicated and and and awkward in some ways subject but the fact
remains that like everything else in addition to the correct choice of the partner to begin with
if you don't maintain if you don't work at it if you don't exert effort then you are going to have
sort of a humdrum sexual life and even that requires a certain amount of maintenance and if
you want to have sex to be a more important part of your life then it's going to take more effort
once more it takes two to play and the difficulties that lend couples in the offices of sex therapists
and counselors and so on more often than not are the result of discrepancies in expectations
whether you make love once a week or once a month is not as important as the fact that you both
want to do it at a particular frequency it's when one says once a week one says once a month
then you typically have a problem now all of this is the sort of ordinary
wear and tear ups and downs of of of being human when do we cross into dysfunction where there is
clearly a problem that requires kind of professional attention will occupy us for the balance of this
lecture and here the classification which is currently accepted of the major categories of
sexual dysfunction are number one sexual desire disorders i will elaborate on this as we go along
to sexual arousal disorders orgasm disorders and sexual pain disorders sexual desire disorders
can be in principle of two types either lack of desire or excessive desire now i want to set
excessive desire apart because that's not something that lots of people complain about and it's another
version of the love addiction we talked about in other words if you are driven for to do sexual
activity which is relentless and not rewarding and you have to run faster and faster to stay
away where you are that's the category it's a behavioral problem in that sense and not in it
sort of a dysfunction problem in the in the type of issue we are talking about but lack of sexual
desire has become very important probably the more more people go to for help saying i no longer
have the kind of drive i had or i no longer have the wish to engage in sex once again typically
it's a question of a discrepancy between the two partners of how much drive they have or sometimes
they compare themselves to other people you know we are doing fine but i think you know the neighbors
are having more fun and why can't we be like them and that of course there is no end it depends
who you compare yourself to so that's the first category and the second has to do with arousal
disorders here in the female this takes the form of the inability to become sexually aroused
and in the past this was referred to as frigidity an unfortunate term because it suggests that
women who have this difficulty somehow are called psychologically and are not able to kind of give
off themselves and engage and reciprocate which is not true really it has nothing to do with with
frigidity or anything like that so we focus now on describing what the behavior is and not the
presumed personality in the male this is obviously male erectile disorder the inability to have an
erection and the word importance which is also now no longer part of the official terminology but
that is so much embedded in our language that it's hard to get rid of and the difficulty with the
the word importance is that literally it means lacking in power and somehow it again kind of
spills over from sexuality to the person and one may get the feeling that because you're not able
to have an erection you are less of a man and you may feel concerned that in other areas of life
that has nothing to do with sex you have lost power over what's going on so these two things have to
be detached from each other you move on to the next category here inhibited female orgasm the
inability of the woman to reach orgasm the inability of the male to reach orgasm is much less
of a problem once men have erections typically they will go on and have an orgasm premature
ejaculation as i defined earlier is typically the male problem premature ejaculation is typically
not a female problem because a if women ejaculate faster than they want or rather have orgasm they
do not ejaculate in the normal sense of the term faster than they wish to they can continue engaging
in sexual intercourse where a man would be out of the game or they may have a subsequent orgasm
sexual pain disorders predominantly tend to be a female problem partly because the female system
because of the process of child birth the the canal through which the child passes in the
normal process of childbirth nevertheless may cause a certain amount of trauma tears that do not heal
properly and scar tissue and so on and also females are very vulnerable to spasm of the muscles in
the region of the vaginal opening either because of of something that causes pain an infection
or something else or because of some traumatic psychological experience a woman for example
who has been sexually coerced may find it very difficult to engage in sex subsequently without
pain of course passage of time and the necessary support and help will often take care of this
problem so when there is pain usually it is more often a female issue rather than a male issue
although there are also conditions where men experience pain so once again a very sort of
fleeting review of what is entailed and now let us see briefly some of the specific ways in which
illness may contribute now virtually any system of the body may have a negative impact but some
systems are more likely than others for instance if an individual is suffering from an acute illness
like the flu a high fever and so on so forth clearly that interferes with with sexual interest and
sometimes performance similarly let's say advanced cases of cancer of debility become a problem but
what I want to want to emphasize is that it really takes a lot of illness to seriously interfere
with sexuality if all else is normal so one shouldn't get the idea that you know I am running a
slight fever so I am out of the game that that is a simply self-fulfilling prophecy otherwise
three systems are critical to what's going on more so than others the endocrine system
because hormones are the fuels that are keeping the system in shape and going the vascular system
because one of the central reflexes that allows visual congestion is the vascular
and neurological or the nervous system because in the spinal centers what we are dealing with
is the ejaculation reflex so these three things have to be in place and any disturbance other
locally or centrally any place in the system may cause difficulties do not necessarily have to
cause difficulties you move on to other systems and you have a reproductive system which obviously
is going to create difficulties if there is pain infection adhesions locally on a prostate gland
surgery for the prostate gland depending on the type of surgery may often damage the nerves in
that region so an older person who has prosthetic hypertrophy or even prosthetic cancer needs to be
told quite plainly what the risks are some men may prefer to go to the bathroom five times a night
and retain their sexual function so it's very important that one knows what the risks are and
what is the value is of continued sexual activity before one undertakes a medical procedure that
may have this kind of detrimental effect drugs I have already addressed in addition to
drugs for blood pressure other drugs that affect the functions of androgens or or tranquilizers
virtually any drug has to be seen with suspicion if after its use you begin to have difficulties
in sexual function this is something that the physician must be very systematic in
in taking down a medical history finally you have the sort of the broader area of psychiatric
disorders which again merge into the kind of pains and everyday pains and pleasures of living
stress now depression and anxiety if of sufficient degree are almost sure to interfere with sexual
function and so those two things must be kept in mind and here again the conflict can be either
intra psychic within the individual or interpersonal between two individuals
sex therapists have come up with more specific causes that are sort of more directly linked
typically you cannot make a one-to-one correlation that if you have this this is going to be the
result so typically there are a set of causes and the set of outcomes but in some instances for
example with erectile dysfunction the fear of failure the demand for performance the male's
tendency to watch what he's doing do I have any reaction don't I have any reaction is it firm
enough you become sort of a spectator to your own sport that is an excellent way of undoing
your ability to have any reaction depending on your particular theoretical orientation other
intra psychic causes are are invoked as well as dyadic causes I will refer to later now with
with women a different set of conditions are probably likely to cause here many women are
sexually not responsive because they have an inadequate partner who doesn't know what he's
doing or is not sufficiently sensitive so the treatment there is that the partner has to change
the way that he makes love poor communication and the unwillingness or the inability for the woman
to sort of lose herself this is true for both sexes in order for this business to work you have
to kind of lose control as it were and let yourself go there can be of course deeper causes having
to do with shame guilt relational problems unconscious conflict once again it is very
much is in the eye of the beholder in terms of one's theory as to what may be causing this
and the equally important in fact the hallmark of the new methods of sex therapy is this idea
that you do not single either the male or the female partner but rather you focus on the
relationship as the cause of the trouble so it's not his fault or her fault but something in the
interaction needs to be mended and here you have to look at things like rejection hostility
fear of rejection lack of trust power struggles disappointments are sort of what one expects
of the other person sexual sabotage pressuring the other person making oneself physically
unattractive let alone repulsive huge range of ways in which people in fact sabotage this
now some of these may be specific to the particular relationship in other words they can be reactive
to the individual but it's also possible that we bring our problems and deaths from previous
relationships to new relationships so it's possible that you may have a certain attitude
towards sexuality and the sexual partner based on your relationship with parents previous spouses
friends whatever and without being quite aware of it you dump this on the new sexual partner
so the new sexual partner is seen in one of these ways which we describe as rejecting
hostile and so on so forth not because the partner is like that but because you have now
transferred these feelings from past relationships on the new now what do we do with all this
these are quite common conditions the best statistics now show that almost one out of
three women says they lack sexual interest and one out of one and a half men statistically as it
were say the same complaint over 20 percent of women complain that this is now all ages not just the
not just midlife they are unable to reach orgasm or sex is not pleasurable on the male side
almost one in five complained about anxiety about performance premature ejaculation one out of three
unable to keep an erection horn erection one out of 10 so in translated into numbers we are talking
about millions and millions of individuals there are effective ways now of dealing with these
conditions there are now competent therapists who deal with these conditions both medically
and psychologically and this may range all the way from treating the underlying condition which is
obviously the way to do if you have located the cause or there are now ways that sound very dramatic
but may involve for example injecting a visor dilator directly into the penile tissue which
result in erection and if the circumstances necessitated there are even implants that are
placed within the penile tissue which with the function of a of a little pump like structure
make it possible for the male to have an erection but not all cases one needs to go into this kind
of a major intervention sex therapy often involves behavior modification techniques the couple is
now the subject of review and if necessary people need to go through more intensive personal
psychotherapy the point is that if sex is important and it seems to be important for lots of people
and if things are not working there is no longer any justification for simply sit on it and suffer
rather than seek help
