Welcome back, we're going to finish our discussion of shock by going through four other categories
of shock but keep in mind while we're talking again that they all have the same common components
meaning that the heart and the vessels are unable to keep the adequate blood flow to
the organs to sustain life.
And in the final common pathway here, the end stages of shock, we have always the same
sequence, decrease in cardiac output, decrease in tissue perfusion, impaired cellular metabolism
and finally multiple organ failure, sometimes called multiple organ dysfunction syndrome
mods but it basically boils down to failure and then finally death.
Now first we'll take a look at cardiogenic shock.
In cardiogenic shock what happens is that the pump fails.
This is very basic.
It causes the pump to have an inability to pump to the rest of the body in adequate levels
to maintain blood pressure.
Now there is almost always a relative overload in the vascular system here.
Patients with heart failure tend to accumulate fluid rather than pushing it out of the system
or losing it.
So unlike most other forms of shock where you either have real hypovolemia or relative
hypovolemia, in this case sometimes the tank is too full.
You have hypervolemia but the pump is failing so it still can't create enough pressure against
the walls.
The causes for this are myocardial infarction which is a heart attack and that just means
one of the vessels or more closes off inside the heart and causes death of heart tissue
without death of the patient.
In this case myocardial ischemia, lack of blood flow to the heart, myocardial arrhythmias
or rhythm disturbance which again causes failure of output, myocardial infections and pericardial
infections, the wrapping of the heart can get infected or bleed and cause compression
of the heart and finally drug derangements or toxicity.
For example digitalis which is the main drug in these kinds of patients who have bad hearts
that help create force of contraction.
You can get overdoses and toxicity where the digitalis itself may be the cause of cardiac
dysfunction.
It can be very gradual, it can be very rapid in onset and the signs and symptoms are a
little different from other forms of shock.
First of all the patient has dyspnea.
Dyspnea means difficulty breathing and this is usually from pulmonary edema.
What happens is the blood that is returning to the heart from the lungs is meeting up
with a side of the heart, the left side which is failing to push it out to the body so the
pressure backs up in the lungs, the pressure causes fluid to fill in the areas where the
patient should be breathing and so there is a lack of exchange.
These patients are having difficulty breathing and they become what we call cyanotic.
Cyanosis comes from the word cyanide which poisons all the cells in the body all at once
and the patients turn blue and these patients turn blue also because they are not getting
enough blood, deoxygenated blood is not really blue, it's more a purple hue than bright red
but the patient looks very blue especially their lips and the nail beds are the easiest
places to see that.
They start to sweat, they become anxious because of the release of adrenaline and they have
confusion, lack of urine output, that whole syndrome of shock and basic primitive reactions
that are in the patient struggling to survive.
Now one of the things that happens you get a kind of a vicious cycle.
You look here at the effect of this increased heart rate which the adrenaline is causing.
If you take a one heart cycle and let's say they have a rate of 60 per minute in a normal
resting patient, systole is only about a third of that.
It's a hard forceful contraction, gets everything out efficiently and then the runoff phase
diastole takes up most of the heart cycle.
Now when the heart muscle is contracting forcefully, it's squeezing down so hard that the coronary
vessels are closed by the contraction so the heart actually gets its blood during diastole.
During this long phase, during the runoff phase when the rest of the body is just getting
passive filling.
If you double the heart rate which is not very hard to do to let's say 120 and now you
only have half a second for each contraction, what happens is that systole is already so
efficient that it can't reduce its time anymore.
It can speed up a little bit but really only a fraction of a second and what you do is
you remove the length of time that diastole has to fill the coronary arteries.
So a fast heart rate is a doubly bad thing for these cardiac patients because they are
working too hard and their heart rate is demanding more because of the increased metabolism yet
if you look during diastole, they're getting probably less than half the flow they were
getting before.
120 isn't all that fast, it's not hard to get up to 160 and you can imagine how much
curtailment of blood flow there is to the heart.
Now this is in the patient with a bad heart.
A normal athlete can get up to a heart rate of 180 and have no problems at all except
incurring a little bit of an oxygen debt which they can pay off later by panting and gasping
and cooling down.
This patient is in real trouble and the more we stress the heart, the worse it gets.
The other thing about this is it's very, very unresponsive to treatment.
When you have myocardial infarction, the first of the diseases I talked about, a heart attack
basically, there's a certain survival rate and most patients in fact do survive their
first heart attack if it's not a huge amount of muscle and they're still being able to
pump.
However, if you see a patient who has a myocardial infarction, definite loss of heart muscle
and it's coupled with cardiogenic shock, meaning that there's been enough muscle damage so
that the patient cannot put out the blood it needs so that the pump is partially failing,
that has about a 70% mortality no matter what we do.
It's a very, very bad component to have attached to just a routine, ordinary heart attack.
So patients who have this really get into a lot of trouble.
This quick slide shows you all the things that can cause the heart pump to fail, the
event causes decrease in cardiac output but it does cause release of adrenaline, heart
speeds up, heart oxygen requirements speeds up.
So you get a further decrease in cardiac output, a vicious cycle here, falling blood
pressure and then the final spiral down to death.
This is a very, very serious disease.
The next one we'll talk about, you've had a little introduction to is anaphylactic shock.
As you know, what happens here is we have a decreased vascular flow which results from
this overreaction from the immune system to some allergen or event that the body at least
sees as strange or danger.
Most of these are things like allergies to foods which can be very devastating, very
fast, drugs such as penicillin, again a few molecules, less often airborne allergens.
These that you inhale unless they're quite toxic on their own are less likely to cause
anaphylaxis as they are to cause let's say an asthma like attack with constriction of
the bronchioles but the heart usually isn't affected and the vascular space isn't affected.
Toxins and venoms are another thing, the toxins of course are doubly dangerous because you
have the toxic effect directly as well as the allergy and we have shellfish and medical
iodine dyes that we use in radiology and animal sera in vaccines.
Not so much today because we're using genetically engineered vaccines but we used to get this
with people allergic to horse serum or cow serum or even egg particles that came along
in the vaccine.
The body responds here to basically the presence of the allergen with a release of IgE and
then mass cell degranulation as you've seen leading to a massive immune and inflammatory
response.
The basic element here is going to be vasodilatation, remember what happens in that immune response?
We saw it before, you get an initial very short lived vasoconstriction and then the
vessels open up so that vasodilatation that we looked at many many times in that part
of our study happens not just in the localized area of the injury or the invasion like the
infected site or the stab wound or the traumatic site but it happens to the entire body.
This reaction is a generalized overreaction to the immune system so we create relative
hyperhypovolemia.
In this case all those vascular beds open up and fluid pools outside the blood.
You get transudation as well as exudation of fluid out of those porous bed sites into
the interstitial tissue and you now have marked marked relative hypovolemia.
There is sometimes the accompanying pulmonary smooth muscle spasm which just makes things
worse.
The patient is now not only having trouble moving blood through the body but it compounds
the situation because they also have the effect of being unable to breathe.
The signs and symptoms are very much the same they get difficulty breathing they can
get hives all over their body we call that urticaria itching and burning and they can
get very panicked from the adrenaline release.
I had a colleague of mine who is a professor of surgery and he is a very smart man did
a lot of experimental research he knew what was going on he was sitting in the dentist
chair one day and as you probably know when you get novocaine or xylocaine to block your
tooth there is also epinephrine in it and it is there to cause vasoconstriction and
keep your blood from picking up the xylocaine and moving it away so it prolongs the effect
of your nerve block.
Every now and then you get a little bit into a vein you try to prevent this by sucking
back on the plunger making sure there is no blood and then injecting.
This doctor got himself a good solid dose of intravenous epinephrine and he told me
later that he was sitting there in the dentist chair hanging on to the chair telling himself
this is IV epinephrine my heart is racing in response he said it was just about to burst
out of his chest and I've got anxiety and high blood pressure and I'm going to be okay
it's going to go away in another minute and I'm going to run screaming from the office
he said he had to actually hold on to the chair and talk himself through it because
the panic attack just from the chemical was so great even though he knew and could tell
himself that this is nothing this is a chemical attack everything is going to be fine so you
can imagine in a patient who is having difficulty breathing and all the other problems and doesn't
know if they are going to be okay that this can be a very frightening experience.
The treatment for this is very urgent this has a very high mortality because of the
magnitude it's not just a mild allergy response and unless these patients are treated aggressively
immediately many of them will die.
You need to remove the allergen that's not usually possible and you need to reverse the
hypovolemia if you're in a hospital setting by judicious use of increasing the fluid volume
with plasma or fluids and not whole blood because they're not losing whole blood and
that's often not possible because these patients don't get this in a hospital emergency room.
Epinephrine is used to relax the smooth muscle in the airway just the way you would in an
asthma attack and increase the force of cardiac contraction.
You pay the price here because you're going to have an inefficient heart that's burning
up a lot of metabolic products but these patients probably a large portion of them may have
a good heart anyway and can take it but the epinephrine is the key in the role here of
getting this under control.
Most patients who have had or many patients who have had previous anaphylactic episodes
or just severe allergic reactions will carry with them an epi-pen something the size of
the pen with a pneumatic plunger and a measured dose of epinephrine and even when they're
very sick they can whip it out, even stab it through their clothing into their skin
and it automatically fires and people who have this problem are very well advised to
keep one of these with them and some of them carry also injectable antihistamines and even
corticosteroids in high doses to rapidly reverse this.
You really need to get these patients to the hospital as soon as possible and patients
who either live far away from medical care or spend time in the wilderness or remote
areas generally know enough to carry this with them.
So that is anaphylactic shock and very, very serious, very, very common.
It also has the same routine.
Here you have the extreme overreaction of the immune system, the mechanism of which you
already know histamines, the kinins and prostaglandins, relative hypovolemia caused by vasodilatation
made worse by the respiratory component and then extravasation of fluids, the whole response
you already know about and this is the same old song.
Everything goes to hell at the end of this unless it's treated.
Let's talk about the next one which is septic shock and what happens here in septic shock
is very, very complicated and I have to tell you this is the one about which we know the
least.
Great amounts of money are being spent on research for septic shock.
We really, really don't understand this as well as we should and as you might imagine
this is one area where we're still not doing as well as we should.
It's a complicated progressive reaction from infections of various kinds called systemic
inflammatory response syndrome.
Systemic means the whole body.
It is an inflammatory response in part and also immune and a syndrome is a collection
or a group of signs and symptoms in a disease.
It's called CERS not to be confused with SARS that we talked about a few lectures ago.
It's characterized not only by infection but by usually bacteremia which means the bacteria
get into the blood, by septicemia with progression in severity so that first the bacteria get
in and then they're actually multiplying in the blood and that's part of the turning
course.
That's where things get very, very serious and then the patient shows signs and symptoms
of shock.
Don't have to go through those again, you know what they are and this leads to the
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome or mods where you'll see multiple organ failure all
at once.
The patient, if they live long enough, you'll start to see liver failure which has many,
many effects all over the body, you'll see kidney failure, you'll see all kinds of systems
starting to fail and of course what's going to fail last will be the brain and the heart.
The general course of this kind of shock involves one or more of several kinds of bacterial
infections and then finally the shock syndrome but no matter what we do for the infection
and the shock about 40% of these patients once they get into actual shock the way we've
defined it are going to die.
Very high mortality, we don't have a lot of diseases that have a 40% mortality or as
we saw in cardiogenic shock a 70% mortality, this is very high mortality for any disease.
It used to be almost entirely for some reason from gram negative infections and it had something
to do with that exotoxin that the gram negative organisms released when those bacteria died.
The part that was part of their coating, their outer coating and when I was in medical
school in the early stages of my residency we almost never saw it from anything else.
We now see both gram positive and gram negative infections causing this and possibly a combination
of the exotoxins as well as the endotoxin and also the detrimental effects of just
being sick from the infection to begin with.
Viruses and fungi for some reason rarely cause these problems.
We don't know why this is so but they're usually bacterial infections and the turning
point is the entry of the bacteria from wherever it is into the bloodstream and taking the
toxic products with it.
They have identified what we call triggering molecules, one of which we've known about
for decades is the endotoxins and there also seems to be something else called superantogens.
The superantogens are substances that trigger an extreme immune and inflammatory response.
Starts to sound a little bit like anaphylactic shock doesn't it, only we're getting this
response to the superantogens and they become very very self-destructive.
There's a massive release of basically every inflammatory and immune element causing what
you may look at as total body inflammation and immune response so it's very similar
to something like anaphylactic shock as well as in its similarity to its death rate.
There's something called cytokine storm which is a new concept and I mentioned that earlier
in which you get a vicious cycle of those very powerful cytokines from the inflammatory
process causing tremendous tissue damage and again adding to the state of shock.
So these patients have again a low blood pressure, a very low systemic vascular resistance from
vasodilatation, massive vasodilatation and they get systemic edema.
When you pour in the fluids they just leak out into the rest of the body.
They also become short of breath, they have altered oxygen uptake and they get this tachycardia.
Wide variations in temperature, they cannot regulate their temperature and finally one
after another systems go especially the GI tract.
They get invasion by the bacteria through the intestinal mucosa in their bloodstream
and they get GI bleeding so now we compound this.
The patients also may have hypovolemic shock if they lose enough blood and usually so diffuse
that you can't operate to fix it.
It's a vicious cycle, they get jaundice, they get clotting dysfunction so they get DIC
as well and they get adult respiratory distress syndrome.
I would have to say of all the forms of shock this is the least understood of any of them.
We treat these patients with antibiotics, massive intravenous antibiotics, nobody wastes
any time with IM, time is of the essence and we treat them with massive fluid replacement
and then sometimes we've flirted with vasoactive drugs.
These are the drugs that cause vasoconstriction to raise the blood pressure.
I won't go into what they are, there are many of them but you have the relative volume
problem, it's not adrenaline, it's a different group, they try to boost the blood pressure
but there are two-edged sword because these drugs also when they cause constriction to
raise the blood pressure they constrict the vessels going to the kidney more than the
other vessels and these drugs can shut down the kidney and cause renal failure after you've
saved the patient and then the patient has to go on dialysis either temporarily or forever
depending on the damage and we have used from time to time and it kind of goes in and out
of favor massive doses of corticosteroids and these steroid drugs suppress the inflammatory
and immune reactions and they can be given really in massive doses for a very short period
of time.
They are more dangerous when you give them in lower doses for a long time because they
retard wound healing, defenses against infection and so their chronic use is bad but actually
you can get away with huge pharmacologic doses for a very short period of time, meaning days.
That brings us to neurogenic shock, the last of the shocks we're going to study.
This is really also called vasogenic shock or vasovagal shock and what happens in here
the brain gives out signals and I showed you that in the last slide that can either speed
up or slow down the heart.
The 10th cranial nerve is called the vagus nerve, it's a huge nerve, comes from the brain
and it comes out at the base of the brain, goes to the heart, basically it goes to every
organ in the body, it's a huge, huge nerve that has lots of branches around the esophagus
and then it comes together again and goes to the stomach, goes to the heart, goes all
over the body and it has what we call parasympathetic function.
Parasympathetic nervous system is for rest and relaxation.
It down regulates things whereas the sympathetic nervous system which is where adrenaline or
epinephrine comes in, those are the up regulators, those are fight, flight and fright hormones
that are stimulated and electronic reactions that raise blood pressure, raise cardiac output,
dilate the pupil so you can get better light when you're fighting, up regulates everything
for survival and then the parasympathetic down regulates.
So we get overstimulation of the parasympathetic nervous system through the vagus, that's why
it's called vasovagal, a blood vessel reaction from the vagus nerve and dilates beds again.
So we're back into what you now can already tell me is relative low volume, relative hypervolemia
because of dilatation.
It can also happen from basically a combination of the two, up regulating the parasympathetic,
down regulating the sympathetic and it's very similar to the patient who is anesthetized
for example and we dilate his vascular beds as well.
You can get this from spinal cord trauma, you can get it as what we call spinal shock,
we'll do that, it'll just make everything vasodilate, you can get it from many, many
drugs, you can actually get this from a spinal anesthetic when you, we don't use spinal anesthetic
very much these days but in the old days when you paralyzed the spine by putting xylokane
in there so you could numb the body let's say from the waist down and do an operation
below the waist, couldn't do this very high because you paralyzed breathing but you could
do it below and going along with that virtually perfect anesthesia was also perfect vasodilatation.
Patients had to be preloaded with a lot of fluid so they wouldn't drop their pressure
and still many of them did.
Probably one of the most common causes of neurogenic shock named again because it's
emanating from the brain is emotional stress.
We all call that fainting and pain will cause this and that makes us faint.
Things we don't want to see, the body really shuts us off from this massive discharge and
there are people who just have a very, very active vegas nerve.
The symptoms here are anxiety, they start to sweat, they get pale and confused but in
this case contrary to every other form of shock we talked about they initially get bradycardia,
slow heart rate.
Everything else we saw a response that was tachycardia, increased heart rate and the
bradycardia only came at the end in the agonal or terminal state.
In this case it invariably starts with a bradycardia.
You take the pulse and it may be 40, 50 beats per minute instead of 70 or 80 and at that
level even if the heart is pumping hard trying to get the blood out there the rate is not
enough.
There's too long a period during diastole for that blood pressure to settle out and
the heart can't keep up with the pressure requirements.
So the treatment is to first of all get rid of the inciting agent always.
When a patient faints what you don't want to do is keep them standing.
It's okay to catch them so they don't hit their head but you want to lower them gently
and then get them lying down, get their feet elevated so blood can return empty that vascular
pool that you don't need.
Get rid of the vasodilatation by letting blood passively flow down back to where it's needed
so you really don't want to faint in a tightly packed elevator.
And victims of crucifixion also died of neurogenic shock.
Men was not an uncommon form of punishment long time ago and these victims were made
to remain upright under very stressful circumstances.
They often became dehydrated and had already gotten relative hypovolemia and then they
got vasodilatation from a vasovagal response as well.
They had massive dilatation and so they had again profound relative hypovolemia but they
could not help restore their own blood volume and circulation by lying down.
They had to remain upright in that position for long periods of time and so eventually
they suffered brain death by profound levels of shock, totally unable to correct the situation.
Now in summary, if you look at any of the forms of shock, it doesn't matter which ones,
the procedures are the same in treating them all.
Go back in your mind, think of what the final common pathway is and you will see that first
of all and simultaneously with other forms of treatment you want to stop the inciting
factor.
You want to stop the bleeding.
You want to stop fluid losses in intestinal obstruction or diarrhea or profound sweating.
You want to correct the heart defect perhaps for the pacemaker or some operative mode in
cardiogenic shock and remove the allergen and anaphylactic shock if you can.
Having done that you want to simultaneously support all the systems.
You want to replace blood correct fluid losses with the properly balanced fluid.
You would give digitalis in the proper doses in cardiogenic shock, correct electrolyte
defects, correct the acidosis, all the many defects that the shock has led the patient
into as well as drugs being used judiciously.
Not only the cardiac stimulants, we call inotropic drugs which can increase cardiac output but
also the vasopressors, the ones that raise blood pressure and anti-inflammatory drugs
and antibiotics.
That takes us through our look at shock and when we return we'll start our series on
the investigation of cancer.
