Welcome back. Today we're going to go to the conclusion of our cancer lectures and talk
about treatment. Now these include our biggest tools against cancer, our surgery, radiation
and chemotherapy. First I want to show you the Loeb's Rules of Therapeutics. These were
made by Dr. Robert Loeb, who is the Bard Professor of Medicine at Columbia University's College
of Physicians and Surgeons, and I suppose Barbers. And Dr. Loeb said, if what you are
doing is doing good, keep doing it. What you're doing is not doing good, stop doing it. If
you don't know what you're doing, do nothing and never make the treatment worse than the
disease. Now this was real genius. There's also the first law of medicine that everybody's
supposed to know, premium, no-lay, no-sary, above all, do no harm. And then one that's
not up there, my personal favorite, isn't just make sure you remember that the patient is
the one with the disease. So let's talk about surgery first. Surgery has always been the
first line of treatment for almost all cancers and actually remains so today, even though
it's the most barbaric thing we can do, it's the most invasive, and yet it still has a
place, unfortunately, in the treatment of cancer and it takes the prime position. Because
surgery is the tool with which we can remove the bulk of the tumor most easily. We can
get rid of that primary mass, and this, as I said, is going to have the oldest and most
aggressive cells in the clone. So we need to get rid of it. It's a very important adjunct
also to staging. Let me just show you a comparative slide that we'll go back to several times,
but the good thing about surgery is it removes the whole mass whenever possible, and it is
instant debulking. We call that debulking because we want to get rid of the majority
of the tumor cells even when we can't get rid of all of them because our other modalities,
radiation and chemotherapy don't do as well. And it is tumor-ecidal, unlike anti-angiogenesis
therapy. This basically kills the tumor cells by taking them out. The problem is it requires
a target. We have to know where the tumor is. We may know where the primary is, but obviously
it might not be so good on an occult metastasis, one we can't see. So we need to be able to
target. It's very invasive. It's the most invasive you can be is to invade someone's
body with a knife, and we don't get control of the microscopic margin. So this is important.
When we take out a cancer, it's very important that we leave no tumor cells behind at the
edges of our resection. Now the way we do this is we try to go in and take normal tissue
around the tumor as much as we can without causing destruction. So in certain areas it's
going to be easier than others. For example, in the breast we can usually take an area
of normal breast tissue around it, whereas in the brain you have almost no leeway at
all. Everything you take out would be destructive. It's also important for us to have that margin
because then what the pathologist can do, again using breast as an example, he can take
that tumor mass with the normal tissue and roll it in India ink. And then when he cuts
it under the slide, he can make sure that there's no tumor cells into the area of India
ink, which would be the outermost perimeter of our excision. And we can do other things
to help him. We can, for example, put markers on the top and the right and the left and
the bottom of the tumor. So when the pathologist comes back and says, you know, you're really
too close on your top or your one o'clock position, then we can go back to that position
and the patient take a little more if we have to. So surgery is really important in debulking.
It's really also very important in what we call staging. In the staging of tumors we
are looking for the anatomic extent of the tumor. Purely anatomic. What we want to do
is stage the patients and we put them in stages Roman numerals one through four and this determines
further treatment. It gives us an idea about prognosis. And we can also compare series
of treatments so I can know how my patients who are stage two do with whatever modalities
I used to treat them compared to, let's say, Dr. Bonadonna in Italy who is doing work at
the Tumor Institute in Milan. He and I are going to be talking the same language. We
both know what stage two means. What we do in staging is we look for the, it's a TNM
staging. We look for the tumor size. We look for the presence or absence of metastases
in the regional nodes. So in the breast those would be the nodes mostly under the arm. And
then we also look for distant metastases which are different. And we number them from one
to four. Local disease with no nodes or mets are stage one. Distant metastases are stage
four and there are two more. In the middle they vary from tumor to tumor. We have different
staging methods to specialize the way we do it. We also have something called histologic
grading. This is something else the surgeon helps do. We number this one to four usually
from best to worst. And the pathologist does this by looking under the microscope. And it's
very consistent. If you ask 20 pathologists to stage, I'm sorry, to grade a certain tumor,
they'll be very close in their approximation. We look at how much differentiation the cells
have. You remember that the anaplastic ones do very poorly. Well differentiated ones are
more like the normal tissue so they do better. We look at cellular pleomorphism. We've used
that term before. Cells that are all different sizes and shapes are not as good as a consistent
size. Nuclear grade, again, how ugly the nuclei look. Number of mitosis. Mitosis are actually
seeing the cells divide. You can see the chromosomes line up like that on a slide. And we count
the number of them. The more divisions, the more aggressive. Lymphatic invasion, of course,
is bad. Vascular, we just talked about. And we have a machine that can pick out one cell
in 100,000 at rapid speeds, 1,000 per second, and tell us, do they have ploidy, the right
number of chromosomes or crazy numbers? S-phase, are they synthesizing DNA? The more DNA they're
synthesizing, the worse it is. Worse it is because that's what cancer does. How much
DNA? Cancer has a lot of DNA and usually bad DNA. And then specific gene expression markers
that tell us aggressiveness. So between staging and grading, we get a very good idea. Now
as you can see, grading is not anatomic. Grading is biologic. We're looking at markers
that tell us the biology of this patient. So for example, in breast cancer, we had three
operations we used to do. Dr. Halstead, who is very, very famous. He was the professor
of surgery at Johns Hopkins. He invented just about everything. I tell my students, if you
don't know the answer to a surgical history quiz, say Halstead. He invented rubber gloves
for his girlfriend who was allergic. She was the nurse and allergic to the disinfectant.
He invented three kinds of hernia repairs, mastectomy. He also invented the residency
training system in America for training surgeons instead of using a preceptorship. He also
invented the radical mastectomy because he thought you needed an on-block dissection.
So through an incision like this, the entire breast was removed. All the pectoral muscles
were removed because he thought it spread through the pectoral muscles often, which
it does not, and then an on-block dissection of all the lymph nodes. In about the 1960s,
people decided that really was too much surgery and unnecessary. And we started removing the
entire breast, but leaving the pectoral muscles, leaving much better function. And finally,
we moved into just doing what is now called lumpectomy, where the tumor is removed with
that little margin of normal tissue. And then through a separate incision, we used to take
out all those lymph nodes again, and now we do what's called a sentinel node biopsy.
We inject either dye here before the operation begins or during the operation, or radioactive
material that will, in a period of a few minutes, get picked up by the lymphatics and deposited
in these lymph nodes. Then we open up the axilla, the armpit, and we use a Geiger counter
and or our own eyes to look for the blue dye and find the lowest lymph node. We call that
the sentinel node. We take it out and we see if it contains metastases. It's unusual for
these metastases to skip lymph nodes. So if that's clean, we figure they're all clean. And if that
has tumor cell in it, we know it's already spread. Unlike Halstead, we no longer believe you have
to take them all out. This is really just part of the staging procedure. So in order to see if
this really worked, the national surgical adjuvant breast protocols were started way back about
three decades ago. They were double blind studies. They were randomized and they were prospective.
We found that lumpectomy with axillary dissection worked every bit as well as the modified radical
mastectomy, which worked every bit as well as the radical mastectomy by Halstead. And now the
lumpectomy with axillary dissection is the gold standard. That's really all I'm going to tell you
about surgical treatment. Basically, we would like to do less and less to patients in a surgical way,
but so far we haven't moved off that position of needing to do surgery in a lot of cases.
The next kind of treatment we give patients is radiation. In this case, we use high energy
coming out of a radiation generator to create a release of energy within the patient's DNA.
Now, if you look at this chart, here again is what the radiation is going to do compared to
surgery and compared to chemotherapy later. It's going to give us excellent control of those
microscopic margins because we're going to aim it in the area. The primary tumor was removed,
but it's going to have a wider spectrum and it doesn't have to see where those
scattered cancer cells are. It's very non-invasive. It has very few side effects of a serious nature
and it does kill cells eventually. The problem is you still need a target, just like the surgeon.
We have to know where we're aiming it. You cannot radiate the whole body and you only get one lifetime
anatomic dose. Once you have full therapeutic radiation, now this is not diagnostic x-rays,
this is full therapeutic radiation, you can never again give it no matter how many years later.
You've done enough damage to the blood vessels that if you radiate again in that area, probably
you'll cause necrosis and death of any of the tissue you radiate. Today, for example, if you
radiate the breast, the patient gets a tiny little tattoo at each edge of where they've been radiated.
So 30 years later, if you have to radiate something else in that area, you know not to cross the line.
And radiation doesn't handle bulk very well. It needs a small amount of tumor cells unlike
surgery, so it might be a good compliment to surgery. Surgery handles the margins poorly,
radiation handles them well, radiation doesn't handle bulk well, but surgery does. The way
radiation works is if you can imagine a hammer and an anvil and a spark. You strike the hammer,
that's the radiation coming out of our gun, our radiation gun, and the anvil is the tumor itself.
The tumor is serving as the anvil and it generates the spark, which is the energy being released
in the target. So in radiation, when we measure radiation doses, we really don't measure what's
coming out of the gun. We're really interested in what strikes the target. That's all that counts.
We don't care what's coming out of the muzzle. We care what's hitting the target. And we measure
these in what are called, for decades have been called rads, which is so many joules per kilogram.
It's an energy measurement. And then later on, they honored the founder of dosimetry, the man who
measured the dose, and they've changed this name to gray. So 5,000 rad is now equal to 50 gray. It's
100 to 1. And if you really want to sound cool when you talk to your doctor, you talk about a dose
in gray, and they'll really wonder where you got that information. The primary lethal event here
is the injury to the DNA. What happens in these cases is that here's a picture of DNA. This is an
X radiation. And here's some higher voltage radiation. This is Achilles electron volts.
And the wavelength is such that the X-ray, for example, can cause a break in the DNA chain here.
And as you go up, you can cause more breaks until you do a great deal of damage. The idea, however,
is not to fry this cell. Because if you're going to shoot, you're going to fry cells,
then you're going to fry all the cells that your radiation goes through. We can boost up the dosage
and really nail the tissue, but then you're going to destroy the whole purpose,
which is to get through the normal tissue and just hit the cells after. What we're looking
for here, the definition, the radiobiologic definition of death here, is to lose reproductive
ability. We want this cell not to die because you've boiled it up like an egg, but we want to make
it so that when it tries to reproduce, it just can't. And that may take several cell divisions
before it falls apart. And that's why radiation may take so long to see a result. These bad cells
have to go through a certain number of attempts at replication before they finally die. And what
we're doing is we're making use of the fact that because you're injuring DNA and because you're
injuring replication, you're also making it so that the radiation event is being felt most in
replicating cells, and that's your cancer cells. Most of our cells are resting. They're not replicating,
they're not going to feel this effect. So we're using selective dosages to get the cells that
are going to be hurt by the same dose the most. The dosage you'll hear, by the way, as I said,
is about 5,000 rad or 50 grade to a specific area, for example, the whole breast. If you want to compare
that with diagnostic radiation, an x-ray or a mammogram would be about one rad. And we actually
don't measure it that way. In the x-rays, we care what's coming out of a gun. We don't measure what
hits the target because we want all our x-rays to go through the patient, come out the other side,
and hit the x-ray plate. So we measure our dosages and we call them something else. But basically,
it's different and it's a much lower magnitude. It's a bit of a problem because low dosage
radiation can damage cells enough to mutate them. And that's the radiation carcinogenesis that I
was talking about in the earlier lecture, saying that we get injury to a cell, we cause mutation,
but we don't kill it. We kill it, it isn't a problem. Whereas radiation therapy is more likely
to kill the cells and even less likely than casual radiation to create further tumors down the
road because we're going to kill everybody that might be in a position to become a cancer cell.
There are radiation induced tumors after radiation therapy, but not nearly as many as you get from
other sources of radiation. Let me show you another method and we call this tangential beam.
This is called the linear accelerator. This is one of the most important machines in radiation
therapy these days and what it does is it spins the electrons into a very fast state and then fires
them out. We used to use cobalt and we basically put it in a brownie box camera that was made of lead
and we would open the shutter and then the radiation would come out the shutter and we would close it.
It gave us a lot of radiation, but it was slow-moving radiation that injured the skin a lot,
so it did not spare the skin and it also didn't have a very fine, precise line of demarcation.
So when we irradiate a small spot, for example, in the breast, we would radiate a lot of tissue
around that we didn't want to radiate. It was like using a shotgun instead of a rifle. It did a lot
of damage, but often places we didn't want it to damage. The linear accelerator gives us much
higher voltages and the beauty of the higher voltages is what we call forward-moving radiation
that tends to spare the skin as it goes through and gets more radiation into the target and then
we use something really very cool called tangential beam and what you see is what's really happening.
This huge, huge machine is moving around here in a steady arc. The patient is getting radiation looks
like on her head here and this laser beam is marking the radiation field and there is a computer
that's linked to the linear accelerator and they do something called a trial run really in the
beginning. It's called a simulation. The first days of the radiation, they set up the patient in a
mold so the patient is always in the same position every time for treatment and then they let the
computer decide how to deliver the dose and what the linear accelerator is actually doing,
if this is the patient on the table with the skin on the outside, the tumor on the inside,
the linear accelerator is shooting as it moves across in an arc and one beam of photons or
electrons is going through the patient, striking the skin there, striking the tumor and moving on
out and in every few seconds that the next beam is moving, it's striking a different place on the
skin, it's striking different internal tissues and it's focusing on the tumor. So when you're
giving this huge dose, you're really sparing all the other places and the tangential beam
is just hitting the tumor exactly where you want it to go. So again this, we do need a target here
but it's a very good adjunct to use along with surgery. Let's move on to chemotherapy and
talk about about its pros and cons too. Now chemotherapy finally moves us away
into an area where we have a few problems that are solved. We give these drugs mostly
intravenously so as you know within seven seconds it's going to get to virtually every cell in the
body. We have to calculate the dose but we're going to get it to everywhere including the tumor
cells but also including our resting cells. Now the thing about chemotherapy is we don't need a
target. This is the beauty, this is why it's become so important in metastatic disease. We don't have
to know where these cells are hiding, it will get there without us. It's excellent for micro
metastases, for the little teeny ones with just a few cells, maybe a few hundred thousand cells,
that's a little bit in the patient. They have no idea where they are and it's going to be very
effective against those. However it's very systemically toxic and it is no good at all really
for handling bulk. It doesn't get in where it needs to and it won't do the job. So again it does
things that radiation and surgery don't do and then it requires no target but it handles bulk
poorly so we use surgery to take care of that and it is systemically toxic. There's a couple of
things about chemotherapy that you need to know about. There's something called the Goldie Coldman
hypothesis. This is a huge mathematical concept and I have no idea what it means. I cannot tell you
put it up on that slide to explain it to you but what doctors Goldie and Coldman found out was
that chemotherapy will fail even in very small numbers of cells unless you go the whole way
using all the chemotherapy and get all the possible metastatic cells that may have some
resistance and you cannot back off and get the same result. If you're getting a bad result in
surgery you can always stop the surgery. If you get a bad result in radiation you can back off
let the patient rest and pick up again. In chemotherapy if you don't finish the course of
chemotherapy because of toxicity then the patient is very likely to have a lot of resistance cells
that escape through natural selection because they haven't been killed and you'll get the most
resistant cells. They also say that it's very unlikely you're going to be able to do the job
with one drug. We usually for most cancers don't use one drug. We use multiple drugs so that we
can lower the toxicity of each drug trying to get drugs that have different toxicities. One that
works maybe depressing the bone marrow is a bad thing. You get another drug that doesn't have
another toxicity and you may get a synergistic or summation effect on killing the cells you
want to kill and not make the patient so sick. So ideally you like to use either 10 drugs we
generally use two or three and try to get the patient to complete the whole cycle and then
what we do is give it in cycle so just about the time when things are getting really bad for the
patient you back off and then pick up again later and these cycles are timed to try to get the
cells when the cells have just caught their breath and are starting to multiply again,
you nail them again. Meanwhile normal cells have probably recovered pretty well whereas the tumor
cells which are kind of not normal cells may not get that chance to bounce back as quickly.
It's very hard to measure the responses unless you have some tumor you can see and this gets us
into the kinds of chemotherapy we can give and the most important one is a category called
adjuvant chemotherapy. Adjuvant chemotherapy has a very specific definition. It means that it is
given to a patient in whom we cannot prove that they have metastases but we highly suspect it
because what we found out is that if you wait until there are enough tumor cells to produce
symptoms and let us make the diagnosis then it's usually too late to get the best results
in the chemotherapy. The patient will have too many cells and the chemotherapy is going to fail.
If you move in to a patient who has microscopic metastases they're going to get the best result
but how do we know who that patient is? So adjuvant chemotherapy therefore is defined
as a chemotherapy given to the patient without proven metastases but who we think has a very
high likelihood of having those metastases. The example is best in breast cancer. We have patients
who are for example stage one. Now as you remember from our staging these are patients who have
had biopsies. Staging really is done at the time of surgery and it doesn't really change.
These are the patients who have small tumor usually less in this case than two centimeters so
less than an inch. We have biopsied their lymph nodes and we know they have no regional metastases
so it hasn't even gotten to the axilla the armpit and we can't find any distant metastases so we
have done scans and blood tests and x-ray we've done everything we can at this point we've taken
the tissue out we've examined the lymph nodes we're at the perioperative period of treatment
and this patient now has gotten all the information we're going to get
for us and from her about the nature of her cancer. If we just treated her with surgery and we also
by the way radiate the local area in the breast because we can reduce recurrence there local
recurrence from about 30% without radiation to less than 5% with radiation so they get a little
local radiation but they don't get any chemo normally. One would expect the survival rate for
those stage one patients to be 100% you should cure everyone and in fact it's not. If you'd look at
all the patients who are stage one and this is clinical staging we don't care about the real
stage because we can't get to the real stage until we have an autopsy we have to do something before
we get to the autopsy and we have to compare our results with our colleagues on how we treat that
stage at the time of surgery so from everything we know she was a stage one but 15% of those patients
are going to come up with metastases later they were actually stage four weren't they
they were in this group that had distant metastases we just didn't know it we weren't smart enough to
find out we would love to know who they are because we would love to give them adjuvant chemotherapy
a couple of decades ago we actually wouldn't treat any of them because we didn't want to
treat 85 patients unnecessarily just to cure those 15 we'd rather wait till they show up and go after
them in stage two and stage two patients here have a slightly bigger tumor but the main thing is they
have positive regional nodes it has spread no matter what the size and they again have no distant
metastases that we can see but because they have these nodes they become suspect and indeed if we
don't treat them about 60% are going to be cured but 40% now will turn up to be stage four so it
has always been our custom to not treat stage one and go ahead and use adjuvant therapy we can't
prove they've got meds but they're such a high risk that we decide to treat everybody so we can
help the 40% okay if we go back now and look at the some of the things we can do we can now
which we couldn't do 30 years ago get all this information in the grading we can add this to
the staging and what we can do for these patients is we can see it's this very anaplastic is there
lots of pleomorphism are there numerous mitosis and are all these parameters measurable and looking
bad we can say to that patient look you're stage one it's likely that you're cured but we've got a
lot of bad biologic markers we would do you a lot of good if we would do the chemotherapy now
before this comes back three years down the road and we can select maybe find that 15% of the whole
group of stage ones who would really benefit from the chemotherapy now that ends chemotherapy is a
subject we are also intervening now in many new ways not in immunotherapy against cancer cells
it hasn't been that successful however we're intervening in individual steps some of those
steps with the growth factors that I showed you earlier for example there is a growth factor called
HER2 and if patients express that growth factor we now have an antibody a monoclonal antibody
which we can inject and block the HER2 and stop these patients from having their tumor grow
out of control and in many cases even cure them we're experimenting with lots of these new
biologic factors to protect patients against metastases and this is probably the biggest area
of exploration and improvement in the treatment of cancer next time we'll come back and we'll
look at how patients heal
