30 years ago today Lucasfilm released a graphic adventure that would change the landscape
of adventure games forever and usher in a golden age for the genre.
That game was the secret of Monkey Island.
Today we'll hear from some of the team that created the game and find out the story behind
its development.
I'm on a retro tip and this is the making of Monkey Island.
This video will make some assumptions, not the least of which being that you have played
the game.
This isn't an analysis of the game itself, but rather a look at how it came to be, how
it was created and by whom.
Before we get to the secret of Monkey Island, it's important to understand the birth and
development of adventure games prior to 1990.
So a brief history is in order.
The genre itself and indeed the very name adventure game dates back to Colossal Cave
Adventure, first released in 1976.
This went by several names including simply adventure.
In these early days adventure games were what became known as text adventures.
The player is presented with small paragraphs of text outlining the story and its developments
and the player responds by entering simple one or two word commands.
Text adventures became very popular in the late 70s and early 80s, but it wasn't until
1980 that they became graphic adventures when Sierra Online, then known as online systems,
released Mystery House for the Apple II.
This was the first ever graphic adventure and, albeit primitive line drawings, depicted
an adventure game visually for the first time.
This was the birth of the graphic adventure game.
Obviously, technological advancements throughout the 1980s allowed these images to become more
and more detailed, but these adventure games still had one monumental flaw.
They still used command line interfaces relying on the player to input commands in text.
The text passes could be rather frustrating because they only recognized a set number
of commands, many or all of which would be unknown to the player at the outset.
The next significant leap for the genre came in 1984, again from Sierra, with the release
of the first King's Quest.
This was essentially a hybrid of graphic and text adventure.
The images on screen were now animated and the player could move the protagonist around
the screen without typing commands, but the majority of the game was still controlled
using text-based commands.
King's Quest saw a slew of sequels in the coming years, and some other very successful
entries in the Quest series, including Police Quest and Space Quest.
In 1986, Lucasfilm Games threw their hat into the arena with the release of their first
adventure game, Labyrinth.
Based on the Jim Henson film of the same name, it sought to sidestep some of the frustration
that came with these rigid command line interfaces.
David Fox at Lucasfilm developed a system using two word wheels, from which the player
could select from lists of available commands and interactive objects, thus creating an
instruction for the character.
This was far from ideal, but it was a huge step in the right direction, as it eliminated
the guesswork synonymous with text-based adventure games.
The next adventure from Lucasfilm Games, Maniac Mansion, came the following year.
Created by Ron Gilbert and Gary Winnick, Maniac Mansion completely flipped the adventure
game genre command interface on its head by introducing SCUM, or Script Creation Utility,
for Maniac Mansion.
This gave the player a selection of available commands, like walk to, pick up, open and
close.
These commands could be selected, and then used to interact with objects or characters
by clicking on them.
This was a revolutionary step forward for the way adventure games would be played.
This interface was obviously far more suited to a mouse, and even by 1987 they weren't
standard.
It wasn't until the PC port of Maniac Mansion that the real advantage of having a mouse
became apparent.
Lucasfilm Games followed the success of Maniac Mansion in 1988, with their second SCUM game
Zack McCracken and the Alien Mindbenders.
The interface was very similar, although slightly improved, but even at this early stage Lucasfilm
were already establishing their style.
Their next two graphic adventures were 1989's Indiana Jones and The Last Crusade, The Graphic
Adventure and 1990's Loom.
We'll hear more about Loom shortly.
And to understand how the secret of Monkey Island was conceived, we first need to understand
a bit more about Lucasfilm Games, and of course, meet the team who would create it.
Lucasfilm Games was a subdivision of Lucasfilm founded in 1982.
It began making original games for Atari, and all of its games were brought to market
by external publishers.
It wasn't until 1987's Maniac Mansion that Lucasfilm Games first self-published.
The company was small, certainly by today's standards.
In fact, that had been George Lucas's only instruction to the studio early on.
Stay small and don't lose any money.
The team that would work on the secret of Monkey Island were Ron Gilbert, the Concepts
creator, he also did design and programming.
Ron had previously done programming for a few of Lucasfilm's games, but most notably
designed and wrote Maniac Mansion, conceptualized Zack McCracken, and did design for the indie
and The Last Crusade graphic adventure.
Ron brought in two fledgling programmers to assist with the programming design and overall
story, Dave Grossman and Tim Schaefer.
They had both recently started at Lucasfilm, being hired in 1989 as Scumlitz, who would
help implement the designer's ideas within the Scum engine.
They had assisted with bits and pieces for some prior games, but the secret of Monkey
Island would be their first proper project.
The art team was made up of Steve Purcell, a cartoonist, notably the creator of Sam and
Max, who began at Lucasfilm Games in 1988.
He did artwork and graphics for the Indiana Jones and The Last Crusade graphic adventure,
graphics for the action game, artwork for Pipedream, and did character design and animations
for Loom.
He'd also designed the cover art for two games, Zack McCracken and Pipedream.
Mark Ferrari, an illustrator who had done art and animation for Zack McCracken, artwork
for Pipedream, and did all the background art for Loom.
Mike Ebert, another illustrator slash comic book artist, he started at Lucasfilm in 1989
and did actor art for the NES port of Maniac Mansion, artwork for Pipedream, and artwork
and graphics for The Last Crusade graphic adventure.
And Martin Bucky Cameron, who had previously done background art for Zack McCracken, graphics
and artwork for the indie graphic adventure, and had worked on a few other Lucasfilm games.
Steve Purcell, Mark Ferrari and Mike Ebert would be responsible for Monkey Island's
background art, and Steve, Mike and Martin Cameron would do its animations.
The art department was overseen by Gary Winnick, who had co-created Maniac Mansion with Ron
Gilbert.
He didn't work on Monkey Island directly, but oversaw the development as a whole.
The other notable team member was Michael Land, who began his Lucasfilm games career
in 1990 as their first in-house composer.
Prior to this, Lucasfilm had mostly outsourced the soundtracks for their games.
Of course, several other Lucasfilm games employees no doubt contributed towards the development
of Monkey Island, as was the norm at the company.
People often did a bit of everything, and it was common for employees outside of a games
development team to lend a hand where needed.
Quite a mixture of personalities here, most of the art team were illustrators or artists
outside of the world of gaming, and two of the game's lead designers, Dave Grossman
and Tim Schaffer, had never taken on such a role before.
Ron Gilbert first came up with the pirate theme for The Secret of Monkey Island as one of
several ideas for adventure game projects after developing Maniac Mansion.
Well, I had finished working on Maniac Mansion, and I was kind of thinking about another project.
And I came up with a few ideas that really never went anywhere, just ideas, and I wrote
down one page, and it was very common back at Lucasfilm at the time that people would
write little one-page design documents and then pass them around the office, and people
would comment on them and give feedback, and you'd sit down and chat with people, and
I did this for, I don't know, maybe probably three or four ideas post-Maniac Mansion,
and nothing really gained a lot of traction, and nothing was really super exciting.
And I was really kind of thinking about games like King's Quest, and you had a fantasy environment,
which was very popular back then, and it is today. Fantasy is a huge kind of genre in
games, and King's Quest kind of had this fantasy genre, and I started thinking about, well,
I wonder if that is one of the things that kind of makes it so successful, but I'm not
a big fantasy fan, and I didn't really want to make a game about dragons and such, and
I started thinking about, started thinking about them more, and that's really where things
like Pirates came up, because Pirates actually share a lot in common with fantasy, and I
thought, well, maybe if I did a game about pirates, I could kind of do fantasy without
actually doing fantasy, which I didn't really like, and so that's really where the whole
idea of pirates kind of sprung up, was from bad idea.
At this early stage, the project was known as Mutiny on Monkey Island. Looking at this
early design document, it had only vague similarities with the final game.
There were probably two major influences that just happened to, just by coincidence, you'll
read the book on Stranger Tides, which Tim Powers wrote, and that book was like this
real kind of eye-opener for me, because in that book, there were two things that kind
of made everything that I was thinking about for Monkey Island really click, and one was
that the protagonist in the story was kind of a fish out of water a little bit, right?
He was not a seasoned pirate. He doesn't really understand this world that he's in.
That made a lot of sense to me, and a lot of stuff with Monkey Island really clicked at that
point, because that's when I started thinking about, you know, the player is really in that
situation too, right? The player is not a seasoned pirate, and so it's really nice to be able to
push this, you know, protagonist into the world that doesn't know what's going on,
because the player doesn't know what's going on, and so they can both learn at the same time,
you know, about what it is to be a pirate, and that was so much so that the, I mean, the very
beginning line of Monkey Island is, you know, my name is Gavrish Supad, and I want to be a pirate.
I mean, he just states right at the beginning of the game, I don't know anything about this,
so that was like a big inspiration for me, you know, from kind of a story standpoint,
and the other was really the Pirates of the Caribbean ride, you know, I'd always loved that
ride as a kid, and there's just this feeling to that ride, especially at the very beginning.
At the beginning of the ride, you know, it's very slow, and there's lots of blues, and it's
nighttime, and I think you're in the Louisiana Bayou, and I just, I just, I love that kind of
environment a lot. In 1989, while developing the concept, Ron wrote an article called,
Why Adventure Games Suck. This outlined the adventure game tropes that he wanted to avoid
while making this new game. These included, end objective needs to be clear, the player must
have a sense of what they're trying to accomplish, and why. Live and learn, no deaths. Backwards
puzzles, avoid giving the player the solution before presenting the problem. I forgot to pick it up,
ensure that essential items can't be made unobtainable if forgotten earlier.
Puzzles should advance the story, and puzzles need to make sense.
And give the player options. These rules would allow the team to veer away from many of the
gameplay aspects common to graphic adventures that had led gamers to become rather frustrated with
the genre. Well, with Miniac Mansion, you know, we, we dropped the parser, right? That was the
thing I hated the most about Sierra games was the typing, right? I really, I mean, the first thing
it really intrigued me about the Sierra games before, you know, I had done Miniac Mansion was
just that they were graphic adventures, right? I had played adventure games from like Infocom,
and, you know, even back in my university days, you know, the original adventure stuff, and I
played those, and I really enjoyed those. And I was very intrigued by, by Sierra, because these
things felt graphical, and they weren't, they weren't graphics like, Oh, well, here's a static
picture, right? They were, they were graphics in terms of, you know, the guy would actually
walk around and you move him around and things were animated. And I was really intrigued by that.
But I really did not like the parser, which was kind of where Miniac Mansion came from,
and the whole, you know, scum interface, you know, ditching the parser. So that was one thing I
didn't really like. The other thing that I didn't like, and I really hadn't kind of formulated
this idea until after Indiana Jones, but was the death part of it. You know, the Sierra games
really seemed to revel in death, right? It was, it was something that the game would actually
chastise you for. And I always felt like the designers of those games actually took pleasure,
you know, in setting up a situation where the, you know, where the player would, you know,
would actually die. And there were lots of places in Miniac Mansion where the player could die and
you can get into no win situations and kind of post Indiana Jones. I really thought, you know,
I don't think the player should be able to die. You know, you should not be able to get into bad
situations where you're constantly having to save the game because you're afraid you're going to
make a mistake with Monkey Island, you know, at least to some degree, probably mostly, you know,
I kind of fixed that issue with that game. I found for my personal taste that that was
always overdone, that the deaths were too arbitrary. You couldn't see them coming. You would have felt
like, like in Lucasfilm's Indiana Jones game, the one was built before I got there, you could
die, but it always felt like you earned it. You know, you lost a fight or something, because
there were reasons why you were dying. Whereas in the Sierra game, you would just, you know,
sort of accidentally click too far on the heart and you would walk into traffic and be run over by
accident. So that was sort of the, I think, the big philosophical difference between us. And we
would go out of our way to ensure that we didn't break the fantasy that never killed you off.
Ron assembled a team to work on this new project.
We had hired some more kind of programmers, and, you know, people like Steve Purcell had done a
lot of the art for, for the Indiana Jones game. And so, you know, I was familiar with him by working
on that. And we had also hired some new programmers to work in the scum system. I think there were
four of them that we had hired. You know, it kind of had that pool of people to really choose from,
you know, in terms of programmers. And, you know, Steve was kind of a natural, because we didn't
really have another project going on. So, you know, that's when Steve came on. And then Mark
Ferrari, who did all the art for Loom. So that's kind of, you know, I think how the team kind of
emerged. So at some point, Ron Gilbert came in and took Tim Schaefer and I aside and said,
look, I'm a game about pirates. And I want you guys to work on it with me, what do you say?
And we said, sure. So what else are we going to say? Of course he said yes. And that's how I
wound up on Gone Monkey, which was my first real, real game. I did background art for Zach McCracken
in using the EGA palette, using solid fields of color for the EGA palette. The next game,
the next major game that I did was Loom, which was done in Dithered EGA. Loom won a lot of awards
because of the way it looked and the way it looked was directly and almost entirely because we were
now using Dithered EGA color instead of solid fields of EGA color. And I believe that the next
major game I worked on after that was Secret of Monkey Island. I was already there at the company
where I had been creating some creature designs for a game that was canceled shortly after I got
there. They discovered I could paint and hired me to do the Zach McCracken cover. From that,
I was going to start on Monkey Island, but we all got shifted on to Indiana Jones and the
Last Crusade first. I don't remember Ron ever seeking me out. I was part of the small bullpin
that got assigned to whatever was happening next. The environment at Lucasfilm Games seemed
idyllic. The freedom that the development teams were afforded was significant and the setting
was picturesque to say the least. In those days, Lucasfilm Games was based at Skywalker Ranch
in California, a beautiful working environment close to the rest of Lucasfilm. I would drive up
to the Skywalker Ranch from Oakland, roll into the gates, maybe start the fireplace in the stable
house at the back of the ranch where our offices were. Settle in and start drawing into Luck's
paint. I can't remember if we would have teen check-ins every day. Gary Winnick was the head
of the art department, so I'm sure we would update with him at some point. At lunch, we'd walk over
to the main house, a big white Victorian house where they served an amazing lunch in a gorgeous
dining room with an NC Wyeth painting hanging above the fireplace. After that, Gary would say,
work or walk? We would usually choose to do a circuit of the ranch down to the farm area and
back past Skywalker Sound, which looks like a winery and past Lake Ewok. Sometimes we get
more ambitious and hike up into the hills surrounding the ranch. In the afternoons,
we'd labor at our desks and joke around as we worked. I'm sure Ron would come down and do
check-ins and let us know what was needed or coming soon. Late in the day, we would start playing one
of Larry Holland's World War II games. You could hear the little airplane motor buzz through the
cheesy PC speakers. If we goofed around too much during the day, we might stay late or there might
be a screening in the Art Deco Stagg Theater at Skywalker Sound. Once, on an after-lunch hike,
the artist decided to venture up for a look at George Lucas' observatory. He had built it to
house a telescope that someone had given him as a gift. On the way, we found a giant wooden spool
that power companies use to transport long lengths of cabling. We rolled the spool all the way to
the top of the hill overlooking Skywalker Ranch and let it go. It went careening all the way down
the hill and kicked up enough momentum to plow through a fence. Dorks that we were, we ran away
and never spoke of it. The location wasn't the only liberating aspect of Luke's film games.
The company's ethos was also very relaxed, allowing the development teams to shine creatively,
free from deadlines and money hungry executives. And Ron Gilbert applied that same spirit when
leading the Monkey Island team. I didn't realize how much freedom we had until later when I had to
have other jobs. We weren't responsible for keeping the company afloat. We were a tiny division of a
great big media empire that had lots of movie money and special effects money and sound production
money coming in. And it wasn't until a few years in that anybody even suggested that we
should make a profit. But I don't remember anybody specifically saying, you need to do this.
It was more, you know, we were all at 20 something and we were going into what we were doing.
Ron had a sense of what he wanted, but he was flexible enough to allow creative people to
contribute. To lead a project, you have to find out how to point everyone toward the same goal
and then give them the room to invest themselves in it. People do better work when they feel their
contributions are valued. The result is stronger when the lead can let the creative team flourish.
Although each team member had their role, a lot of the work on Monkey Island was a collaborative
effort, as was common at Luke's film games. Brainstorming sessions were common and ideas
were often bounced around. Working on the game and I was designing stuff and just really reacting
kind of to what we had seen implemented and going, oh, well, that's really interesting. Let's do more
of that. First of all, it was a new industry. Nobody had decided at that point what this was
about or what this should be about or where it was going. So everybody was in experimental
mode. Even the investors were in experimental mode in those days. So the fact that all the answers
hadn't been nailed down and everything that hadn't been nailed down hadn't been excluded
left a great deal of wiggle room that is no longer well, that hasn't been there until recently.
So our teams were six to a dozen people. Everybody knew everybody. Everybody was in contact and
talking and involved all day long and everybody was involved in all the discussions there were.
Everybody talked about game design. I mean, yes, we were each there to specialize in some part of
the game making process. A couple of us were there to do art and that was our area of expertise.
A couple of us there were there to do programming or game design and that was their area of expertise.
But everybody got together numerous times a day to talk about the art and the game design and puzzles
and dialogue and, you know, I mean, there wasn't anything that anybody was excluded from and there
was very little in the games that wasn't actually the sort of collegial summation of what everybody
had contributed. It was a far more creative, far more collegial environment than it is now.
So we would usually spend one or two, sort of maybe hour-long sessions together, all three of us and
maybe with some visitors here, brainstorming about puzzles, puzzle structure mostly, which
is all wrapped up in story and story structure. All the puzzles are sort of about people,
their weird needs. And then we would go off and have responsibilities and him and I were mostly
doing, we were sort of responsible for making a scene come to life. So it would be like, all right,
you're going to do the scene with these circus guys. And so part of that was, you know, somebody
would draw the art and but we would have to do some like stage direction, which is like,
these guys are going to stand over here and then when you talk to them, they're going to walk over
here. If anybody does any animations during the conversation, just say how and when that's going
to happen. When developing the puzzles for Monkey Island, Ron, Dave and Tim made sure to bear Ron's
roles in mind. Typically, we would do it how you might think of it as backwards, which is think of
the goal first, and then think of how you achieve the goal. That would start with story. So the
usual approach is to sort of take the overall idea for the stories and break it down into a few
acts. Each act has some kind of a goal that the character is trying to achieve. And then break
down that goal into some sort of goals that sort of make sense. And then take each one of those
and break it down into some actions that you take to achieve them. Each action that you take should
be hopefully something that makes you feel a little bit clever and is sort of a leap of like,
oh, I gotta do this. It's fun in some other way. And there's definitely a
space between telling people exactly what to do and leaving them lost. You have to kind of
aim in the middle somewhere where you've got some information, but maybe not quite enough. And the
more you poke at it, the more you learn, then finally you get to a point where you're like,
ah, I know what I'm going to do. The stuff that I like best now are the things that aren't
puzzle puzzles, but that sort of use the standard interface to do other stuff. So
I mean, there's the insult sort of biting, but also around that you have to, the puzzle where
you have to follow the shopkeeper out into the forest to find the sword master. And I thought
that was a clever bit of subterfuge. And there's one puzzle where you have to, like the grog is
eating through your mugs and you have to keep transferring it from mug to mug as you get there.
And I like mugs, I think just because they're sort of breaking,
um, breaking the, what we have come to think of as this game or the adventure game puzzle,
which is just use this on that and see the reward.
For Monkey Island, the scum engine was improved over the last crusade with a seemingly small tweak.
Players can now hover over environmental objects to see their description and therefore interact
with them. This minor change made exploring the world much easier and far more intuitive.
The game was also littered with references and in-jokes, a trend already established in their
previous adventures like Zack McCracken. These references included nods to previous Lucasfilm
adventure games, Lucasfilm movie properties, and even George Lucas himself.
The things that are sort of specific, timely references to something that was in the news
like that year, mostly probably wouldn't even notice anymore. But the things that are sort of
more general references to a certain type of character last longer, like Stan the Ship Salesman
is a good example. He's loosely based on a real guy, right, Cal Worthington.
But he was the used car salesman who was on TV a lot in Southern California where I grew up.
And people in Northern California or Oregon know about him. And Tim wrote that scene,
never having seen, I think, a Cal Worthington commercial. But he still kind of hits the
mark because there's something sort of universal about that kind of hand wavy,
noisy guy who's trying to sell you a car.
Dave Grossman even had a little dig at Sierra's adventures by programming in a spoof game
over screen. The way that happened was I got the background art for that scene.
I think Mike Ebert was the one who did that one. And there was just like a line over at the edge
of the piece of rock that he was standing on. And it just looked like a crack, like it was
supposed to break. And my first thought was, did I miss a meeting? And is there a puzzle about
this that I don't know about? So I just that night, I painted a different version of it where
the thing had broken off and made the piece so that I could animate it dropping down and
stepping it up there and put in this whole elaborate thing where the cliff crumbles,
but we just make the excuse that there's a rubber tree down there that you bounce off of
and you survive. But not before seeing the parody of the Sierra Death message come up.
Sorry, you died. No, haha. This isn't that kind of game. This is a Lucasfilm game.
The story and puzzles in Monkey Island were in the end very well put together,
and the game's sense of humour was light years ahead of anything that had come before.
The Secret of Monkey Island was such a joy to play because its constituent parts were all
exceptional, and the artwork was of course a huge part of this. Even the box art,
designed by Steve Bissell, was striking. For the first cover, we worked with an outside designer
for the logo, and I designed the illustration to fit with it. I must have started on it pretty
early because I have sketches of a version of Guybrush that's nothing like what he came to be.
In the roughs, he was kind of a muscly doofus. I had done the Zach McCracken cover previously,
and Ron said he wanted Monkey Island more realistic. That was a stretch for me,
but I did what I could with it.
In those days, a video game's box art was far more important than it is today.
Kids couldn't simply look up a game on the internet to assess its appeal,
so sales were made and broken on the attractive box art sat on the shelves.
Even the game's copy protection was visually striking, the Dyla Pirate Wheel.
The game would give the player a composite face made up of two different pirate faces.
It would then ask for a specific date to be entered relating to one of several Caribbean islands,
an ingenious device, and a bit of fun. During a particular rush period to get the game onto
shelves, the team were all hands on deck, so it's possible that Dave Grossman himself assembled
your Dyla Pirate Wheel. The game's artwork, all drawn in deluxe paint, a program familiar to any
Amiga owner in the late 80s and early 90s, was even more impressive. To understand why,
we need to rewind a few years.
And of course, none of those people were pixel artists. There was no such thing.
We were traditional illustrators who were proficient at making imagery using traditional
media, so we came to this new platform with a set of expectations about color and about detail
and about 2D visual skills in creating atmospheric perspective and linear perspective,
and all sorts of things that went into making a vivid 2D image that were rendered virtually
impossible by this low-res pixelated medium with 16 horrible EGA colors and nothing else available.
It made it almost impossible to do what we were trained as traditional illustrators to do.
So rather than being people who were in love with pixels and maximizing the visual and aesthetic
potential of pixels the way artists do today, we were people who saw pixels as a technological
misfortune that we had to somehow overcome as much as possible and compensate for.
So when I sat down to do Zach McCracken, the first thing I started doing was dithering the
16 awful EGA colors that we had to use. You know, there was this acid green and this acid magenta
and this sort of fire engine red and this buttercup yellow. I mean, there were no useful,
I mean, little spots of saturated color very important in a traditional illustration,
but those spots become focal issues because of vocal spots because they are supported by a
whole lot of the painting that's done in darker, less saturated background recessive colors,
and there were no recessive colors in the EGA palette except for black and well, except for gray,
really. I mean, even the brown was this bright orangey mustardy kind of
orangey, well not orangey, yellowy kind of brown. There just were no useful colors. So
I was being asked to draw, you know, architectural interiors and landscapes
without any of the colors I needed. So I just began to checkerboard dither
the ugly colors we were forced to use with into more useful colors.
The greatest hurdle faced by the Monkey Island art team was the EGA color palette,
which was a mere 16 colors and most of them unappealing.
We were challenged by the color palette. There was a good black, dark blue and yellow.
That helped the night scenes. Some other colors were not so forgiving.
You could shade a face with a mealy brown or a dark red. It never quite looked right.
Ron would have something in mind for all the locations and then gave us room to explore.
To combat this, Mark fought hard to use a technique called dithering in the background art.
Dithering is a technique by which a richer color palette or at least the illusion of one can be
created by blending the available 16 colors. For example, this image during the Zak McCracken
era of graphics would become this if dithering was used. The only problem was, dithering would not
compress. We finished Zak McCracken and all those backgrounds with solid fields of EGA color and
it has its own classic look now, but it's still not a look I would want to look at for very long.
At the end of that project, we were in crunch mode. We needed to be working over a couple of
weekends. They didn't want us hanging out on Skywalker Ranch through the weekends. They let
us take our PCs home to work. And while I had my PC at home and had finished what I needed to do
there, I just decided to draw a nice looking EGA picture, a scene of rows of receding hills covered
in crests of live oak trees against a twilight sunset with a crescent moon and some stars
and a sunset. Sort of an orange band of sunset at the bottom fading up into this blue twilight sky.
I did it all in dither. It was just so beautiful compared to what we were doing for Zak McCracken
and I saved it to my hard drive and then I went back to work on Monday. And when I finished up
what I needed to do Monday morning enough to go to lunch, I decided just to put that picture
up on my screen and go to lunch. Just let it sit there. I shared an office with the art director
then. His desk and my desk were in the same room next to each other. And I just put that image up
and went to lunch. I figured people could take a look at this. It was really, at some level,
it was an intentional complaint. We could be doing this if we could use dither.
So that picture was up there for quite a while and when I came back, Steve Arnold who was then
the head of the Lucasfilm Game Division was in an animated conversation with Ron Gilbert about why
dither didn't compress. And within a few weeks or a month at most, dither did compress. Ron and
his team had made changes to the SCUM engine that allowed for that. So the result was loom.
I did all the backgrounds for loom because I was the guy there that understood drawing and dither.
I was in no position to implement the ability to draw on dither. That was all Ron, but
I was the guy who knew what to do with dither on screen. So loom was our first attempt at a
dithered EGA game. And it won a lot of graphics awards because it places people thought this was
VGA art. And we're very surprised because VGA art wasn't really being used by gaming companies yet
at that point. It was all EGA. So that worked out really well. Secret of Monkey Island was the next
major game we did after that. And Secret of Monkey Island was, among other things, my doctoral thesis
on dithered EGA art. It was where I got to apply everything we learned about how to use
the EGA palette as dithered art during loom. So that was sort of the progression from
EGA art in Zach McCracken to the EGA art you have in Secret of Monkey Island.
The background art was split more or less in three between Mark, Steve and Mike Ebert.
This created a small problem. As each artist had their own distinctive style,
they sidestepped this issue by assigning each artist their own areas. So it was less noticeable
for the player. I was doing most of the background work for loom. I only did about a third of the
background work for Monkey Island. But I did most of the background work for loom.
Probably because I was the only person there who had ever given a second thought to dither
or wanted to try that yet. Because loom was the first time we really used dithered art in a
game, we did not understand going into loom what the impacts of that were going to be.
But one of the impacts of that that nobody saw coming till Monkey Island
was that once you were able to get more color choices into a game with dither,
personal artistic style suddenly began to actually be possible visibly on the screen.
When we did Zach McCracken with solid fields of EGA color, everybody's art looked the same.
It didn't matter whether you were me or Steve Purcell or Andy Warhol or Vermeer,
your artwork was going to look pretty much like everybody else's because there were so few
choices to make about what color to use or how to apply it to the image.
Just dithering those colors gave us enough additional choices about color and how to apply it.
And at that point, the images that Steve Purcell drew with dither and the images that I drew with
dither looked like two different artists drawing into slightly different styles.
So all of a sudden, you know, up until then it had been no problem to have three artists
working on a game. It was just going to look like one artist's work, no matter how many
artists you had helping. As of Monkey Island at least, you could really tell the difference
between Steve's dithered artwork and my dithered artwork. So for Monkey Island, the way we solved
that was we divvied up the different environments and handed them out to different artists. So
when it came to Melee Village, I was assigned that and I did all of the exteriors from Melee
Village and some of the interiors. When it came to the Monkey Village on Monkey Island, that was
all Steve Purcell. When it came to some of the other places, it was all Mike Ebert. By assigning
all of the images for a single environment to a single artist, that way when people moved from
one place to another and this looked completely different, it was because we were in some place
different now. It wasn't because of, hey, who drew this? We actually had to disguise those
differences in artistic style. They were a liability all of a sudden. But for Loom,
we had no idea that was going to happen. I was fine doing backgrounds, but Mark was able to take
them to another level. I tended to get assigned a weird or funny subjects or maybe they ended up
that way because of how I did them. I did the stone monkey head and Stan's dock with the grog machine.
I can't remember if the machine was part of the assignment or something I added to make it more
fun and anachronistic. I liked working on the big stone monkey head because it's silly and I like
strange stone Zardos type icons and stories. Dithering wasn't the only technique used in
deluxe paint to get the most out of the limited palette. Mark also utilized color cycling.
I didn't go in understanding the technology. I didn't go in interested in the technology. I just
went in trying to figure out how to make this damn thing do what I wanted it to do. And as such,
I never sat down knowing how to do what I was here to do today. I sat down to figure out how
to do. I was reinventing the wheel all the time because I'd never heard of wheels. And when we
started working on artwork for the game, one of the first things we did was that lookout point
with the stone arch where the old man is sitting by the bonfire staring out sea. And we were debating.
I mean, first of all, we were I was my first big challenge there was drawing firelight with
even in dither with these 16 horrible colors. You know, the way a fire looks like fire is not
just that it is orange and yellow, but that it is casting orange and yellow light on and shadows
onto things. We really didn't have the colors for it. But part of that debate ended up being about
whether or not to animate that fire at all. Again, all the art direction decisions that were made
by disk space, just the extra frames to animate that little bonfire were a serious calculation
terms of consumption of disk space. And we were very early in the game. And Ron didn't want to
just start, you know, eating up disk space with gratuitous environmental animations until we
were sure we could. So we were talking about just drawing that fire as a frozen part of the art,
which really didn't appeal to me again for artistic reasons. That was when Ron called my
attention, I believe to the color cycling feature in deep paint, deep paint came with this capacity
to identify a little row of colors of whatever length you wished in the palette. And of course,
in those days, the palette was 16 colors. So the length was pretty narrow, no matter how you
cut it. But to identify a little row of colors and tell this particular art file to switch the
positions of those colors in order in a loop at whatever speed you chose. So with 16 colors,
there wasn't a whole lot you could do with color cycling. I mean, you couldn't color cycle the whole
palette. Otherwise, the whole screen would just become a jumble of changing colors. So you got
to pick just two or three colors. But Ron said, here's a way to make things look like they're
moving on screen. Maybe you could just use this with the fire somehow to give it some motion without
us having to do frames. And that was, unbeknownst to me, the beginning of my color cycling career
right there. Because I, of course, once I discovered a new tool, even 10 years of using that tool,
I had to go back and figure out how I could use this better, how I could stretch this further.
You know, what we might be able to do to get around the apparent limitations of this and that
involved a lot of happy accidents along the way that opened my eyes to a possibility I would
never have just thought of on my own, etc. I had 10 years to play with this. So I got to do things
with it. Nobody thought we're possible. Nobody ever imagined would be possible when they first
saw the color cycling tool as presented by EA. The character animations were very accomplished,
too. Animating emotions and reactions was no mean feat where this kind of pixel art was concerned.
There was a lot of animation to be done, so there was plenty to split between me and Martin and Mike.
On Indiana Jones, I had done the first special case animation, where a character does something
that is specific to one moment in the game. In the case of Indy, it was him slipping down a bank.
Special case animations were something I guess I had a knack for, so I would get those assignments.
We had lots of characters that would appear in cycles of animation. The cycles were designed
by the animators to seem randomized. Martin and Ebert were really great at figuring out how
to sequence the motions to get the variety so it would feel more spontaneous. They were also
good at creating modular characters that could be used to make multiple variants of all the extras.
I was good at goofy stuff. I had fun working on the ghost ship in the Sword of Lava underworld.
The skeleton pirates were fun because the blue lent themselves to a kind of glow effect.
I enjoyed getting to figure out and animate Guybrush and Le Chuck. If my comic background
helped, maybe it was in making stuff up on the fly, which is also a help for storyboarding.
The challenge on the computer was in working in 16 colors and trying to give life to tiny characters
where you can barely see their faces. The challenge was getting these little figures to act with their bodies.
Of course, Monkey Island looked different depending on the platform.
The Amiga version was significantly better looking than the DOS EGA version,
and then it was entirely redone in VGA.
You know, we still only had 16 colors, right, all the way through the first version of Monkey Island.
It really wasn't until the VGA graphics became a lot more standard that we got access to 256 colors,
which I mean the Egg Mansion was in, you know, redone in. And I think when people play
me, Nick mentioned, or play Monkey Island today, most people are playing the VGA version.
So, you know, color space really changed. And then, you know, I don't know that memory was
really that big of a deal, just because the scum system was really good at being able to shuffle
stuff into and out of memories you needed it. I mean, it did, the more memory did allow us to do
more complex animations. And you really saw that starting with the last Crusade game,
you know, because the Maniac Mansion, there are no what we call special case animations, right?
People walked and that was it. When Indiana Jones came out, we started doing kind of special
animation. So, when Indiana Jones had to do something special, there was this special
animation that he would do that would only be seen in that one place in the game.
And having more memory and more disk space kind of allowed us to do more of those. And then,
by the time Monkey Island came out, you know, we had even more disk space and even more memory
to play with. And so, we could do even more, you know, of those special animations.
And the resolution was a lot higher. I mean, the Egg Mansion on the Commodore 64 was 160 pixels
across. And by the time Monkey Island came out, it was double that. So, it was 320 pixels across.
So, having more resolution, more colors, you know, more memory, we're all kind of nice.
But I don't think anything really fundamentally changed.
Part of the magic of The Secret of Monkey Island was its diverse roster of quirky characters,
not the least of which being the game's lovably goofy protagonist Guy Rush
Threepwood. He wasn't your typical video game hero.
I don't always thought about Monkey Island, you know, the protagonist, which later became Guy
Rush, as kind of being a seasoned pirate, right? And that's really, you know, if you look at the
Sierra games, you know, you're playing Police Quest and you're a seasoned cop in Police Quest.
And you're, you know, all these things, you're a seasoned person. And the player is not a seasoned
pirate. And so, it's really nice to be able to push this, you know, protagonist into the world
that doesn't know what's going on because the player doesn't know what's going on. It helps with
the game design because you can introduce the main character to things at the same time you
introduce the player to things. The origin of the somewhat unusual name Guy Rush is an interesting one.
In those days, a movable sprite on screen was called a brush. In fact, I'm pretty sure that's
what the tool called it. There was a pull down menu in deep paint called brushes or something
like that, I think. And so, this, any, anything that you picked up and moved around on screen,
any bit of art that you picked up and moved around the screen was called a brush. So,
character sprites were referred to as brushes. And as we were in the early stages of designing the
game, our, I think the designer's first intent was that there would be a male protagonist and a
female protagonist and the player could decide whether to play the young pirate as a, you know,
as a man or a woman. In the end, I think that that alternative was eliminated because we realized
it was going to mean a dual set of every protagonist animation in the game. And that tiny bit of
floppy disk space we had in which to ship the game simply wouldn't accommodate that many animation
frames. So, but before we had figured out that there wasn't any way to fit that particular option
onto the disks, we were talking, having one of these group conversations about narrative aspects
of the game where Ron and Steve Purcell and Gary Winnick and I and Bucky Cameron and a
couple of programmers, I don't remember who at this point, we're all sitting in Gary's office
just shooting the bull, as we say, about all of these things that weren't in most of our job
descriptions or areas of expertise, but we were all people with interesting minds, creative people
with good senses of humor, and we were all having this thing. And what we were discussing at the
moment was what to name this protagonist, these two protagonist characters, you know, I think they
came up with a name for the woman first. And then I think Ron asked, so, okay, so what do we call the
Guybrush? And Steve Purcell said, well, how about Guybrush? And everybody looked at each other and
said, well, that's great, okay, and that's how Guybrush got his name. That decision wasn't made
by some designer sitting his desk alone someplace or talking with the other designers. That came
out of one of these pal around conversations that happened five times a day there. His surname
Threepwood came from a PG Woodhouse novel, The Brinkmanship of Galahad Threepwood.
The other characters are equally well designed, from Guybrush's independent love interest,
Elaine Marley, and arch nemesis, the ghost pirate Lechuk, to the supporting cast of
Down and Out Pirates and Melee Island inhabitants. Every single character not only has a unique
persona and sense of humour, but adds depth to the overall story. Stan, the used ship salesman,
Herman Toothrot, the Down and His Luck hermit marooned on Monkey Island, the list goes on.
The secret of Monkey Island had a strong female character in Elaine, but also with Carla, the
Swordmaster. The reveal that she was in fact a woman added gravitas to Guybrush's eventual
encounter with her. Carla was named and modelled after a Lucasfilm Games employee.
You know Elaine, Elaine was kind of switched to a woman. Originally the person who was supposed
to be the governor of the island was Governor Fatt, who appeared in Monkey Island 2 as a governor
and so I switched that character to be Elaine in Monkey Island.
The Swordmaster, I'm not really sure exactly how the Swordmaster came about. I do remember
having this weird questioning about everyone's assumption at the time on the team was really
that the Swordmaster was a man. So I remember thinking well what if what if she was a woman
right that would be interesting you know and then there was this woman who worked in the
product support department at Lucasfilm named Carla and I don't I don't know how it happened
but even if you look at the picture of the Swordmaster at Monkey Island that is Carla from
product support it looks exactly like her and so it was I'm and I'm not really sure how that
happened right so I'm not really sure how how that character became Carla from product support
but um but there was that that initial questioning of like well why does the Swordmaster have to
be a man let's let's make the Swordmaster a woman. Of course the build-up to the Swordmaster
encounter is one of the most well-loved aspects of the game the insult sword fights.
On Melee Island a pirate's most valuable weapon is not his sword but his sharp tongue.
Author Orson Scott Card most known for his 1985 novel Ender's Game recently made into a film
was brought in to contribute. Lucasfilm Games approached me during the time that I was reviewing
games for Compute Magazine and a couple others. In those days the big game consoles had not yet
taken over Commodore 64 and Atari were still treated as valuable game platforms. Apparently
someone at Lucasfilm Games liked the kind of things I said in my reviews of their games and
those of other teams and I was invited to visit and consult with them. I did a thousand ideas in
an hour session at Larkspur Landing and several other things I did in my writing classes at the
time but what I liked most was looking at various games under construction. The one year's completion
was loom with a fascinating, innovative interface. During the playthrough I made a couple of comments
about very slight improvements that might be helpful. As far as I know they use none of my
suggestions. Why would they? But somehow they still found a reason known only to them to recognize
me in the acknowledgments. The game that I contributed to most was Monkey Island. I was
delighted with the concept that instead of a twitch game where conflicts are resolved by pounding
on a control button or key at a very fast rate, Ron had come up with a dialogue centered way of
winning duels. When you start the game you have a selection of very lame insults. The computer AI
also has lame insults but they have a few better ones which can beat yours. Every insult you hear
is added to your selection of insults and eventually you earn your way into killer insults that defeat
all comers. And for that reason instead of keeping the fun for themselves they asked me to come up
with the insults. When I got home to Greensboro I asked my kids to help. What insults have they
heard among elementary school and middle school kids? The lame or the better I said. So they came
up with some terrific, embarrassingly bad insults to be the original selection. They also suggested
a few of the better ones but they had the most fun coming up with insults so stupid that same one
was more embarrassing than having one aimed at you. Then it was my job to come up with sword fighting
appropriate insults on a higher and higher order. It was one of the most fun yet challenging writing
tasks I've ever done. Of course the final decision on whether to use all or any of my suggested
insults rested entirely with the game's design team and I never checked to make sure whether
they used my insults. They did give me credit for all of them which was generous and maybe the insults
in the game all originated with me and my kids. That would be cool. My aging brain does not remember
any of the insults now. My son Jeffrey, now a game designer, played through Monkey Island several
times and because he only knew the opening insults he got a kick out of the advanced ones as he played.
I never played the game. When I was reviewing games Jeffrey would play them through until he
knew how they ended. Then he would demo them for me along with his comments on the gameplay,
story design, etc. I paid him half the pittons I was paid for my reviews. Odd how $50 seemed like
almost nothing to me but a fortune to my son at the time. The fact that he loved the game
made me feel confident that I had not let down the team at Lucasfilm Games.
In the end many of the insults were created by Dave and the Monkey Island team as the retorts
learned would need to have two uses. One as comebacks to the pirates insults in order to beat them
and two to talk back to the Swordmaster during Guy Brush's duel with her. This meant pairing
the comebacks with an entirely new set of insults. I mean we're working on the game and we just sort
of got this information that Orson Scott Card had written was writing some insults and comebacks for
us but the instructions we got were you know just take these and if you can use them use them and
if they don't work for you then don't worry about it and just make up to more stuff and and so
because he didn't really have all the context for what these were going to need to do
which is a they needed to be sort of matched pairs of insult and comeback
that needed to be distinct from one another and that also were going to need to serve double duty
when you got to the Swordmaster you're going to have to use all your your comebacks again in
another context. That's a very narrow box that he was not given and so you know we just kind of
a list of interesting insults and and so what wound up happening was that Tim and I crafted
almost all of that but some of the insults are still in there and I think mostly with different
different comebacks so you know Scott's fingers are still in there somewhere.
All of Monkey Island's elements blended perfectly to submerge the player in this intriguing pirate
filled world and its distinct soundtrack played no small part in this. The soundtrack's composer
Michael Land had started at Lucasfilm Games in 1990. His background was not only as an
accomplished musician with experience in creating electronic music but also as a programmer.
Hired as their first in-house audio programmer and composer his first project would be the
Secret of Monkey Island. The soundtrack consisted almost entirely of Caribbean inspired music
with many characters and areas in the game having their own distinct theme. He struggled with the
music's fluidity matching the music to the action happening on screen. An issue he went on to fix
for the game's sequel with the development of the iMuze interactive music system but that's a
story for another time. The Secret of Monkey Island is undoubtedly a cult classic. A culmination of
extraordinary talent, gorgeous artwork, a great soundtrack, lovable characters, an unmatched
sense of humour and most importantly a well-crafted narrative. But what solidified it in the hearts
of gamers so profoundly that it's still so admired 30 years on. For some insight on this
let's hear from some of the game's fans.
The reason I love the Secret of Monkey Island is undoubtedly the humour. It has to be and I'm sure
lots and lots of people will say this. But for me it's the humour because I discovered this off
the back of playing Sierra's Police Quest which is as straight laced and as unfunny as a game can
be that's not to say it's not enjoyable so this was so refreshing when I discovered it. When I
fired it up in fact before it even loaded into the game you had things like the dial-up pirate
copy protection kit and of course as soon as you get into the game it becomes infinitely
quotable. You fight like a dairy farmer Pete. If for some reason you've never played this game
do it because the graphics hold up superbly, the script writing is a masterpiece, the jokes are
still as funny as they ever were and through the use of something like scumvm you can do away
with all compatibility problems and you can enjoy this as much as I did the day it came out.
The Secret of Monkey Island truly is in my opinion one of those games that everybody
should play at least once in their life. So Secret of Monkey Island wow the thing that
comes to mind with this game for me way back in 1990 released by Lucasfilms is the show number
of discs it came on. I mean eight discs I think on the game and on the whole and you know it was a
very innovative very important game and luckily on my Amiga at the time I'd sprung out for the
extra disc drive so you could have two discs going at once but still eight discs was always
a bit nervy for me or any number of discs because floppy discs were so corruptible
and with eight discs all you needed was for one of those discs to
stop working and the whole game was ruined so I remember sitting there and hearing the older
Amiga whirring away and crunched the disc as they would want to do and just hoping the thing was
going to load every time but the game itself the adventures of Guybrush what a great game
open things up in a big way for point and click adventures hope you enjoy the game
should you revisit it and if you're a retro gamer you really should.
My relationship with Monkey Island isn't the same as most other people of my age I'd always
heard that Monkey Island was good but I didn't actually play it until a couple of years ago
I'm a lifelong fan of adventure games specifically in fact LucasArts adventure games I've played
the dig I've played Day of the Tentacle I've played Grim Fandango obviously I'd heard of Monkey
Island and I was always conscious of its impact on the genre I knew the music I'd heard that
loads of times before it's a certified classic I just kept missing out on playing it it's one
of those classics that you just never get around to it's like being into films and yet somehow
never having seen the godfather anyway I finally got round to playing it on my old DOS laptop and
I was staggered by how good this game is there's no nostalgia for me here there's no rose tinted
memories of loading up old floppies on my Amiga this is just straight up great writing great puzzles
great jokes the humor in fact has survived surprisingly well it still feels really 90s
but it had me laughing out loud for real and when you consider that's me reading pixely text off
of a screen with no voice acting that is a testament to the quality of that writing there was always
this nagging doubt in my mind that Monkey Island wouldn't live up to the hype that nostalgia
was warping people's opinion of this game I'm glad to say that that is absolutely not the case
Monkey Island is a certified banger it gets so much right that I don't hesitate to recommend
this game to other people who missed out just like I did although a huge success from a technical
standpoint the secret of Monkey Island wasn't an immediate commercial success Sierra was still
outselling Lucasfilm's graphic adventures by a wide margin certainly in North America in fact
most of the team didn't realize it had become such a revered game until much later
we got ahead of marketing a Lucasfilm a guy named Doug Glenn and I think he had lived in Europe
and he lived in Italy for several years and so he he was always like we have to go to Europe we
have to go to Europe you know and I think Sierra online had kind of licensed the kinks west stuff
to I think Activision it's like the old Activision but to Activision and so I think I think Activision
kind of you know had the rights to all of Europe for this stuff and I think one of the things that
Doug Glenn did was he said no we're going to go to each individual country and do deals with
distributors in each country and I think his his philosophy at the time was if we do that these
individual distributors in Germany and Spain and the UK and stuff will have a lot more vested
interest in this game because it is a game for their market right and I think he was really
right about that and I think I think that's one of the things that kind of made Monkey Island
really explode in Europe is is that you know those those deals were not Europe as this big
you know giant entity but it was deals with Spain and deals with France and deals with Germany and
I think it gave those people a lot more ownership over the title and I think helped you know help
them promote it I mean today you release a game and 24 hours later right everyone's playing it and
there's reviews everywhere and all that stuff that wasn't the case back then you know we would release
a game and it would spend months you know in manufacturing getting hundreds of thousands
of floppy disks pressed and then it had to be shipped to stores and then you know so it was months
between when we would finish a game and it would actually come out on the shelves and
and I know I was very disappointed in the kind of sales of Monkey Island but you know I had
started working on Monkey Island 2 just immediately right Monkey Island 1 finished I went on vacation
for two weeks and I came back and I started working on Monkey Island 2 and I do kind of wonder right
if if we had had immediate feedback on the success of the game maybe I wouldn't have been allowed to
do Monkey Island 2 but I could almost start Monkey Island 2 without knowing how well Monkey
Island 1 did and so maybe that was a kind of blessing in disguise you know it's like Monkey
Island 1 came out I mean it did okay it wasn't a it wasn't a flop by any means and then Monkey
Island 2 came out and I left Lucasfilm right after Monkey Island 2 came out and so I didn't
um I don't know how well it did because I wasn't privy to any of that you know sales
information after I left there were two games I did and they were fun games and I was very
proud of the games but at that point I started Humongous Entertainment and that was really my
focus right which was making these adventure games for kids and I kind of in some ways forgot
about Monkey Island and it really wasn't until probably 2003 or 2004 when I started my blog
and I started doing blogging stuff and there were just just throngs of people would come to my blog
and that was actually a little bit of surprise for me and I'm like well I'm like yeah and I was like
you know 10 years ago why are you still playing it and and that's that's what I kind of personally
realized what an absolute cult following you know that those two games had was was when I when I
really when I started my blog and I started interacting with people and you know I made
a couple of you know trips to Europe just as vacations and stuff and I thought oh it'd be
fun to do little meetups with people and just the sheer number of people that came to those
meetups right just blew me away so I was I think that's the point that I kind of realized that
it had of the following that it had
you know success is is definable on very very kinds of like we got recognition like at the
game developers conference and stuff other other game developers like to do that and we all like
to you know I think we we knew that we have made something good just in terms of actual
monetary sales Lucasfilm never did that great in the US market we were certainly
overshadowed significantly by Sierra domestically uh but we did have a lot of European
fans go there you know that was like a significant portion of the income that we got in Europe
and you know there's no particular moment where I was like oh hey this is this is a success
and I guess I always felt like it was a success um just because it it came out which is I didn't
realize even how unusual that could be until much later in the career everything we did actually
released uh it came out and and people played it and we got fan letters and you know the people
seem to like it and I didn't um I didn't have a lot of uh insight or interest into what were the
financials of you know how much do we spend on this now we're making now somebody else's job
we had made something that was fun and various people were telling me that it was fun so in that
instance I knew right away that this is a success um and and the fact that people still talk about it
though is um that continues to amaze me on a daily basis like so many other things have come out
the fact that we made something that was not just good and fun but that actually continues to be good
and fun many years after its release is not something that I understood at the time
nor would I know how to plan for that people need to remember we had we did not sit down to make a
classic computer game nobody ever gave it a thought monkey island wasn't as good as it was
because we set out to make a classic computer game it was as good as it was because everybody
there was incredibly creative everybody there was very hard working and everybody there really
loved to make the best thing they could make the best way they could possibly make it no
matter what it was whether it was lunch we just thought we were making a computer game
and making the best game we could make because that was fun for us and when it was over I don't
think we gave the game another thought I did not discover that monkey island had become a classic
game until 2005 I went on doing I went on to develop these techniques with color cycling and
palette shifting and things that made me literally the only guy in the world who could do those things
with vga 256 color 8 bit art and I was beating away potential employers with a stick and you
know one of the eight guys for a very short time and then at the end of the 90s they they came out
with 3d CAD rendered art and within a year or two everything I was famous for doing was irrelevant
I mean I suddenly I went from being one of the most sought after
computer game artists in the country to having no work for years at all and went on to other things
I assumed that my career in computer gaming art was over and since my career had always been about
art not about computer gaming it honestly I mean financially it was a catastrophe for me
but in every other way it didn't bother me all that much I just went on to do other things
and assumed that was the end of things and then after a couple years in Omaha I came out to Seattle
Washington for on a two-week trip to attend the wedding of some friends there and attend a science
fiction fantasy convention happening in Seattle intending to go back to Omaha at the end of that
period of time and on my last night in town I called an old friend from the computer gaming
industry whom I'd worked for back in my heyday to say hey I'm in Seattle would you like to get
together for dinner and he said yes would you like to work for me and I said what he said yeah I'm
the head of a division of a pretty large subcontractor doing computer games would you like I really need
you because what I didn't know while I was out of the industry was that handheld gaming platforms
and smartphones were now powerful enough to run what we used to think of as desktop computer games
but not powerful enough to run 3d CAD rendered cinematographic console games and suddenly
they needed people who could do the old style 8-bit art and nobody knew how anymore because
everything had been replaced so I started doing this work again all of a sudden and on our first
day at this new company Steve was walking me around from cubicle to cubicle introducing me to all of
these by then I was in my late 40s introducing me to all of these 20-something year old artists
pixel artists hi hi this is a new guy working for our company today's his first day I just want
to introduce you his name is Mark Ferrari and several times these kids would look up and go
because they were kids to me I mean they were 25 years old but to me at that point these were
fresh-faced kids so they would look up go you're not the Mark Ferrari Mark Ferrari
I don't think so like Monkey Island how the hell do you know about Monkey Island I mean
this was way back at the beginning of my career I had forgotten about the secret of Monkey Island
I do you 25 year old kid know about Monkey Island I grew up playing that game that was one of my
favorite games I can't believe you're working for us this went on and on I mean it was just this
sort of growing wave of astonishment that the Mark Ferrari was working for their company now
that was when I found out that Secret of Monkey Island was a classic game a secret of Monkey Island
was a success story that nobody saw coming even the development team but it changed the face of
adventure games forever becoming a timeless classic with gameplay and humor still as appealing today
as it was in 1990 Secret of Monkey Island is not just a classic because of the way it looks it's
not just a classic because of the way it left from Zach McCracken to you know EGA Secret of Monkey
Island in addition to that those were games that were about storytelling beyond their gifts as
artist programmer designer and administrator which were all considerable they were gifted
storytellers and the reason these games are classic more than anything about the scum engine
or the look of the art or any of the rest of that the reason they're classics is because
their exercise and storytelling was so good so that when somebody sat down to play these games
they were involved in discovering strange places meeting interesting people engaging in relationships
solving puzzles mysteries discovering it was it was a giant cavalcade of mental and emotional
creative exercise when those games were replaced by first person shooters all that narrative went
away and for years and years all you did then it was all about autonomic response and dopamine
loops it was all about developing muscular and nervous thumb twitches as you ran down an endless
visually interesting but airless and repetitive hallway kicking punching stabbing blowing up
and knifing whatever you encountered along the way there was often some little story scenario
attached at the beginning at the end to frame this somehow but there was no none of the same kind
of exercise it wasn't because those games were too slick technologically that people got bored
with them it wasn't because they were produced after the innocent age and they were all the same
it was because they weren't doing the thing they weren't doing the thing with your brain and your
creativity that adventure games had done before they weren't storytelling games people don't
understand that their entire existence is storytelling but it is and that once you
understand that a whole lot of other things fall into place in very different ways than they do
for people who think it's all about some objective or mechanical aspect or approach it's the secret
of monkey island perhaps that is the true secret of monkey island thanks for watching
you
you
