A quick content warning about today's episode.
We got off topic a bit, and between about the 10-minute mark and the 15-minute mark,
there's some talk about experimentation on animals, including some cases of cruelty.
It's nothing graphic, but it still might upset some listeners.
If you want to skip that, we move on to human experimentation at the 15-minute mark.
Or if you prefer, we get back on topic at about the 25-minute mark.
I'd encourage you to stop using the phrase bad trip just because
you can learn anything from even bad experiences, right?
I've heard, you know, if there's no such thing as a bad trip, just difficult experiences,
which is really euphemistic.
Yeah, it's like getting arm broken is a rough experience.
Yeah, right.
I would also call it a bad experience, but...
Right, but I think more to the point is that you can get something out of
sometimes the most out of the worst experiences.
That's been my experience lately, and it's like...
So, the experience was fucking awful.
It was the worst thing ever, but...
So, I call them psychedelic crisis.
I suppose, I don't know, that's kind of replacing.
Everybody knows what a bad trip is, and not everybody knows what a psychedelic crisis is.
Yeah, right, right, right.
But you know that bad trips exist, and I said,
oh man, my friend was having a psychedelic crisis,
and you'd be like, what the fuck does that mean?
Bad trip, right?
But you can pretty much always learn something from them.
Another thing people say in the psychedelic world is,
you don't always get the trip you want,
but you always get the trip that you need.
Oh my god.
Which again, is one of those things where it's like,
it's probably actually really valuable to believe that whether it's true or not,
because then you'll look for what you can actually gain from the experience afterwards.
So, I mean, if I'm just being straight, I just say,
there's something to be gained from that experience, no matter how terrible it was.
But if I were telling young people, I might even consider lying to them and say,
you always get the trip that you need, man.
Like, if you went through that, you needed to go through that, dude.
Yeah, it's hard to not sound like a ridiculous hippie when saying something like that,
but it might actually be more beneficial that way.
In a dark arts sort of way, for those aspiring rationalists out there that know what dark arts are.
My understanding of them is basically whenever you're sacrificing epistemic rationality
for the sake of instrumental, you're basically lying to yourself in order to get more done.
Well, or to other people.
Or to other people.
Yeah, it's even more unethical when you're doing it to yourself.
Because you're deciding for other people.
So, I don't know.
The majority of my experiences have been with mushrooms.
I've done acid enough times where I feel like I know what I'm doing and I feel like I know what's
there.
I haven't done massive doses of acid, though.
Like, I've done massive doses of mushrooms and multiple times.
So, I feel like I know my way around that really well.
If you've done one psychedelic, you can kind of know your way around other ones.
Sort of, right?
But they're different drugs, right?
Can you have psychedelic crises on mushrooms?
Oh, yeah.
Okay.
Yeah, I mean, you can lose it on a lot of things.
Gotcha.
But yeah, for sure.
I'd say until I had one, I didn't really think it was possible.
Yeah.
Because I went, I've gone super insanely deep and in not the best place to do it.
If I had noticed people giving me funny looks or something like that, right,
it could have sent me into a bad spot.
It just didn't.
And it was all good, happy, wonderful.
And then one time, one time that wasn't the case, hey bud.
I brought my cat today in case.
So, if we ever say like, oh, hi bud.
Oh, hello.
You're so cute that it's to my cat.
Yeah, I think we're basically in the episode now.
Yeah, I don't know.
I mean, this is actually a good precursor.
Like we're talking about drug experiences, which relate to spirituality
in the sense that I think we'll be talking about it today.
All right.
So, for me, they're the same thing.
Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, everyone.
We're not sure how long we've been going so far.
We'll figure it out in post.
Welcome to the intro.
Yes, I am Eniash.
I'm Steven.
And we have with us, Katrina Jenkins, Cannonball,
Bullington, Stanton, something.
Your name keeps getting longer every time.
Yeah.
Why not Junior, Mad Dog.
You can't call yourself Mad Dog.
The Mad Dog.
People in high school literally called me Mad Dog.
What did you do in high school?
I think my French teacher said it one time.
And for no reason at all, it stuck.
It was like I bit the hat on the run back.
And all of a sudden.
Like, yeah, I'm basically the Secretary of Defense.
What's that guy's name?
The Secretary of Defense now.
Cannon.
No, wait.
No.
I know.
I'm just kidding.
Mattis.
He's actually a really good dude by all accounts.
Like, people in the military love this guy.
Like, one of his nicknames was Mad Dog.
No idea why, but The Warrior Monk is another one,
which is probably more.
That's a pretty fucking cool name.
Right, yeah.
No, like, he's really, he's really well respected.
Dan Carlin loves him, so I love him.
Fair enough.
Right.
That's a good nothing to do with me.
Yeah, I'm not.
Yeah.
Anyway.
I think Jenkins will do for the episode,
just because it's faster.
Here are syllables.
It is less syllables, and this way,
people will be familiar with you from before.
Oh, yeah.
Because that's what we called you then.
And we're talking about something that I'm not an expert on at all.
So, lest anybody think that I might be an expert,
and I'm here because I'm an expert.
Why are you here?
Are you just here because you brought the kitten?
Mostly, yeah.
Okay.
The kitten is, the kitten is the closest we have to spirituality.
I wanted to see Stephen interact with the kitten,
and it's been satisfying so far, so.
I'm a big fan of cats and kittens,
and all things small and fuzzy.
Yeah, it's both of those things.
Yes, he is.
So, nowadays, when you talk about Japan,
do you tell people about the seeing of the foxes
and the chupacabra?
Capybara?
That's how I remember it, too.
He's like, I petted a chupacabra,
but that's not a real thing, because it is.
But, I mean, it's about the same length
that has the same biters and more or less the same order.
It's basically a chupacabra.
Honestly, I think the 90 seconds I've been talking to you guys
about it was the longest conversation I had about the trip.
Lord.
No, when I talked to him about Japan,
he was like, I really enjoyed the movies on the flight back.
What?
That's something an insane person says.
So, that particular line was because I knew it would piss off Matt.
All right.
I went with a guy who has been fan-playing over Japan
since he was a kid, and I kind of have been, too.
But I didn't come back as crazy hyped as he did,
so I like giving him a hard time.
But when people ask me how it was in front of him,
I'd be like, meh, four out of 10, whatever.
No, it was fun.
I got back, like what, two months ago?
Yeah, it was a fine trip.
I don't know what to say about it,
other than there were animals there.
Oh, my God.
And good food.
And that you loved the animals so much.
I mean, it was the animals.
We were around them for like 45 minutes out around the trip.
And honestly, it was in a circumstance
that I don't think would fly in the United States.
Yeah.
There were a lot of owls and mixed species.
Yeah, so like, part of me was like,
man, these animals are probably not flourishing right now.
But I was like, well, I'm already here,
and they're not so miserable that they're killing each other
or themselves.
So, you know, it can't be all bad.
Seriously, it can't be that bad.
They're in decent enough health and kept in okay conditions, right?
Yeah, I mean, I assume.
It just like, I just had to look at like the quarters of,
I don't know, there were 20 owls in a room about the size,
but maybe 1.5 times the size of your living room.
Plus like the caliwara and a couple of other things.
But like, it just seemed crowded.
And I was like, this is kind of a drag.
But I mean, it was fine.
No, it was fine.
I don't know what to say about it.
It wasn't a spiritual experience for me.
It makes you feel better.
I used to put down rats as like part of my job
after doing experiments on them.
So, you know, it was ethical.
But like, in all seriousness,
I didn't like feel that bad knowing like,
okay, it's either like rat in the wild,
get rips apart by an owl or some other sort of something
or starve to death or freeze to death,
you know, or live a long life full.
I keep hearing those sorts of things.
And I don't know if they really matter all that much.
Like because whatever the last few minutes of your life
are the least important anyway,
you're nothing is going to be affected by them.
Oh yeah, good point.
You're not going to be like scarred emotionally or whatever.
Like as bad as dying is.
And I'd rather have, you know, a not horrific pain death.
Like if the rest of their life is pretty cool,
like running around in the wild and sometimes finding food
and sometimes not every now and then like scoring
with some hot rat chick or something.
If that is a fulfilling life for a rat,
then I don't think, you know, freezing to death
or being torn apart by an owl in the last few minutes
is really any price at all to pay.
Well, freezing to death, I think,
precludes like having a really, really rough time
for a long time.
Like if you're freezing to death, you're alive for a while
and just like really struggling for an extended period of time.
I don't know, unless it's flash frozen or something.
Yeah, like your last hours or days are spent
with you desperately trying to find warmth and food, right?
That sounds like a shitty way to go.
But the, I mean, I don't know how much the rat's flourished
being in a lab, but it's depending on what you're doing,
it's a small price to pay for progress.
So.
Yeah, all right.
No, yeah, I thought it was justified.
It's totally worth it for the human progress, yes.
Well, like it also depends what they're doing.
I got through half of Peter Singer's All Animals Are Equal
when I was like 17 or 18.
Maybe, I don't know.
I have such flexible objections to that title, but go on.
I don't know if he chose it or not, but I think.
That's probably why he did it.
Well, so, yeah, I mean, Singer also has just a great habit
of deliberately being provocative.
He wrote an essay defending bestiality called Heavy Petting.
So, yeah, very, and I don't think he's pro-bestiality.
What he is is pro-challenging your intuitions
and making you like actually articulate a defense.
In All Animals Are Equal, just like every other philosophy book
I've read, the primary argument's made in like the first 20 pages,
and the next 300 are just backing up the argument
if you're not already sold.
And so, he talks a lot about the experiments done on animals
over the last 30 or 50 years.
This book is published in the 70s.
Almost all of them are super pointless.
It was just like, I wonder how much of this it takes to kill rats?
I wonder how much of this it takes to kill rats?
I wonder, you know, if you electrically them enough,
if they get sad.
Stuff that I think was paraphrased like either you can learn
nothing useful from it, in which case what's the fucking point,
or rather you can learn nothing useful from it that helps humanity.
Or they're similar enough to us in that you can learn useful stuff,
in which case this is like now an ethical nightmare, right?
If they experience a ton of separation anxiety,
watching their babies get electrocuted to death in front of them.
Wow.
It's very funny, right?
You guys, we're laughing at the cat.
Well, and no, I was laughing at that because that's fucked up.
It is fucked up.
And this is the kind of insane shit that they've done to rats,
dogs, everything that, you know, chimps.
Acquiring an LD50 is pretty important for a lot of chemicals, right?
Is it important to know what the LD50 is for rats?
Like, for example, a rat's kind of a scaled down human in a lot of ways.
But I mean, enough ways where, yeah, no, it's a good analog.
And establishing that a rat does get upset
when its children are electrocuted in front of it.
At least you figure out now that rats may have some more moral worth
because they are able to understand that these are my children
and they are not happy and that makes me unhappy.
And so like, otherwise, how would we know
that they aren't just meat robots, right?
Well, I think what his complaint was
that people didn't take a lesson from it.
They're just like, oh, okay, so they do suffer.
All right, let's keep doing weird shit to them.
So like, I could get behind doing animal experimentation,
even on like great apes, to the extent
that you do the experiments that you need to do
while they're as comfortable as they can be.
And you don't, and you treat them great
when they're not being experimented on.
There's a whole field of bioethics.
Yeah, and it wasn't really a thing in the 70s
in the Spokas region.
Oh, okay, all right, that makes sense.
Yeah, he-
That was 40 years ago now.
70s were 40 years ago.
Yeah, we've come a long way.
They guys feel old now.
And now it's gotten to the point
where you can't ethically ask people questions.
What?
Yeah, well-
Did you not read Scott Alexander's thing
about how he tried to run a survey once?
Man, I haven't tried.
I haven't been keeping up with SSC for a while.
Oh my God, it was fantastic.
I want to get into that in one second,
but I want to drop a quick tidbit about Japan
that they haven't really had their animal rights movement
over there yet.
And I think it's something like four,
maybe seven percent of the population is vegetarian.
So as a result, vegetarian options are very hard to come by.
And there's, I think that's why you can have places
like this kind of sad petting zoo
where they had this sort of thing
because no one really cares over there.
Yeah.
Anyway, fun tidbit.
All right, so when was, what's this SSC?
He basically wanted to add a questionnaire
to some of the people that were being taken in
at his mental hospital.
I think it was just the psychiatric ward
of a general hospital.
Basically, after three years of struggling
or two years of struggling
with the ethics board was unable to do it
because it could be too traumatizing
to ask people these questions.
And they were simple intake questions
that actually get asked all the time anyway,
but you couldn't write down their answers.
Yeah, without violating their rights and shit.
And eventually it was like, well, fuck it.
I am done.
I have spent two years trying to do
a simple little research project
and I can't fucking do it.
What questions were these?
Dude, I'll have to link the post,
but it was the most basic shit.
Like, have you been sad in the last two weeks?
I mean, it was really ridiculous, easy crap.
And part of the problem being
that there's not really sure what the guidelines are.
And so they are as cautious as possible.
And it just, it was horrific.
So I did exactly.
I guess horrific is a bad term considering
we were just talking about shocking babies.
It was ridiculous and disheartening.
And I don't see how any research gets done ever.
Regarding the shocking babies thing,
I might be misremembering the specifics,
but they definitely did things to figure out
what makes them sad.
And do they experience empathy
when their siblings get tortured or something like that?
Those are definitely things.
I think it's a legit thing to find out.
But to what end?
Well, first of all, to know if we should care about them
and maybe figure out when empathy evolved
in the million line.
And it could be interesting to know that.
I could see it being interesting to know
if lessons were drawn from it,
and we adjusted behavior accordingly.
The fact that it took us decades
after those findings to adjust is kind of a drag.
I mean, if they keep redoing the experiment
every few weeks, then I can see how that may just be sadism.
Sure.
And it might be really interesting to know,
like, if you chop the arm off of one twin
if the other identical twin notices.
Actually, yes.
As an identical twin, I would like to say
that I don't want to submit to that research.
Well, no, no.
That's why we do that research on identical twin rats.
Yes, if the other one starts limping.
Yeah.
Or if you're Mengele, you do it to people.
But what?
This was some of the crazy shit they did
to the Jewish captives and the Holocaust.
They would cut the limbs off one twin?
That is like really awful twin experiments, yeah.
Fuck.
I don't...
Do you remember the name of the scientist guy
that was the head of all that?
Tuskegee?
Yeah, that sounds right.
No, no, no.
Tuskegee was the United States syphilis experiment.
I don't know anything.
No, wait.
Then I'm thinking...
Oops.
That does not sound right.
Man, I am just lowering my opinion of Nazis every day.
Who knows?
Nazis could be so evil.
Turns out those guys suck me, right?
So they treated humans like rats.
And I was like, this will be interesting to find out, right?
I guess.
Yeah, sure.
But, you know, I'm not saying that there's an equivalency,
but there's...
Question.
Should the research be destroyed?
No.
I mean, it's too late now, obviously.
But when they first got the research,
should they have to destroy it immediately rather than...
I don't know.
I mean, at the very least, it's done.
If there was anything useful to learn,
then it's worth keeping around,
because we don't want to have to find out again, right?
We don't want to have to do the experiment to find out again.
I figure...
So the downside is people that were one or two steps away from that
could just still be horrified or something.
But I don't know.
I suppose it should be at the very least locked in a vault for a while
until it's like everybody agrees.
Like, okay, we're not going to cry,
because our great, great, great, great, great grandfathers
were tortured or something like that.
Yeah.
Maybe if there was centuries down the line, then unlock it.
It really depends.
Like, I don't know.
Because, I mean, like Stephen said, the damage is already done.
And it feels awful that there's nothing that's being gotten from it.
But, fucking, I, when I read The Viathan Wakes,
they made this point that if you just accept the research,
then basically the researcher has won.
He's contributed to the human body of knowledge,
which was what he was trying to do.
And it's an incentive for other people to keep doing that in the future,
especially if they're willing to, you know,
take prison time or whatever else the consequences may be
in order to make this mark on humanity.
The only way to keep them from gaining the advantages
is just destroy the data.
Or, and that'll stop people from doing that in the future.
If they know that, even if they get all this data,
and people are like, well, the damage is already done,
it's like, no, fuck it, this data's being destroyed anyway.
And so, don't bother doing it in the first place.
Or you could blast their name from all the publishings
and say this was found out by somebody who,
history will forget because they were a dickbag,
and then that person doesn't get any credit for forever, right?
Then the knowledge is out there, but they don't get to be
the person who made those discoveries.
They're already like going against a bunch of societal rules
at that point anyway, I don't think.
If war crimes isn't as strong enough like deterrent, right?
Like, you know, you'll go to prison forever
in an international prison, you know, or however they do that.
Like, if that's not a deterrent, I don't think so.
Especially not in the age of the internet,
when you can get your data out immediately to everybody.
It would be, yeah, much harder nowadays to...
How are you gonna...
But like, if they didn't put it on the internet,
if it was some guy in his, you know...
But like, if that's his goal,
then he's gonna get it on the internet.
It's going to be like...
Unless you intercept him first and destroy the data.
Like, I know it's extremely unlikely to happen nowadays,
but if it had happened, if we were the guys
making the decision back then,
I kind of think it would have been the best deal
just to destroy it.
Hmm.
I can see the benefit to that.
My initial response was kind of knee-jerk,
and I'm considering your guys' points that...
The fallout, especially for like...
You know, if it was my grandmother that got tortured,
and I was reading about like...
Oh, it turns out that...
I'm trying to think of some of the other insane shit
they did to people.
See, I'm the other way around.
And I was actually...
My initial answer was the same as yours.
I mean, the people are already dead.
Might as...
We shouldn't let that data go to waste,
but I am more on your side
if it was my grandmother or even me.
Like, if I went through all this and lost a limb and everything,
I would want the data to be used for something.
But like, as a more objective outside person,
I'd be like, no, I'm sorry.
They'll just encourage this sort of behavior in the future.
We're going to destroy this data.
And I'm sorry that you lost your limb.
I suppose that's like such a small...
I expect that to be like a really small portion
of their motivation is like...
They want to know themselves a lot of the time.
I wouldn't expect that to be like such a large portion
of the motivation that like...
Oh, no, other people might not know that I did this research.
Like, I think it's...
Again, I think it's a much smaller deterrent
than all of the other deterrents that are already there.
You're working in research, right?
Yeah.
I no longer kill rats, though.
I will, right.
But isn't the point to gain more knowledge?
Sometimes.
Okay.
Sometimes it's just for fun and curiosity, right?
I mean, for me personally,
I'd like to develop something that works,
that can then be used, right?
And so if your data...
It's not necessarily more knowledge, it's more capabilities.
If your data made it so that this thing
that you want to be working and usable
was more likely to be working and usable more fast
than objective, partially achieved?
Yeah, I guess so.
But still...
You don't give that many fucks.
But again, every scientist I know
has moral objections to that sort of thing.
Like, you're talking about like...
You have this huge deterrent of like,
oh, no, then I'd be evil.
Like, oh, no, then I'd be punished horribly, right?
If all of these other things...
Like, my name would be trampled.
My reputation would be destroyed, right?
And then I feel like normal base human sort of thing.
My data might not be distributed is like,
number eight or nine on the list of why I shouldn't do this.
Right?
But I suppose if you're crazy...
If you really are like a crazy person,
but I don't think of like the people
that were doing that as totally crazy people, I think.
No, I mean, they were working with the system.
Yeah, so...
But you'd have to be damaged
to do that kind of thing to another person.
You'd have some sort of psychological damage
to look at a person screaming, saying,
please don't be like, I'm gonna do it anyway.
My parents didn't have any problem
strapping me down and cutting off a piece of my dick
when I was a tiny baby.
Yeah, but they didn't do it because they were like,
about a malice.
Yeah, and they also didn't do it out of curiosity.
They did it because they thought it was good for you.
Well, I mean, the Nazis probably didn't...
Well, most of them probably didn't do out of malice either.
They were like, these are...
By the way, I'm circumcised.
Sorry, I understood where you were getting at.
Sorry, they're public people.
Now we all have to visualize your dick.
Hold on.
Give us a second.
Nobody knows who I am.
I'm using a pseudonym.
All right.
Well, I can visualize your dick because I know who you are.
All right.
Do you have a mental microscope?
I'm kidding.
Oh, dude!
Go with...
Yeah.
Small dick jokes, classic.
If it works with electrons, we'll...
No, but I mean, for Nazis,
it was probably a lot like working on rats or dogs or something.
What I'm saying is, you have to have some psychological damage,
I think, to have distance between other humans and that.
My point is, like, they were working...
Yeah, they were working within some sort of system.
I don't think it's necessarily psychological damage.
I think they could just be treated in a certain way.
Do you think it would be rewarding to toss in a certain way?
What?
Do you think it would be rewarding the system to let the...
The system?
Yeah, to let the...
That system?
Yeah, I suppose so.
But, like, once you get to that point,
you've already destroyed the Nazis, right?
So, like, the Nazis aren't coming...
Sorry.
They're not really coming back.
They're not really coming back in Germany the way it was in the 1930s.
Right.
As far as I can tell.
Yes.
The Nazi party is not in power.
Yeah.
So, what were we here to talk about again?
Fuck, I don't know, dude.
No.
So, I want to...
I don't know.
20 minutes ago, when you mentioned that you were an expert on this sort of stuff...
Oh, you said...
Yeah.
I want to say two things.
One, that this might be something that's worth articulating on the air,
because I've said this in private.
But when you bring on guests, it's not always...
If they're like an expert, we'll mention that in their intro.
For the most part, we bring on somebody who knows more than us, me and Inyash.
And that's not hard.
So, like, we bring on somebody who can guide and lead the conversation a bit,
even if they're mid-level and we're entry-level, right?
And being good on a microphone is also something which I have discovered as a skill,
which I didn't realize.
Like, some people just right away freeze up and be like,
oh, god, microphone, what's going on?
And Jenkins is like, yeah, I'm just here to bullshit with you guys.
Yeah, I just mentioned circumcision offhand.
Right, right.
So, yeah.
My brothers are going to make fun of me for that.
Are they not circumcised?
No, they'll make fun of me for bringing it up,
because they know that it still makes me upset and that that's pathetic.
I don't think it's pathetic.
I'm a little bummed.
Am I sending us that sex is less fun than it would be?
It's kind of pathetic.
Like, on the one hand, I'm still preoccupied about it enough to say it on microphone.
That's the part.
If you're preoccupied enough to talk about it for five hours a week, maybe.
Maybe it'll help discourage parents.
I'm up to like six or seven.
Maybe it'll help discourage people in the future,
or parents in the future, from getting their kids circumcised.
Yeah, I hope so.
If you're still like, look, dude, fucking,
I'm in this old and I'm still pissed about it,
so don't do this to your kids.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, if I had kids, I wouldn't circumcise.
If I had a male son, I wouldn't circumcise him.
Unless it was medically necessary, in which case, fine.
Yeah, of course.
But I'm not going to cosmetic surgery on my baby.
Right.
I'm just going to tattoo their forehead.
Yeah.
Ooh, with what?
Your name?
No.
Whatever religion I'm a part of by that time.
Okay.
But are you planning on joining a religion?
I'll probably make one.
That's everybody's plan, right?
No.
No, it isn't.
No, no.
Because everyone stops and thinks, what is my plan?
Oh, God, I have no plan.
So the second part in the spirituality thing
is that you brought more books than I own on the subject.
So you could just tattoo on your baby's head.
Really?
We never actually officially introduced the topic.
We did.
We tried to for about 30 seconds.
Sort of.
Yeah, I guess, like, apparently,
Are we talking about spirituality?
Yeah, spirituality and ritual.
But we're having fun.
That's cool.
The episode got more on ritual than spirituality.
And so there was some desire to talk more about spirituality.
That's right.
The last episode we got really hung up on a couple of things,
especially about, I still don't really know what a ritual is.
So yeah, that goal was going to be kind of a hybrid.
And then it got distracted by me not understanding ritual.
And us not explaining it or tabooing it.
Tabooing would have been important.
We forgot that skill all too late.
Something about your Art of Rationalist fails you when you most need it.
And we wasted a conversation to your guys' detriment.
I don't think the conversation was entirely wasted.
But no, it was fun.
It would have been better if we remember to taboo that early on.
Also a 30 minute digression on witchcraft.
So which I don't regret having.
Yeah, that was interesting.
Yeah.
Anyway, so this one, I think in one of our earliest episodes,
we talked briefly about spiritual experiences in the context of non-religion, right?
I don't know your earliest.
Well, no, I think I've listened to pretty much all of your episodes at one point.
There have been a couple where I was too upset with the audio.
So I skipped to the next one.
Okay, man.
Our audio did use to be much better.
I'm so sorry.
No, no, that's very understandable.
It was actually the Yodkowsky one.
And I should probably go back to it.
You didn't listen to one with Robert last week then, did you?
No, I did.
That one was rough.
I just finished that earlier today.
Yeah.
Was that worse than the Yodkowsky one?
What's up?
Was that worse than the Yodkowsky one?
I think so much worse.
So much worse.
Oh, was it?
Yeah.
Okay.
I want you to try, you have the raw audio.
Listen to that and then listen to the edited stuff.
And then come on the next episode and say,
remember how bad that one was?
You should have heard the raw version.
Because Steven worked really hard to make it sound as bad as it did.
We appreciate your sacrifice.
Yeah.
It was, I'm sorry, I appreciate the sacrifice of everyone who listened to it.
It was a great conversation, but it was just hard to hear.
Anyway, so this was a fun conversation because I think that
spirituality has been bogarted by religious contexts.
Or it might even be fair to say that like they own it and we're trying to like
solve which part of it for ourselves.
Right?
Yeah.
The conversation we were having kind of before we introduced the show was about psychedelic drugs.
See, I feel weird that every time we bring up spirituality, drugs come into play.
I'm like, that's not all there is.
It's the same thing.
No, it's not all there is.
I've had a ton of spiritual experiences, especially when I was much younger,
and they never involved any drugs at all.
They don't have to, but I think one way to put it is that like,
if you take 300 micrograms of LSD, you're going to have,
I think, what Jenkins and I would describe as a spiritual experience.
How many is 300 micrograms?
Three hits.
Because I had two and a half, and I had not a spiritual experience.
I had a fun experience, but certainly not a spiritual one.
If you're of Inyosh's size, build, and tolerance, and you have 500 micrograms,
you will have an experience that you will have, I don't know, you read the accounts of people
who've had really just spiritual experiences in history or in contemporary books, and you're
like, yeah, I totally see what you guys are talking about.
Not that I believe what you, you know, it's one thing to like have a crazy experience and say,
yep, that was pretty cool.
I had a great time.
I feel like I learned a lot about myself.
It's a huge misstep to say, and now I know facts about nature that I didn't know before.
So like, it's one thing to, like Francis Collins, the, I don't know if he's still a director of
the NIH or not, but he was a few years ago, wrote that book about his coming to terms with
Christianity, and he describes, you know, like-
Saw the triple waterfall, right?
Exactly.
He saw the waterfall frozen into three streams, which spoke to him of the trinity of Christianity,
and he fell to his knees.
Which just sounds fucking bad shit when you hear it.
It does.
But there must have been something going on in his brain right at that point.
No, he had a really powerful, like powerful, powerful experience, and that was the context
in which he decided to slap onto it, and it came ready, made, and it worked for him.
I've had powerful experiences before too, but I was able to say to myself, this is a normal
thing that humans experience, and it doesn't mean that a crazy bullshit God exists.
Those weren't the words exactly that I used.
I'm, like, using that now, but I was able to, you know, power through it, I guess, and say,
yes, this is a spiritual thing I'm feeling, but it has no impact on whether magic exists, you know?
Well, and I've talked to people who are religious who've had similar experiences,
and they just, they interpret it through that context.
They say that experience was profound and insane.
That must have been the divinity talking to me.
Right, which-
I agree it's a misstep, but I think it's an understandable misstep if that's the lens
that you're viewing your universe through anyway, right?
Well, yeah, they kind of have the monopoly on, like, all spiritual speak, right?
Because it's really hard to talk about it without sounding like a frufy idiot, and-
We need to introduce some sort of rationalist chamanism, or, like, this is your experience.
Yeah, dude!
And, you know, this is your spiritual experience, and this is how they work,
and this is not, has nothing to do with spiritual beings existing.
Yes, I guess you did just say-
Yeah, I did just say everyone starts to find religion, so there you go.
But I don't want to start at religion.
I just want people to be able to interpret these experiences in ways that don't leave them, like,
coming to Jesus.
You want them to interpret them, you know, closer to the way you interpret them?
Yes, thank you.
Yes, I am the rightful Caleb.
I'm throwing my hat in that ring.
There you go, cool.
That's what I thought.
I am not big enough to run with those dogs, but, uh-
Not yet.
I- Jesus.
But no, I had a friend of a friend, I guess briefly my friend too,
but we- we fell out of contact pretty quickly, where he was an atheist,
and then he took a bunch of shrooms for the first time, and he saw Jesus,
and after that he was a Christian.
And I'm like, what?
That's weird.
That's interesting.
And I was like, you- you did drugs, and he's like, yeah, I know.
I- I realized I was doing drugs.
I still realize it was just the drugs, but, uh, yeah, I found God.
That's- the drugs was what I needed.
And I was like, okay, I don't know how to argue with that.
So he found Christianity, he didn't find God in generic?
Yeah, yeah, literally Christianity.
Okay, so that's interesting.
I mean, it was a very liberal light sort of Christian.
So like, I have a friend who, uh, well, I know a guy, I guess.
I haven't talked to him in years, but he wasn't- he, I guess, is still an ex-Mormon,
and you know, he was fully on like the, I'm not a religious person,
and I can't remember if it was LSD or DMT that he took, but he was like, yeah, I-
I can't resolve what I saw other than to say that there's something out there
that's greater than us, and I'm gonna call that thing God.
And I'm like, don't you feel like that's like, at best, like, deliberately, like, misleading?
Yeah.
Can't you just say like, you know, a greater force, which I still-
I mean, the moon is out there.
Definitely greater than me.
Not calling it God.
Um, yeah, it was interesting because- and he was coming from like,
he had come out of religion into an unreligious sense, and then he didn't go back to Mormonism,
but he was like, yeah, man, where there's something behind the universe,
and uh, I guess I haven't taken enough drugs, but I don't- I would like to think that my grip
on my perception of reality wouldn't change enough to where I would say, uh-
I personally feel like I'm immune to that because I used to believe that, like, wholeheartedly,
you know? I had actual spiritual experiences when I was a kid, and I don't see how I could possibly
go back to that.
So can you describe the quality of them, and- or, I mean, like, what exactly can-
like, do you remember any of them specifically?
Well, yeah, I mean, okay, so-
What they felt like and looked like and-
This one is going to be childish because-
That's okay.
I was a child at the time.
Most of them are.
Yeah, okay, well, all right.
No, I mean, regardless.
Yeah, yeah.
Not undissurregardlessly.
And you can't describe them without sounding like an idiot most of the time.
Yeah.
Like, it's really- or- or like a pretentious douche.
Like, it's- walking that line is pretty impossible, I've found.
So you just have to embrace one of them.
I was in my bedroom, in my bed, and I was scared of basically monsters under my bed, right?
Except it wasn't monsters, it was literally Satan, because that was what I was taught.
Right.
Satan was gonna come get me.
Satan lived in my head until I was like 20, and I stopped believing, like, when I was 12.
So.
Okay.
I'm still a little bitter about that, too.
I wanna know more about that in just a second.
But yeah, basically, I was- I was just terrified and full of fear,
because you are a- when you're a kid and you're in a dark room and you don't know what's around,
and so I started asking God for help and to protect me, and he was like, yeah, I got you, bro.
And it just- it was reassuring and safe and empowering,
and it was- it was great to have God on my side like that.
I think that's why the hell component is so great for the memetic fitness of religions,
right? Because if you just promise, like, yeah, things, you know, no matter what you do,
things are gonna be great, and, you know, God's got your back, that just is this gentle reassurance.
But if you say- if you don't believe in this, and then things are gonna get really,
really bad for you, like, so much worse than you could ever possibly imagine,
then you're really on board to, like, buy into it wholeheartedly and tell everybody about it, right?
I mean, I guess.
I don't think it's necessary, because the Jehovah's Witnesses didn't have a hell.
I was just terrified of Satan.
So they have a Satan, but not a hell?
Yeah.
Okay, see, I don't know a lot about Jehovah's Witnesses.
So what's- what's the fear of Satan if he's not gonna send you to hell?
Well, you know, he's gonna corrupt your soul, so you won't be saved.
So then what's- what's not saved in Jehovah's Witnesses?
Just, uh-
Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, right, okay.
So yes, if you die as a good Jehovah's Witness,
then you will be brought back to life after Armageddon,
and you get to live in perfect health for all eternity on a beautiful paradise,
Earth, where everyone is happy and bad things don't happen.
And what if you're not a good Jehovah's-
It's basically a transhumanist future.
And if you're not a Jehovah's Witness, you just don't get brought back?
Yeah.
Oh, that doesn't sound- that doesn't sound so bad.
Oh, so you have the concept of like-
I knew you'd get to be dead, which sucks.
That does suck, but it's better- it's- it's- it's certainly-
It's better than being tortured forever.
But Jehovah's Witness is-
Other people don't believe in death.
Like, I mean, like death doesn't exist.
It's just your spirit moves on to-
Yeah, yeah, no, that was- that was one of the harder recruiting parts of Jehovah's Witnesses'ism.
Yeah, is that- death is a real thing?
Yeah, yeah, that- that was- a lot of people were like- that- that was a hard thing to get across.
Weird.
And actually, that doesn't actually- that's not contrary evidence to my position, though,
because Jehovah's Witness is- is Jehovah's Witnessism- I don't know what's the word for that.
Seventh-day Adventism?
No, no, no, no, that's a different thing.
That's a religion?
Yeah.
I mean, they're- they're related.
They- they respond off from the same movement.
Oh, okay.
Well, so Jehovah's Witnessism isn't that big of a religion,
and maybe because they don't have a health component to scare people into believing it, right?
Okay.
That could be-
So, like, if- if- if I'm at the door-
I mean, why does it have similar tactics and they got much bigger?
Yeah.
But they have a health.
Neither of them are proselytizing enough, I think, is the main problem.
Proselytizing enough?
They're the ones that go door- to door- are you joking?
Yeah.
Okay, yeah.
I'm sorry.
You did it with a very flat demeanor.
You said the word wrong.
Yeah, wow.
Actually, do the Mormons have a health?
I don't know that much about the Mormon theology.
I think so.
The way I've had it described to me is, like,
most people still end up going to heaven, though.
It's pretty rare.
So that- that's kind of how they deal with it.
Because I- I think it's more about the works they do than it is, uh, you know,
whether your belief system or-
When I was a kid, it was all about whether you believed or not, right?
That's where they can be, uh, baptized post-death.
Yeah, right, right, yeah.
And that's why they have the whole Ancestor.com thing.
Yeah, yeah.
Or Ancestry or whatever.
While I'm- while I'm on the topic of post-death baptism,
I think it'd be great if- well,
might not be great for their physical safety,
but I think it'd be a great tactic
to posthumously baptize every suicide bomber publicly
and say- as a Mormon.
I- I was like, as a Mormon church stance.
That sounds like a great PR move by the Mormons.
No, no, what it does is I think it might,
like, to the extent that you believe in that sort of, uh, voodoo,
that could deter suicide bombers from saying,
well, fuck, I don't want to risk my soul
being bow-guarded by the Mormons, right?
I don't- I think the problem there is that no one who is-
if devout enough in their religion to be a suicide bomber
would take the Mormon seriously.
But they wouldn't- they wouldn't take the threat of
that sort of thing and purifying their- their soul?
No, they'd be like,
God is totally looking out for me.
I just killed myself for the faith.
Fair enough.
There's no way that the Mormon stupid little ritual
is going to overrule the will of God.
All right, well, if it wouldn't work, it would still be funny.
So I stand- I stand by it for that reason.
Let's consult Steven for clever spiritual warfare.
And for- for funny fallbacks.
Best case scenario, it works.
Worst case scenario, it's just funny.
I don't see a downside.
The downside is then, if, like, it did work
and people started freaking out about it,
they'd start non-self-immolatingly destroying Mormon churches,
whatever those are called, if they have a special name or not.
I believe they're temples?
Temples.
Yeah, I mean, the big ones are temples.
So that'd be the downside, obviously.
Where were we?
You were going to tell us about Satan in your head.
What? Oh.
Yeah.
Satan lived in my head?
I don't- I don't know.
Like, so-
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, you can't just drop that
and be like, duh, don't you guys have that?
I don't know.
So I don't think I'm schizophrenic,
at least as far as I can tell.
But like, you know, whenever my internal monologue
was telling me to do something that I knew was bad, right,
I characterized that as Satan.
And I had a lot of like weird neuroses about him telling me
to do bad things and that-
The intrusive thoughts is a fairly common thing.
So did you stop attributing the intrusive thoughts to Satan
or did you stop having intrusive thoughts?
Little of both.
I kind of just like looked up one day and I was like,
oh yeah, I don't really think that anymore.
That's not like a problem.
And it used to be like, you know, like a main aspect of my psyche.
Maybe I am schizophrenic or I was or something.
I have this weird theory that like mild schizophrenia
is like really good to be like in a religious context, right?
You're just like, oh yeah, you're connecting with the divine, right?
You don't recognize that part of your internal monologue
as part of you because it's not a part of you,
it's part of the spiritual realm interacting with your brain.
So yeah, I don't know.
And I feel like those are things that you can probably
like train in and out of existence.
Have you guys heard of Tulpas?
Yeah.
Yeah, right.
So that's basically like somebody giving themselves
multiple personality disorder, right?
It's fucking terrifying.
Yeah, right.
So Tulpas are basically like you like train
like a new separate personality inside your brain
that only you interact with.
It sounds like a bunch of like 12 year old edgelords
doing this kind of shit when I read about it.
But look, I don't have kids because I do not want to be
responsible for another physical being.
Now I have one in my head like fuck.
Well, yeah, that sounds like that sounds like
they're just training themselves into like this sort of,
I'd argue, unhealthy behavior.
So I think you can probably do the same thing
with voices in your head or whatever.
Maybe it's what a lot of people do with Jesus.
Yeah, right.
That's kind of my theory.
I'm kind of just blown smoke right now.
But I don't feel like that's a super important thing.
I feel like that's pretty common for people
to feel like Satan is talking directly to them.
Or, you know, calling them to do bad things, right?
Is that not a common thing?
I just kind of assumed it was.
I have three quick thoughts on that
and I'll think I'll take them in mixed order.
So one, I think it is a very common thing
and it gets different names.
I think if you're raised in a really just context,
it could be, especially if you're told explicitly
the bad thoughts are Satan trying to corrupt you,
then you internalize it.
I'm pretty sure I was.
I don't remember that specifically.
So I think then it makes a lot of sense,
but everybody has intrusive thoughts,
whether it's like, you know,
randomly laying about it with your partner
and just like this random image in your head comes up
of like you strangling them to death
or like driving down the interstate
and be like, I could just swerve into traffic
and kill myself and have it out with people.
Or, you know, or just voices saying,
you're a shitty person, you deserve to die or something.
So some people, depending on your upbringing,
might call that Satan.
A psychologist would call them like intrusive thoughts
and that could stem from depression or other things
or if it's really destroying your life,
that could start coming into characteristics
of schizophrenia.
But yeah, I don't think that it's a sign
necessarily of diagnosable neurosis
to have thoughts like that.
If they're destroying your life.
I don't think so either.
I feel like I'm pretty normal.
Yeah, and if they're destroying your life,
you know, talk to a doctor,
but you know, I think everybody has random thoughts
like that once in a while.
Well, yeah, I mean, like I get intrusive thoughts
in the same, like, oh yeah, I could just swerve
into traffic and die right now,
but not to the sort where I feel like the voice is not me.
Right, and that might be another big component of it.
Psychedelics, interestingly enough,
you do enough of them, like a really,
really huge amount of them.
You can get to the point where like,
you're not recognizing Dionne,
like the sounds that are coming into your brain,
like you have no idea where they're coming from more.
So if there's a part of your brain
that is producing the monologue,
there's another part listening to it, right?
So if those two are separated enough.
Yeah, yeah, you get the impression it's not you.
And the ones altered enough,
or both are altered a lot.
Yeah, you're gonna be like, oh, this is like,
I'm interacting with an angel or anything else,
or a fairy or an elf.
So we've used the term spiritual experience
a few times, we've never bothered to say
what the hell spiritual experience is.
You can't, dude.
It's like describing an orgasm, or...
I could just...
Well, no, I accept that.
No, you can't.
I mean, you can try.
It just feels really good.
It feels really good, right?
Yeah, what does red look like?
I don't know.
So it's like, there are a few things that it kind of is,
and a lot of things that it's not.
And we could spend the whole time defining it.
Well, what would we say to someone
who was like a Richard Dawkins,
who's never had a spiritual experience,
and is like, what are you guys talking about?
To defend Richard Dawkins, I think has had what people,
and I think even he would call spiritual experiences.
But we could use a caricature of somebody like Richard Dawkins.
Okay.
Yeah, you could say exactly.
Here, I put some LSD in your water half an hour ago,
or in your orange juice half an hour ago.
Don't do that.
No.
No, no, no.
Don't.
You're like someone...
No, no, I'm not saying...
No, never do this.
But what you might say is like,
you're going to buckle up.
You're going to have a spiritual experience,
even if we're running this to the absurd.
If you consent to it.
Yeah.
I'm not saying...
I didn't say do it.
In the hypothetical that we're talking to this,
that'd be one answer.
If you want to explain what you mean by spiritual experience
without drugging someone.
Sure.
There are a few things I can bring up.
I've sometimes heard of it as like a loss of ego.
Where...
Yeah, ego death is one aspect of many.
So let's say...
They feel connected with the universe,
rather than as a separate being.
And I think you can have that without the loss of ego.
And I think that would still count.
Yeah, not all spiritual experiences involve that.
I mean, mine, when God was looking out for me,
certainly didn't.
Yeah, and you know...
But then there's others that I've had,
which surprisingly were on alcohol,
where I did lose ego and was just entranced by the world.
Okay.
So here's a bunch of attributes I can attribute to a spiritual
or numinous or mystical experience,
or whatever you want to call it.
A big one would be like a sense of like cosmic unity or oneness,
or just like being...
Like the separation between like you and your situation
is not really there.
You know, I am you.
You are me.
You know, we are the couch.
I am the universe.
I am me!
That feeling where I is everything,
and me is also everything.
I think that one's pretty uncommon, though.
People don't speak about having that one often.
I'd say that's like the main one.
Oh, the main one.
No, that like...
If you're saying like, oh man,
like I felt like I was everything,
and like I was the universe,
and that's as close to like a binary.
You were, you weren't having a spiritual experience,
or mystical or whatever, as I can get.
But I mean, there's a bunch of other things.
So there's like transcendence of time and space, right?
So it's like, I don't feel like I'm within this...
Like the normal experience of time that I usually have,
or spatial understanding.
So like bliss, ecstasy,
that sort of thing would be the next one.
Just like extreme, like massive flooding
of an emotion of gratitude is really common, right?
One of the attributes is just ineffability.
It's really hard to explain, right?
If this sounds like nonsense,
well, it sounds like nonsense.
Sorry, I don't know what to do for you.
Say, here, eat this plate of mushrooms.
I was gonna say, I think you can try and pump the intuition
using examples that people can relate to.
You could ask, you know,
have you ever been with somebody that you love,
and you reflect on how much you love them
to the point where you can bring yourself to tears
by just reflecting on that feeling and the bond?
I think you love people a lot more than I do.
Well, I don't cry a lot,
but I can occasionally have an emotion about,
you know, or a physical expression of...
A physical expression.
This is my new ringtone from when Steven calls.
I can occasionally have a feeling.
Well, I'm also not huge in day-to-day
of having tons of feelings, but I can have them.
So, yeah, I sound like a robot describing it, but whatever.
But I also can have them strong enough
to where I physically express them.
But I think other people at least know what love is.
If you don't, you can find another feeling,
like gratitude or pleasure.
And say, yeah, so picture that,
but picture it amped up to a level
that you have never experienced before,
but you can at least, they have like something to start with.
So it's not purely ineffable.
You can have this moment, whether it's on a drug,
like ecstasy or LSD or mushrooms,
or just through reflecting on it,
but you think, God, I love my, whether it's my child
or my parents or my partner,
and have this moment where you think,
man, the world is full of people
who love each other that much.
And like, that's kind of a deep thought.
That can get you going.
I don't know if that has the same intangibility
as some of the quote, spiritual experience stuff,
but I think it's a good intuition pump.
I was once asked by a Christian,
regarding like the world and evolution,
how can you believe that all this made itself,
like where is the wonder and everything?
And I was like, first of all,
ignoring the made itself comment.
I was like, I think you're completely missing evolution
because when I think about the world
and how it just springs from basic physics
and the interaction of atoms in suns
brought about this world,
and then like the creation of life
and how interconnected I am with everything,
it brings me to this place where that I do feel like
that that has been some of my more adult
and spiritual experiences,
this connection with everything
and with how things manage to work out the way they are,
because of how these little tiny molecules interact.
And I don't know, I was like,
how can you think that like,
yeah, some God waved his hand and made it
is a more spiritual explanation
than the actual physics and biology that we have.
That is so much more intricate and beautiful
than I say, let there be light and there is light.
You know, that's just some dude waving his dick around.
To attest again to Dawkins having spiritual experiences,
the last chapter of The Greatest Show on Earth hits that tone.
And that's the whole point.
In fact, he dissects-
That was like his best book,
or at least among the top three.
I liked it a lot.
Really, I've only read a handful of his books,
but basically like The God Delusion got him popular
in some circles.
And but that's a book about something
that bugs him that he doesn't like.
And so the tone is very different.
I recommend Unweaving the Rainbow all the time.
That's a book about something that he loves
and then he wanted to share with people.
The Grand, or not the grand design,
The Greatest Show on Earth is another version of that.
But there's a context of like fighting back
against you know, creationism and stuff and that.
But yeah, that is the majesty of the universe, right?
And that's a much better story than, you know,
yeah, you're a pawn on a chessboard,
but the chess player loves you.
And the other players at Dick and he doesn't like you.
Like that's not a really interesting story
and either like any of the origin myths, right?
I mean, they're fun and they're culturally relevant
or whatever.
I'm not going to shit on everything,
but they're not the real majesty of the story
that science tells us about our origins
and our place in the universe is super gratifying.
And I think that gratifying, that gratification,
that sense, in fact, gratitude,
I think this is actually one of his books,
maybe it was Dan Dennett's,
that that feeling of gratitude might be one of the causes
of religion being popular.
Because like, who do I thank for this?
Like, you know, you reflect on this
and you do this without the context of science
and understanding and you're like,
where do I, who gets the props for this, right?
This is awesome.
And reality doesn't have someone for you to give props to.
So you just think, I'm just glad this happened.
You know, that's a sort of profound insight
that can lead to that sort of spiritual experience
kind of thing, right?
You spend enough time thinking on that,
and especially if you do it in a week by your,
you know, in silence under pretty trees or something,
and you think, holy shit,
this tree that I've been sitting under for the last two days,
we share a grandparent, right?
Like, that's nuts.
And that's, I'm struggling to articulate,
part of the ineffability of this kind of experience, right?
It's one thing to like understand that on a textbook,
just like you understand that the Battle of Hastings
was in 1066, like it's just like a random trivia, right?
Is that the right year?
Anybody know?
Good.
Is that the random fact that everyone always generates
when they think of a random fact,
or why is that so popular?
For me, it's because the whole sexy back song
that they redid it to Battle Hastings.
I definitely am not familiar with that.
Oh, that's great.
Perfect.
1066 Battle of Hastings, 1066 Battle of Hastings, that's great.
The way I usually break into this conversation
is like, oh, well, now that I know what a sunset is,
I can't enjoy it.
It's clearly not true.
Like, I know what a sunset is,
and I still think they're really pretty.
And I don't think it really has,
and honestly, I don't think like knowing what a sunset is
makes the sunset more pretty in the moment or less.
I think those are separate enough in my mind
that I don't think I really need to bring that into it,
and I don't need to bring what science teaches us
about the universe in order to have this amazing experience
with a tree or something like that.
Maybe that can enhance it.
I think it does.
I'm not going to shit on it.
Move aside.
Right, but I think that's still a few steps away from,
I don't know, a really deep internal or external feeling
that has nothing to do with your knowledge
about the situation, right?
And in some cases, I might even say,
you having, bringing in your scientific knowledge,
and you're like, here, yeah, no, I can compartmentalize this
in this way, and sometimes that's beautiful and wonderful.
It's like, okay, yeah, you can totally do that,
and then that expands your understanding,
but sometimes that's really distracting
from just the experience you're having.
The intense experience is itself so overwhelming
that if you have room to have those thoughts,
then you might be missing out on a part of it, maybe not,
but I just kind of wanted to put that in there
as a sort of almost disagreement.
It probably depends on both the person and the situation.
Right, well, and I think I do see where you're coming from,
and you're right, for me, I was anchoring a lot
in science and stuff, not because I think
that's where all spiritual experiences come from
or that's where they all need to end up, but that can be...
That science itself is spiritual.
Or can be, certainly can be.
Sure, but I think that's not the goal.
No, no, that's not the goal.
And your understanding of nature can pump those intuitions
is what I was trying to get at.
So I was trying to think of, to the most secular person,
if I was talking to Richard Dawkins,
luckily he had this conversation with us in a book,
but if I was talking to the stereotype
of the cold, unfeeling scientist, Richard Feynman,
nothing is mere, right?
Nothing's merely refracted light.
So if you're trying to destroy the beauty
of a rainbow or a sunset by saying,
well, isn't it boring now because we know how they work,
it's like, no, man, it's really fucking cool.
Are you kidding me?
Like, what's a more fun story?
Like, oh, God, that you like those colors or...
Technically, God was promising not to drown everyone
in the world again.
It'll be fire next time.
There's another understanding to take it from though
and to say, man, I really understand how this works
and my brain likes the colors and it's really cool.
And look at my angle from me to the rain over there
and the sun behind me can show me the spectrum of colors.
Like, that's really kind of cool.
Again, I don't think that's all...
And you're right, like, man, some spiritual experiences.
I think that understanding might even just distract...
Like, I think you have the feeling and then you're like,
why am I having this feeling?
Oh, the light and refraction and then you get these colors
and like, that's you kind of like running from the experience
and going into like some sort of like cognitive exercise
that you don't need to do.
You can just have the experience.
I absolutely see what you're saying.
Okay, I see how that's a disagreement and you're right.
Right, yeah.
So maybe, like, maybe just the experience is more valuable.
I think it's harder to remember if you're not doing that,
if you're not like putting it into compartments and whatnot.
And when I said that, when I said that you're right,
I meant that you're right in that you're making a point
that is absolutely valid.
Not that I'm recanting everything that I said,
but that that's a different dimension than you're absolutely right.
That is that I'm missing a huge ingredient
by not including that kind of thing.
Because you're right, if you're in a sense grounded enough
to articulate what's happening,
especially if we're talking about psychedelic drugs,
like if you're far enough out to where you can't describe it anymore,
then you're really having an experience, right?
I think I may have a far more narrative,
sort of linguistic type of thinking than you guys do,
because my best spiritual experiences have been
including things like thinking about how my ancestors viewed the moon
and how scary it must have been to be in that kind of time period.
And it would not have been the same spiritual experience
if I was just looking at the moon.
The fact that I was having all these thoughts
and relating them to culture and history
far more profound for me.
I think we're describing different kinds of experiences,
but they can both be in the spiritual circle, right?
Can you make a strong distinction
between something that's mind-blowing
and something that's spiritual?
Can you do that?
I can't do that.
So mind-blowing in the way you're like,
holy shit, I never realized that before.
That kind of changes the way I think about X, Y, and Z.
Well, no, no, it was both.
Or something, right?
I mean, the closest I can think of
is when I went to the temple at Burning Man.
That was just legitimate emotion blast
without any sort of cognitive thing going on there.
And even that's not true.
Even there, I had some...
The fact that I could think about things
and regret things
and want things
in a literal thinking about words sort of way
made it different.
And that was probably the most spiritual thing
that's happened to me in at least a decade.
I think they're a little different.
So I can read something and be amazed
and be thinking about it for years later.
The first time I read Meditations on Moloch,
that was pretty mind-blowing.
It's like, whoa, all these things that I've thought before
just in better words and artistically done
and that's a really big deal.
I'm gonna glom onto that.
And then having a really powerful experience
that has nothing to do with words
or even cognition
is basically just feelings.
They're pretty qualitatively different, I'd say.
Although there's a lot of overlap
because then when I reflect upon this...
I was extremely thankful at that time.
Like that can change the way I think about a lot of things.
There's huge amounts of overlap either way.
So do you...
I'm assuming then when you have sex
it is far more of just a physical sort of emotional thing?
Yeah, I don't always have words going through my head.
I mean, so most of the time I have an internal dialogue, right?
If we're just talking about how I think right now.
But yeah, when things get ramped up enough...
Do you remember the last time you were really, really angry, maybe?
Yes.
Okay, were you thinking in complete sentences or words even?
Was it weird grunts and stuff?
I had trouble getting home
because I could not navigate from work to home
even though I've done that literally thousands of times.
That's amazing.
Yeah, so the last time I was really, really mad
that was something I noticed.
I think that's one of the...
That's an emotion that kind of takes over a lot of the time.
I don't think a lot of people have happy just takeover.
But it's awesome when it does, it's great.
It might be a form of mania, but I don't care.
It's great.
You should just let it happen.
Well, I mean, even at the time, both at the time and looking back on it,
that is the least human I've ever felt was when I couldn't even get home
and I couldn't articulate myself or anything.
It was just anger.
That is not a thing that I want.
But you didn't have an internal monologue.
Is that what you're saying?
Were the words shut off?
You weren't thinking in the language?
There was definitely still some language in there.
Because I realized it was frustrated and simple single syllable words
because I could tell that I couldn't get home and this was an issue.
But no, there was definitely still words in there.
That's really funny.
Okay.
So I'd say in a lot of cases, yeah, you can go through that feeling a lot of different things
and lots of mixtures of different things and whatnot.
And it's not going to be like,
you're not going to be able to explain it to somebody else later
because it wasn't in words.
So pushing it through that compression algorithm is just like you can't.
It's really hard, right?
Super lossy.
I'm suddenly feeling like I may have found one of these places
that has a universal human experience I've never experienced.
Maybe you haven't, right?
Here, take this plate of mushrooms.
So like I'm a big fan of like the heroic dose too, right?
So like what is the heroic dose?
That's like a really, really large dose, right?
So for mushrooms, it's like five plus grams.
I mean, like a normal dose is like an eighth of an ounce, whatever that is,
is like pretty normal for a night.
And that'll be like a mildly, like you might slip into something.
You might not.
Five grams is like, that's a heavy you'll be there for a long time.
If I can have ecstatic spiritual experiences
without completely taking away my linguistic ability, I'm okay with that though.
I don't feel like I need to get to this whole
wordless place that you're talking about.
No, you don't need to.
I think that's a new place that is valuable for you to go though.
I think it's a new place that's valuable for other people to go.
I can somewhat second that to the limited experience I have with that.
Do you remember when we were hanging out and I could barely talk?
I mean, I had a hard time getting my brain to talk to each other enough to
like, I mean, I was limping around like I could barely,
there are periods where I like, you know,
you'd ask how I'm doing going to give you like a shaky thumbs up.
Yeah.
But I think I just, I want to protest that I think we're losing something.
If we say to have a spiritual experience, you have to go that far.
I don't think you have to.
I think that we kind of disagreed that I was pushing hard on like the science
and understanding and being able to have that articulation
as being one kind of experience.
And Jenkins has a lot more experience while he's pushing back,
not from outside the ring, but from a different part of it.
You know, imagine if you had an experience so positive
that it was like that angry drive home, right?
I don't know, something happened and you're,
you literally can't tell your friends about it because it was just like,
I can't even describe it to you.
I just, I, I couldn't describe it to myself while it was happening.
If that angry experience was a good experience or a positive emotion,
that's kind of maybe closer to what this is talking about.
Does that hit, right?
Yeah, that sounds good.
I mean, I've had that though.
I was just able to talk about it afterwards.
Then you haven't had it, man.
Yeah, man.
No, man.
Yeah, we'll start gatekeeping on this.
Okay, so here's another one that I want to hit.
A lot of the time,
this experience will feel somehow more real than normal waking life.
So like whatever it is that makes you notice that you're in the real world
or that you're real or something,
or what you're experiencing is not a dream, right?
Yeah, it'll feel more like that.
I think that that's one of the things that,
especially religious experiences, psychedelic drugs and whatnot,
can like really fuck with your intuitions.
So like if you're interacting with some sort of like elf in hyperspace,
which DMT can do to you,
it's really hard to come back from that and just be like,
that wasn't real because it felt more real
than this conversation we're having now, right?
In a really weird way.
So you can't just rely on like does this feel real or not?
Like you can in a lucid dream or something.
You're left to your intuitions
and your intuitions are kind of fucking with you in that sense,
which makes a lot of sense why like people would like
want to die for this, right?
Like they're like, this is really, really important to me.
And be so convinced that it's true that God really does exist
because it just feels so real.
Yeah, right.
It's really hard to talk somebody out of it
when they're like feeling the presence of the Lord.
So the feeling of the sacred is another one, right?
So like this is really important.
Whatever, like what I'm experiencing now is insanely super important.
It's more important than these other things.
Similar to like it's not only is it more real,
people need to know about this.
It's hard to not be preachy about it.
I fail that a lot.
I end up like, God, no, you don't understand.
Like this is a big deal.
And it is like, I think it really is a big deal
in the sense that like it's a really big deal to me.
I can't make my experiences be a big deal to you.
That's not going to happen at all.
But for me, it opened a lot of doors in a lot of ways
that were hugely positive in like a long-term sense.
Can you elaborate on that?
For me personally, it was taking lots of mushrooms many times.
So it was like heavy doses.
Yeah, a lot of times.
And I'd say the main biggest one is like I'm a lot nicer.
There were people that liked me
and thought I was funny a long time ago.
I don't know if anybody would call me a nice person, you know, pre-20.
So like, and I know like most teenagers are assholes,
but I mean like, I like really leaned into it.
Like I was just like, no, fuck other people.
And most of that was just from like, I had a better sense of empathy.
I could connect with other people in a better way.
Yeah, so after this experience, I could, it started to bother me
if other people were feeling bad, right?
Instead of just like, I could notice it maybe sometimes.
Like I could notice it more.
And then it bothered me more if it was bad or something.
So like both empathy and compassion, compassion, right?
So like empathy is like the ability to understand what other people are feeling.
Compassion would be like the desire,
the desire for them to be feeling the best, whatever it is, that is the best for them.
Yeah, I would say-
Do you think there was just a long-term structural change in your brain brought on by the drugs?
Yeah, okay.
Yeah, I do because so, and part of it coincided with me like growing up,
you know, I like, it was around the time when I was about to graduate college and,
and you know, started living on my own and, you know, in other capacities.
And I was, I was more of an adult at that time.
So like, I can't just isolate it and say like it was just the mushrooms
or it was just growing up or something like that.
But I do think it was mushrooms played a really, really big, big part of that.
Well, I think, I think part of it too, I want to interject briefly.
One, that when I took a mild dose of LSD, that was,
and people would argue that my other dose is mild.
But for me, mild was one hit.
And that was how I tried to describe it was, you know, other than like the visual artifacts,
there was this sense of profundity to everything.
Like this feels really important.
Like, I remember we were eating lunch and I watched a raindrop hit the table.
And like, it's not like I felt like this cosmic connection with the universe or anything insane.
It was just like, that was, that was profound in a way that, you know, kind of escaped description.
But maybe what helped, and maybe tell me if I'm on the right intuition here,
that maybe one of the things that, that jog, jogs your, your empathy meter into functionality
is having stepped that side of yourself and, you know,
realize that maybe from a, from an experiential sort of way, you know,
not been you for an afternoon, right?
Um, I don't know.
Honestly, I think it was, I think it was more just being able to notice
things better and caring once I noticed.
And I don't, I don't know if, yeah, me stepping outside of myself in that sense did that.
Yeah, it's hard for me to tell.
Honestly, I might, I don't know.
Sort of the nature of what we're describing entails that it's hard for you to tell, right?
Right.
So I suppose another way I can express this is like, my like general behavior is like,
you know, life's kind of a zero sum game.
And, you know, if, if I win, it kind of means somebody else has to lose, right?
Which is, I think a super fucked up way of looking at
anything because it's, it's not true at all.
I mean, you can just think of like two separate people.
Okay.
Now they're friends.
Nobody lost in that situation, right?
Maybe one person won more than the other person because the other person was more lonely
or something.
That's a win-win situation.
I mean, basic economic theory is like lots of win-win can happen.
So that was, that was super valuable for me.
And specifically for mushrooms, I've, I've never gotten anything like that from,
from LSD on the few times I've tried it or, or DMT, DMT is just weird.
I mean, and you'll get like powerful feelings and, and interesting experiences.
And I can describe that to you in a little bit, but please do.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Sure.
Totally.
But I kind of want to keep hitting this point like it can, so like it can change you.
It doesn't have to.
In my experience, all of the changes I can notice are positive.
Uh, it's possible that degrading specific neuroses I had, you know, like habitual,
like negative self-talk and whatnot, maybe that eroded like some source of motivation
that I used to have.
But I don't like, I still feel like I'm a pretty motivated individual.
So if it did that, then not enough for it to cause me real problems that I can tell.
And probably worth the trade-off.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, at least for me.
And this is part of the reason why like I end up suggesting them so often is because I end up
like, I'm constantly talking to nerds, right?
Fucking nerds all around me all the time.
No.
And one thing I noticed is that like they're, they're usually like pretty sharp
and not very good at like some sort of like emotionally connecting with people
in certain ways.
Sometimes I'm painting with a broad brush here, but I think like these are the people
that I think can really, really benefit from this.
Cause it's like, oh, I can have a deeper connection with other people and, you know,
richer, a richer emotional life and better relationships and blah, blah, blah.
Like I was just better able to like notice my own emotions when I felt them
and feel like I feel more now.
So I don't know if it's just like me knowing that I'm feeling better because some people
aren't aware of this, but you can feel things and not know that you're feeling those things.
It's really weird.
Yeah, you, you, it's different parts of your brain.
I don't, I don't know how you want to say it, but, but that's pretty important, I think.
So, um, I also appreciate like music and art and like all forms of visual art,
a lot more in a stronger sense.
So that's what, um, I can pretty much just boil it down to like mushrooms,
like lots and lots of mushrooms have, have done for me.
Okay.
I, and I mean, there were a few times that were like, that were definite like watershed
moments where I was like, oh, I'm doing this and I need to stop doing that or like,
oh, I'm maybe not doing enough of this or, or something.
Um, but it's, it's not like you'll take this, you realize it and like you'll immediately
be a different person.
Usually that's not the case.
You still have to do the work to like fix yourself.
Mostly I would say it, they're like really powerful, introspective tools, at least for me.
LSD, I haven't, I haven't gotten anything like that on that.
I feel like I can maybe, maybe like understand the world differently in different ways.
You were talking about having like fractalized thoughts in a way a while ago.
I'm a really big fan of this one guy's music and it's really good.
And I was listening to this album and I realized like every side of this out,
because I was listening to it on vinyl, because I think I'm better than you.
I was like every, so I was listening to it.
I was like, every side of this album like contains the essence of this album in it.
And I was like, well, wait, no, no, no, it's really every song.
And then like, oh my God.
Oh my God.
And then like I can zoom out and be like, yeah, but like every album
like contains like the essence of it.
So I learned the 72 names of Derek, Vincent Smith that day.
It was really great.
But the whole like fractalized, self-similar sort of lines of thinking,
I think of fractals as like the most psychedelic thing.
When I'm trying to characterize what psychedelia is, fractals are like,
that's as close as I can get to like, that's it.
That's the essence of it.
It's the infinite self-similarity.
It's the, you can find like infinite, complicated, interesting aspects
in like a teeny tiny fraction of a spot, right?
I think that it's pretty close to, if I had to articulate it.
Yeah.
I spent, it's hard to gauge it on time somewhere,
like a third of the day thinking about basically one thing.
And it just kind of, it kept going in.
And I realized that there's more and more layers to this
and that I can keep going deeper and deeper into this thought.
And I liked the fractal imagery for it too,
because everything kind of felt like there was like these weird
shards that could go off in a thousand different directions.
But I kept just going down this one way.
And yeah, that, that, that hits it pretty well.
Oh, another aspect of like a mystical experience would be like paradoxicality.
You can, you can be experiencing two seemingly conflicting like emotions
and thoughts and understandings of things without really realizing
that they're conflicting or like they conflict, but they don't really conflict.
That's about as well as I can explain it to you.
So with all this talking we've been doing about spirituality and drugs,
I guess, and they're not the same thing, man.
All right.
Really, like it.
I mean, you can, you can separate the two, but not really.
I'm pretty well convinced that most religions kind of started
through like some sort of shamanistic source at the beginning.
I'd be really surprised.
No, I mean, I suppose like you can, you can do these things
if you just like starve yourself and, and whip yourself and, you know.
There's lots of ways to get it.
Yeah, sure.
I guess so.
Like, yeah, you can like feel so bad and think you're going to die
that you can have one of these experiences for sure.
But it's a lot easier.
I mean, especially if you think of like prehistoric man.
It's like, well, they either could have done that and they, you know,
some of them probably did, or just like find mushrooms growing out of poop.
So that's where, like, that's where I like Cubensis grow.
It's pretty likely.
LSD was, was that in 1930s?
When did Albert Hoffman since the first synthesize that?
No idea.
I don't remember.
Albert Hoffman, Swiss, chemist, amazing guy.
What's really interesting, you can look at the different molecules.
Of like each of these drugs.
So like, like you can compare serotonin to DMT, right?
And there you can, that's serotonin, that's DMT.
This does not help anyone who's doing the podcast.
But you can put pictures on the podcast.
I don't know.
Anyway, LSD is a much larger molecule than psilocybin,
which is the active chemical in, in mushrooms.
And LSD like hangs around a lot longer.
So like all the girls listening that dye their hair red,
you know that like red hair dye might like lingers a lot longer
because the molecules are bigger.
So when they latch on, they latch on for a really long time.
They have a really strong bond.
So like the first time you watch it, it gets knocked out.
So similar thing with LSD, right?
It hangs around.
What do we, what do we do with all this spirituality talk
that we've been talking about?
First we start our own religion.
Okay.
Then we ask everybody to give us all of their money.
No, no, no, only 10%.
It's gotta be, gotta be maintainable.
If they give us all their money,
then they only give us the money the one time and then they're broke.
Dude, have you seen the Scientology centers?
Right?
Yeah.
They're pretty loaded.
All right.
You just got to get them involved enough that they want to, no.
I don't know.
So I think the main point to get across is that
you shouldn't believe in the Christian God
because there's no reason to, right?
Right.
But like don't throw the baby out with the bathwater, right?
Still understand that people can have these experiences.
You don't need to be religious in order to have them.
They can still be just as important to you.
They can be just as important to the world, I think.
If like one person changing and being a much better person overall.
Again, like your mileage may vary and not everybody reacts with these things that way.
And there are a lot of people that take massive, massive doses of LSD all the time
and they're still assholes.
Like it still happens.
I think you still have to do the work.
But I think it becomes really difficult to lie to yourself.
About how you are and what you're doing.
And when you're experiencing something like that,
and that can be really valuable.
But just outside of that, like it's really interesting.
Like it's valuable in the same way that like an orgasm is valuable.
Like it can just be valuable for itself.
It doesn't need to be this external thing that affects more people.
It can just affect you and be good for you.
Yeah, I still see the value in that.
And I think people should seek those out.
Apparently meditation is a really good way to get there too.
I've never, I've had a few weird experiences meditating.
But I don't meditate enough to really know what I'm talking about.
I mean, I've heard it's good.
But it also takes a lot of time and effort.
And which I just don't have to give right now.
Most difficult things do.
Yeah, well, I mean, from what I've heard,
I can take a lot of mushrooms and approximate the effect of years of meditation experience.
Probably not the same thing.
But yeah, maybe like an ego death sort of situation.
Basically, I just want to say like people that don't think they're valuable,
you're wrong, right?
Like they are valuable.
They would be valuable to you, not necessarily the same way.
Like a lot of people take mushrooms and don't like them.
And you know, I think those people are wrong.
No, I think there's a lot of value to be had in spirituality,
but also it shouldn't become the most important thing ever
where you dedicate your life to joining a monastery.
Like I sometimes feel really bad about the amount of human effort
that has been wasted pursuing religious things and these spiritual things.
I'm like, as opposed to, I don't know, spirituality is really great.
Expansion of a like lifeless human like machine.
I don't know.
Yes, sure.
Anything.
I don't know.
Okay, so my parents went to visit Tibet at one point
and they were taken to this place where someone's footprints were in the wood.
Like literally, I think, depending on how much pressure
the various parts of his feet had put on the wood,
between a quarter inch and a half inch just completely
indented into the wood, which had been worn away
over the decades that he'd come and knelt in that exact same spot.
And the wood had just eventually worn away from the constant
his feet being right there.
And like the monks pointed that and be like,
this is such an amazing thing.
Look at how dedicated this person was.
And my parents were also impressed.
And I was like, all I could think was how many hours of life
were wasted kneeling there that was by his choice, right?
Yeah, it was by his choice.
But first of all, he could have done so much more with his life.
And secondly, he's being supported by the local peasantry.
This is a waste of both a life and resources.
And I think as awesome as spirituality is,
and I do think it's awesome.
And I think we need some sort of, well,
I would like to someday have some sort of common resource
as a way that we can process these things.
But I don't think it should ever get to the point
where people are like dedicating their lives to it.
It seems like just too much of a...
It's like the people who just do drugs constantly
and don't do anything else because they're like,
man, life is just about being high all the time.
Like, no, no, there's other things too.
Or running with your...
You are high all the time.
I mean, you're high all the time.
I don't do drugs.
I am drugs, man.
That's Dolly, by the way.
Yeah, that's it.
Anyway, I had a couple of quick things to add.
I was going to say, just to bring your point home,
we use the orgasm example as a meaningful experience is,
if you just could take a pill that would give you an orgasm
for 70 years and then you died,
that might be a life wasted, right?
It might be a fun life, but I think it's possible
to not know what you're missing out on, right?
Yeah.
Like if you're just having a ton of pleasure all the time,
you might never really know other kinds of pleasure,
like a good meal or loving somebody or something, right?
So I do think that, yeah,
if you're just find a way to stay high all the time,
you're probably missing out on experiences worth having.
But on the other hand,
if you're never high, you're also missing out on something.
Yeah, probably.
I mean, so you asked what we do with all this spirituality talk.
I think one thing is that I would like to, I guess,
propagate the idea that you can have meaningful,
life-changing experiences and talk about them in ways
that don't necessitate you having to identify
with a religious context.
So I kind of want to take back the idea that if religions don't,
if they didn't create the sense of, or rather,
if they didn't coin it,
they certainly seem like they claim to own it.
And I don't think they get a monopoly on it.
The religion is throwing a lot of things
over the course of the centuries.
Well, and I think it very well may...
They have all the pretty buildings.
It may well have started, yeah, right?
Architecture, art.
It may well have started from contexts like that.
Whether someone found mushrooms growing in poop
or someone just realized,
I'm not a practiced meditator to the extent that
I spend a lot of time on retreats or anything.
I don't even spend that much time day to day
practicing meditation, but I do introspect a lot.
And I do practice mindfulness, I think, quite a bit.
That's sort of...
I mean, there's a number of things that mindfulness does.
You know, one thing...
In essence, mindfulness is like paying enough attention
to where your thoughts come from and how they...
Where they go.
That it makes having...
It makes your internal dialogue third person
rather than the first person.
And the sense that the world is full of...
In a non-hippie way, the world's full of love.
People love their families, their friends.
And meditating on that thought doesn't take 10 years in a cave.
You can do it in 10 minutes.
And I think many people can be moved by that experience.
And, you know, then you sit behind somebody in traffic
on the interstate on your way to work and road rage hits.
And you're like, you know, this person might be a prick.
In fact, they have to be because they fucking cut me off.
But I think you recognize really quickly the futility
of that sort of wasted cognitive effort.
And if that person isn't a complete psychopath,
they have things that they care about too.
And that sense that they care about something is valuable.
So that's one thing that you can do with this insight,
that spirituality is important.
I might disagree with you fairly firmly
that I don't think it necessitates drugs.
Drugs might necessitate a spiritual experience.
But I don't think that you need to be high
or have been high to have...
Well, excuse me.
You don't have to have been high on drugs.
I needed to have been high.
Like you needed to.
The door was shut before I had gone there.
And afterwards it's...
So like I've had them without drugs, but only afterward.
And it was like clearly very reminiscent and sort of things.
So I mean, that's a big improvement too.
It's like, oh, now I can have these experiences
that I'd never had before.
And like I feel like I probably never would.
Maybe like once I have a baby or something like that,
that might be different.
Well, really quick, that brings to mind
the last point I was going to make was that,
if a drug-spond spiritual experience isn't enough
to make you a new person, like you said,
you have to put in the work,
I think it can definitely catalyze it.
Oh yeah, you feel sure.
So I mean, it might never happen without them.
It might happen in six weeks where it might have taken six years.
You know, if you just try to...
You can't fix a problem that you don't know is there.
Yeah, and so it definitely...
Or you're unwilling to admit is there or something.
Or just that you can't notice, right?
So I think it can definitely kick off a lot of those insights.
I kind of want to push back on Niyash saying like,
that's a life wasted.
It's like in a certain case, it might be a life wasted.
That's not really how I want to live my life.
But if that's something you're not willing to dedicate yourself to
is like a full, complete understanding of your own experience
and expanding that experience and having more of them,
then like what is worth it, right?
And if it's just like four other people,
it's like, okay, well then to what end, right?
Like where does that line of questioning end?
My own answer really is like, if I'm supposed to be like, be good.
This isn't a great answer at all.
But I see it as like, you need to be doing good
on a lot of different levels, right?
But like the first main one is like,
you need to be good to yourself first and foremost
before you can even really be good at being good
to the people closest to you.
And then and so on and so forth as you get to
like people in your community, people in your country
or state or whatever.
And then like people in the world,
which Effective Altruism, man, plug that.
That's probably the best way to do people on the other side of the planet.
But then you still have all those other levels
where it's like you can't just abandon your community
for the sake of kids in Ghana with malaria.
I mean, you can, but you should still going to exist, right?
Yeah, right, I would say you probably shouldn't,
but you know, other people might disagree.
But the spiritual fulfillment thing is like,
I think that's probably how you can best be best to yourself, right?
I don't think just like devolving into a bit of
nihilistic despair.
Acquiring more money to buy more money with it.
Yeah, this is really.
You don't want to become a Rick.
Right, right, right, right.
Right.
You love that show because it's so deep and philosophical, right?
Yeah.
I like that show because the fart jokes are amazing.
Oh, right.
We just agreed on it.
Yeah, you're like, oh, that was the best episode ever.
You're like, there were no jokes in it.
No, like, yeah.
Well, to be fair, you have to be very intellectual
to understand Rick and Morty.
Nothing personnel.
We totally got to have an episode
where we just geek out about Rick and Morty.
To qualify, that last line was a joke from a meme
about Rick and Morty fans.
Right, very high IQ.
We should probably wrap up,
unless you have something to wrapping up.
Well, so some people might argue,
I've never done ayahuasca.
Ayahuasca is basically DMT over a long period of hours.
It's sort of like taking an MAOI,
mono-immunote as a base inhibitor, I think.
And then consuming a brew with DMT in it,
so like it stays in your system.
I think that's how it works, somebody that knows better.
That's the one where you go down to Peru
and you purge a lot and you have a shaman beat a drum.
There's like a ceremony surrounding it,
which I think ceremony is good
when you're about to do something.
That's a big deal.
Hi, kitty.
Hi.
Oh, he's so cute.
So I've never done that, but a lot of people say
that's like the center of the spiritual
or the psychedelic experience.
It's the most helpful.
I wish I could talk more about it firsthand,
but I can't.
I have tried DMT though,
and DMT is insanely weirdly, it's just weird.
I suggest reading DMT The Spirit Molecule by Rick Strossman.
He's a scientist that works at the University of New Mexico
and ran like clinical experiments,
just like giving this to people and be like,
so like what did you see?
And huge variability.
A lot of it was people interacting with aliens
or fairies or things like that.
So wasn't that a very common response?
Super common.
So there was variability in where they went
and who they talked to,
but this sense of going somewhere else
and talking to something greater.
Interacting with, yeah, interacting with somebody, right?
Which is not super common.
If you're on mushrooms or LSD, you have to be on a lot
to be seeing other people, things or having,
it's not really the same thing.
This is a whole new thing.
Is this, would you recommend this?
You're folded into a new dimension.
Would you recommend that you not do it
unless you have someone sober around watching you?
Well, set and setting are important with,
so anytime you're gonna be doing something intense
to your mind, make sure you're in a good place
emotionally and mentally.
I wouldn't suggest these for depressed people
or people with bipolar disorder
or issues that you really need to work out
because things can go wrong more often there.
Can I weigh in there really quick?
Yeah.
Two things.
One, the cool thing about DMT,
one of the cool things is that the trip
begins and ends within 20 minutes.
It's not an all day thing where you're out of it.
So you're probably gonna die of exposure
or something while you're doing this?
Not unless you live in the South Pole.
But all of these things can fuck you up emotionally,
so that's, there's still a risk,
but I think it's really low.
We should probably wait to talk about DMT
until someone has done it.
Oh, I've done it a bunch of times.
Oh, you have done it?
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Oh, that's right.
You're showing us it's really weird.
I haven't done ayahuasca, so ayahuasca's a different way.
It's like similar, same drug,
but there's more drugs in there too,
so it's not just DMT.
Can I dive in really quick about the emotional component
or the mental background component?
So yeah, set and setting and all that stuff.
But at least from my own anecdotal experience,
I found that with mild depression,
that tinkering with psychedelics, I think kind of...
Oh, it'll help you.
Yeah.
When it's mild depression, right?
When it's mild.
So I don't know if it'll necessarily...
I don't want to say that it will help you.
But if you're like suicidal...
Right, yeah.
So I don't want to say that it will help you
because it might be...
Your mileage may vary, but getting that...
There's high potential for benefits there, I would say.
And now that the clinical study of some of these drugs
is resuming, there's clinical evidence to support that as well.
You just mentioned about...
Yeah, not wanting...
Yeah, although...
There's some actual science you can look up.
Like, one study I was reading, it was like 70% or something like that,
said it was one of the most powerful, amazing things that they...
And this was with mushrooms.
I think it had long-lasting effects.
And then the 30% that didn't like it.
And this was in a clinical setting,
so it might not have been best situation for them to be taking mushrooms.
The 30%, they didn't have lasting negative effects.
I'd say that's pretty promising.
Especially when you can control...
I'm not going to take this in a hospital,
I'm going to take this with my friends or on my own.
Or depending on what you want to get out of it,
like you can take them and go to a concert or an art gallery
or a cathedral or whatever.
Or with a therapist, maybe.
If you can get them to talk to you while you're on drugs.
Hi.
I just had to transcend...
Or with your cat, you should totally do drugs with your cat.
Don't give drugs to the cat, just hang out with your cat.
I just had a transcendent spiritual experience with your cat just now.
It just licked my hand and that was pretty awesome.
She's so cute.
Here, can I finish with how I would explain DMT?
Sure.
So first, you kind of fold into a new space.
And then you'll notice you're in a weird pulsing glowing room.
And there's this child that's sort of like a cartoon child
dressed in just pink and white.
And he's pulling something out of a box saying,
we're still in here.
And after all your efforts to get away from them by turning inside yourself,
you just turn in and inward, they're still there.
You're realizing that you have a body and you can open your eyes
and you see your brother smiling at you.
And you've noticed that you've been vibrating into the pillow,
and crying the whole time.
So is this your experience?
Totally unable to process
this full cocktail of super powerful emotions
while you're reading all this?
Yes.
This is kind of like a compound of like two or three.
But I think it gives kind of...
I'm not sure if you bolstered or invalidated every point you made tonight.
No, that's DMT.
I haven't extracted anything of strong value from DMT.
Even chemically, it's really similar to Silasyn.
Look up pictures of Silasyn, Silasyn and DMT.
You'll see that they're all very close to each other,
probably interacting with your brain in similar ways.
So DMT is endogenous, right?
So like it's produced within your body,
which makes it different than all these others.
Stop biting me, buddy.
Stop, stop biting.
Don't edit these out.
Just leave the no biting.
Hey, kitty, stop.
There's actually a cat.
He didn't have DMT.
Well, I mean, he might have had DMT too, but there's also a cat.
Well, like every living thing's on DMT all the time.
Well, I think you can find it in pretty much anything that's living.
So nothing is actually real and we're all
bringing vast that are DMT hallucinating.
Like it's all really weird.
It's very, very weird.
And again, like feels more real than real, right?
I don't know.
So that one, most of what I've gotten out of it is like,
oh, your brain can experience way weirder things than you think it can.
Like it can experience way more than that.
So I haven't extracted any more value from that.
But in this book, I was talking about,
I think there's a Netflix documentary, DMT, The Spirit Molecule,
that explains it hosted by Joe Rogan.
So you know it's quality.
So that's DMT.
I don't know if that's more or less interesting to you guys now to look into.
But whatever.
Two hours a lot.
And if we did, I don't think we had time for feedback.
Did we?
No, we definitely don't have time for feedback.
All right.
I'll build a force wrap up.
I want to thank our supporter this time.
So I get the credit and you just get to repeat what I say as far as gratitude.
Because so far it's always been you.
Right.
Because I always have the names right in front of me.
That's right.
Special thanks to supporter Tim Sharp this week.
It supports like you that keep us keep the lights on in here and keep the episodes on the internet.
So thank you, Mr. Sharp.
Yes.
And keep in mind that you can write reviews at iTunes.
You can come on the website.
You can come into the subreddit.
You can write us emails.
We read every email.
I don't respond.
We don't have time to respond.
Well, it's not time.
It's like sometimes I mean to get around to them in episodes and we don't.
Or they're for feedback and we don't always get back to them.
But everyone is read and appreciated.
So don't think that they're just being left in the inbox.
That's all I got.
Yeah.
That's that's everything.
Thank you guys for all your support and your reviews and ratings and all that.
And we'll see you next time.
Cool.
Thanks.
I hope this is valuable somehow.
Bye.
Bye.
