Welcome to the Poetry of Reality podcast. If you're hearing this it means that you're
on the public feed, you get episodes a week late and you hear advertisements. You can
get access to the subscribers feed by going to thepoetryofreality.com and becoming a supporter
with immediate access to each episode and no ads. You can also support me by liking and
subscribing on YouTube and sharing my podcast. Thank you so much for your support.
I was delighted when the Centre for Inquiry in America decided to
give Ricky the Richard Dawkins Award for 2019. The ceremony took place in London Theatre. I
made a speech and then we had an onstage conversation which was chaired by Richard Weisman.
I thought it was a lovely occasion and I hope you will enjoy it too when you listen to this recording.
I'm sorry to say I hadn't seen any of Ricky's wonderful shows when I met him for the first time.
It was backstage in a London theatre where the comedian Robin Ince had organised an
alternative Christmas, a Christmas for atheists. I was one of the many performers and Robin had
lined up some really big names as well, including Ricky Giovese as one of the star terms. I was
astounded by the audacity of his act. It reminded me of a New York Times review of Tom Lehrer,
that wonderfully witty American songwriter and performer. The New York Times said,
Mr Lehrer's muse is not fettered by such inhibiting factors as taste.
Well, Ricky's act was like that only more so. I found his script literally shocking and I don't
shock easily. Naturally, this drew me to him. How I asked him, did you get away with it?
He admitted that he was using the atheist audience as a test bed to try out ideas and
see just how far he could go, before subjecting a real audience to a more generally acceptable
version. He was pushing the envelope. I must rephrase that. He was using the atheist audience
to reach way outside the envelope in order to calibrate where the bounds might be for an ordinary,
dare I say, less interesting audience. I next met Ricky when I interviewed him for one of my
Channel 4 documentaries. We pretty much agreed about everything. Some people think that makes for
bad television. It's not exciting. The public want disagreement. Well, I've never thought that
agreement can be interesting as well as verbal fisticuffs. It doesn't have to be tame and bland.
And I need hardly to say there's nothing tame or bland about Ricky Gervais. His comedy frequently
gives offence, not least in his splendidly irreverent takedowns of Hollywood celebs in his
presentations of the Golden Globe and things like that. If there was a Golden Globe for seeing how
far you can go and just getting away with it, Ricky would win hands down. And he's so witty
and entertaining with it. More recently, I binge watched his various drama series, The Office,
Derek Extra's After Life. And what I've learned is that he's a truly great playwright and actor,
as well as a stand-up comedian. The character of David Brent in The Office is so sensitively written.
I found the embarrassment of it too near the bone. I almost couldn't bear to go on watching. Like
Faulty Towers, but I also admire. Perhaps my favorite of all his shows is Derek,
where Ricky plays a supremely kind and gentle half-wit. It's a piece of acting genius,
but he also shows his writing genius. As for After Life, it almost had me in tears. It's so
movingly clever. Ricky is not just a stand-up comedian, not just a great comic actor. He's
an outstandingly creative writer as well, like Woody Allen, except Ricky is capable of playing more
than one character. I'm going to end my acclamation of this witty hero of atheism and reason with a
quite long series of quotations from him, because I think they're so wonderful. On Life and Death,
it's a strange myth that atheists have nothing to live for. It's the opposite. We have nothing to
die for. We have everything to live for. It's amazing life. There's so much to live for. As for
Death, he said, that's the best thing about being dead. You don't know about it. It's like being
stupid. It's only painful for others. The doctrine of hell is one of the most evil things about
both Christianity and Islam. At least it is to the extent that people really believe it. But as
Ricky points out, a Christian telling an atheist they're going to hell is as scary as a child telling
an adult they're not getting any presents from Santa. Another wonderful sally. Remember, if you
don't sin, Jesus died for nothing. On Morality and the absurd myth that
you need religion to be good. Do unto others is a good rule of some. I live by that. Forgiveness
is probably the greatest virtue there is. But that's exactly what it is, a virtue, not just a
Christian virtue. No one owns being good. I'm good. I just don't believe I'll be rewarded for it in
heaven. My reward is here and now. It's knowing that I try to do the right thing, that I lived a
good life. And that's where spirituality really lost its way. When it became a stick to beat people
with, do this or you'll burn in hell. You won't burn in hell, but be nice anyway.
And one of the nice, one of the things that you'll notice about Ricky if you follow him on Twitter,
for example, is how nice he is. Yes, he can be cutting in his wit. And he can, of course,
give offense, but he has a wonderful, gentle side as well, frequently to non-human animals,
but to human animals as well. When asked once whether he believed in God, his reply was,
I believe in dogs. As for Twitter itself, I can strongly empathize with this.
Arguing with morons on Twitter is like correcting graffiti on a public toilet wall that you'll
never need to use again. I read that Ricky had an early ambition to be a scientist and his attitude
to science seems to me exactly right. Of course, he wouldn't claim to be a scientist. To quote him,
science seeks the truth, and it does not discriminate. For better or worse, it finds things
out. Science is humble. It knows what it knows, and it knows what it doesn't know. It bases
its conclusions and beliefs on hard evidence, evidence that is constantly updated and upgraded.
It doesn't get offended when new facts come along. It embraces the body of knowledge.
It doesn't hold on to medieval practices because they are tradition. And the following seems to me
to show an admirably scientific attitude to theology. The existence of God is not subjective.
He either exists or he doesn't. It's not a matter of opinion. You can have your own opinions,
but you can't have your own facts. Ricky is immensely famous, of course, and he's very
gracious about being stopped in the street and other aspects of fame. But being famous also
prompted a typically witty remark on the subject of the widespread belief that only religious
people are moral. Being famous is like believing in God. Someone's watching you all the time.
I've never quite known how to cope with the retort, that it's only extremists who get a
religion a bad name. Ricky's answer to that at least hits one nail on the head. You can easily
spot any religion of peace. Its extremist members would be extremely peaceful.
Literary scholars have sometimes pointed out how fine can be the line between tragedy and comedy.
Some of the greatest comedians and comic characters have been close to tragedy.
Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton, Tony Hancock, Falstaff, Basil Faulty. Ricky Jovese is one of
the world's great comedians, but unlike some comedians, he's not himself a tragic figure.
He's a happy man with an endearing smile, a laughing court jester in a dark time.
He uses humor to lift us all out of despond. Other comedians may do that in an escapist way,
making us laugh as a way of running away from the dark reality of life. Ricky doesn't do that.
On the contrary, he goes right to the heart of the darkness,
tackles the evils of life and the evil people by confronting them head on and laughing at them.
As he himself said, if you can't joke about the most horrendous things in the world,
what's the point of jokes? What's the point in having humor? Humor is to get us over terrible things.
Ladies and gentlemen, atheists and rationalists, I give you a great hero of our movement,
our own wittily creative, infectiously laughing court jester, Ricky Jovese.
APPLAUSE
Fantastic. I can take that back from you, I would say, Ricky.
I guess. OK, you sit down, I think. I'll sit down. That's it. Good night.
Now, Richard, did you do that? If you had been all in black,
that would have looked like a really amazing trick. I thought you'd do that with the power of your mind.
That was amazing. So, we're going to chat about, I think, and I'm going to start off picking up
on one of the topics you mentioned there, which is, I think, for many people in the public,
atheists have this sort of reputation for being a little bit down in the world and a little bit
pessimistic. I mean, we're living in quite a difficult time at the moment. Are you optimistic
people? Are you optimistic about the future? Well, I don't know if I'm optimistic. I don't know.
I'm happy. I've always been happy. I have. I've always tried to get the most out of life.
I worked out early on that that was the shortcut I wanted. I just wanted to be happy.
I did that first and then decided how I was going to sort of make a living. Am I optimistic?
I mean, I've got nothing to fear. I look at this a bit like a holiday. We don't exist for 13.5 billion
years. Then we exist for 80, 90, 100 years, if we're lucky. And you experience everything. It's
amazing. I mean, it's amazing to be alive. The chances of us being here, as us, that sperm hitting
that egg is 400 trillion to one. It's incredible that we're here. And then we die, never to exist
again. And some people even get offended by me saying that. They say things like,
you don't know that. I'll probably live again. Someone said on Twitter once to me,
why don't you pray just in case there's a God? And I said, why don't you put garlic over your door
just in case there's a Dracula? I've got no problem with praying. It doesn't bother me for,
I've never been bothered by spirituality. I don't believe in it, but I never,
a personal belief has never been a danger. As I say, religion is something else and
not even just religion, but dogma. Dogma is the dangerous bit. And it doesn't just
exist in religion. It exists in more and more places now, that cultism, that which shouldn't
be questioned. Anything that, you know, that's what you want to question. If someone says you
shouldn't question this, you've got to question it. You've got to question it.
I love that thought experiment about the improbability of being here and the
chance of one sperm eating one egg. And I love to quote a poem by Aldous Huxley.
I think it's called Fifth Philosopher's Song. And it goes, a million million spermatozoa,
all of them alive, out of their cataclysm, but one poor knower, dare hope to survive.
And all that billion minus one might have chance to be Shakespeare, another Newton, a new Dunn,
but the one was me. Shame to have ousted your betters thus, taking arc when the
others remained outside. Better for all of us, fro at hermunculus, if you'd quietly died.
That's great.
But I mean, I think realistically, we probably have to be pessimistic,
but that's no way to live a life. I think you've got to be optimistic. Otherwise,
you're not going to have any chance of changing things to make them better.
So I say I'm realistically a pessimist, but I live my life as an optimist.
And like Ricky, I'm happy. Yeah. And I think if I get it right, your question is geared to
either are we worried about not existing again, or are we worried about how where the world's
going? Well, there's not a lot we can do about it either way. It's not a choice. Are you going to
die or live? I'll probably just live forever, which I probably wouldn't choose, or I would
then regret it. I think the first million years, I'd really be kicking myself. I'd go, I'd go.
Oh, no. Why did I choose infinity? There's no way out. I quite absolutely agree with that.
What's frightening about death is not death itself. It's infinity. It's eternity. Yeah.
I want to spend eternity under a general anesthetic. Yes. That's exactly, yeah. Yeah. And
and, you know, we don't know. We don't know. But I imagine it's like the 13 and a half
billion years before we were born. And that was fine.
Well, before we started, I did put on Twitter a call for questions. Oh, God.
And I'm putting in some of these. Why are you asking for it? Well, the first question was to
Richard, actually, which is about Charles Darwin created the theory of evolution.
How did animals change before that? No, that's not, that's a joke. That's a joke, isn't it?
You made that up. I made that one up. I made that one up. Yeah, that's not.
Yeah. But listen, okay. That is a joke, but it's no more stupid than some real one. Okay.
The one that obviously everyone gets. And I used to be frivolous and I used to do not. Now I just
answer them seriously. If we evolved from apes, why are there still apes around? I used to say
things like, well, if God made man from dust, why is there still dust around and things like, you
know, but now I say, well, we didn't evolve from modern age, we evolved with modern apes from a
common ancestor, rather like, and I just answer it deadly, deadly serious, like they, you know,
it doesn't help. Someone, someone followed up with, well, I've been that that go into the
same zoo for 24 years and I haven't seen one monkey turn into a person. But I think, I think,
even though that's incredibly stupid, we think actually it shows what the problem is when people
try and understand it. They can't grasp the scale of it. They can't imagine these tiny changes.
No one can imagine 50 million years. So they do expect them to the chimp to go, come on, lad.
Come on with it. And that's because they also give it a will. They think, they think, even non-religious
people are trying to understand you. They try and think that the giraffe was really stretching his
neck, you know, that's the problem. There's lots of little logical problems that hasn't been explained
properly. But actually, it's, if I can understand it, anyone can, you know. And Richard, you must
have been asked many stupid questions over the years. Is there a standout stupid question for you?
Yes. Well, the one that Ricky just mentioned, but there's also, why don't we ever see a Crocoduck?
That's a good question. I think that's a great question. I would love that. I would love a Crocoduck.
I've actually got a Crocoduck tie that somebody gave me. Well, I have to say, what, what image
have you got in mind for a Crocoduck? A Crocoduck would be a crocodile that would be angry,
but he's fucked because he's just got a bill. That's like my tie.
Yes. The implication of that is that there should be an intermediate between every animal and every
other animal. I think there should be, though. You can get a Crocoduck. Well, look, they can't see
that it's nearly an analogue thing as well. And I think you've spoken about this before, your
amazing model about if you took a picture of your dad and your grandparents and their dad,
any one point you go, they look alike. But for some point is a fish, you know. Eventually,
there's a fish. I didn't see that coming. What you did, you see, you know, again, it's the scale.
The scale is, is unimaginable. It's lucky that it did happen because we couldn't imagine it.
If it wasn't fact, we couldn't make that up because it's incredible. It's incredible. It's
perfectly true. But whenever I've done that, it always gets a gasp of astonishment. Why? I mean,
everybody knows we're descended from fish. Don't they? Yeah. The way I put it is, if you could
meet your 200 million great grandfather, you would eat him with a slice of lemon and tartare sauce.
Yes, exactly. Yeah. Yeah. There is the scale, though, isn't it? Is it true we're closer? I know
closer is a non-scientific term. But I like these facts as well that go around that we're,
evolutionally speaking, I think they mean in time, we're closer to a salmon than a salmon is to a
shark. Yes. To the plasma branch. That's a perfectly respectable thing to say, by the way.
Nothing wrong with that. All it means is that we're closer cousins. That means to say
that the common ancestor that we share with salmon lived a lot more recently than the
common ancestor that salmon plus us shares with sharks. So is a crocodile possible?
Okay, listen, I'll take this one. I'm a psychologist. I can answer this one.
Is that a possibility in a parallel universe? Oh, here we go.
I did a podcast with Lawrence Krauss and he was definitely saying things like that to just
wind me up. Just when I started understanding it, he'd throw in something else. I go, oh, well,
why are you doing that? Well, it is true that when duck-billed platypuses were first
sent back to the museum here, nobody believed they were real. They thought it was a hoax.
They thought that somebody had taken a duck's bill and sent it on to some other kind of creature.
So I suppose that's the nearest approach to a crocodile. And that is real.
Because it's only monitoring that it produces eggs and milk, it could make its own custard.
It doesn't, but it definitely could. I use that instant stuff, so it could use that as well.
If you get a whisk, it will be fine. It is amazing. I mean, some Australian mammals,
it's because is it true that it floated away and there weren't predators as such?
Oh, there were predators, actually. They most had gone extinct. There was a giant
predatory carnivorous kangaroo, for example. It must have been quite terrifying.
Bounding after you with its jaws agape. Yeah. We should bring them back.
I think so, yes. Now, now, you started it, but turned into an idiot on Twitter.
Can we bring back the mammoth? You know, can we? I think we can, can't you?
Well, I don't know. Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome them.
Would that be the greatest thing ever? Can we bring back the mammoth?
There is a serious possibility. The genome of the mammoth has been pretty much worked out,
and the technology to actually bring it back isn't there yet. We've got the genome,
and so it doesn't seem totally impossible that you could.
Now, what does that mean? Do you mean you've synthesized something, or you've put together
bits of DNA, or the DNA exists and you've found it in the elephant and modified it?
What does it mean we've got the, we've got the, you mean you've got the thing that would make
a mammoth if it was? Well, because frozen mammoths died sufficiently recently and they're frozen in
the Arctic, so that there's plenty of tissue there. You can get plenty of DNA. There's a lovely
Healer Bellock poem about the frozen mammoth, which ends up, I can't remember how it goes, but
if the skin be, it will make an excellent soup, but the snag is, if the skin be but punctured
before it is boiled, your confection is wholly and utterly spoiled, and hence on account of the
size of the beast, the dainty is nearly unknown. But anyway, there it is, it's, it's, if you don't
know the answer Richard, just say so. Right, you asked for this. It's, um, okay. So how, so how,
how would we bring it back? How could, how, what is the process? What would we do? The process is
that you use the, you use the soft tissues of this frozen mammoth, right, sequence the DNA,
and that's pretty much been done, the little bit of filling in with elephant DNA as well. Now what
we don't yet have the ability to do is to implant that DNA into an elephant egg, right, and then
put the elephant egg into a, put the elephant egg with mammoth DNA into a female elephant, and then
grow the embryos. So it would be, it would be a hybrid at most. No, no, no. How would you, how could
you say, oh, so you'd clone, oh, you'd clone the mammoth egg and just use that as a, you remember
Dolly the sheep. Yeah, yeah. Well, it would be that kind of thing. So Dolly had a, it was a sheep egg,
and into that sheep egg was, was put the DNA of another sheep. Right. And so, and then it was,
it was cloned. If a mammoth baby come out, wouldn't that surprise the elephant?
No doubt. Yes, no doubt. Right. A lot, a lot of people have hairy babies.
Tusks and everything like that. Yeah. Well, elephants have got tusks.
Asteroid. There's just, it's just hairier than this. Yes. Yeah. If, if you could clone a mammoth,
would, would you do it? Not cloning, would you, would you? I would, but there are many who wouldn't.
There are many who think it would be unethical somehow to do this, they think,
it would be cruel. Why would it be cruel? Because it wouldn't ever be in its natural habitat.
Well, if it was just, if it was just on its own. I mean, if you made lots of them, and there's,
some people think we should actually clone lots of them and let them loose on the,
on the Siberian tundra to, to, you know, bring back the ecology that's, that's disappeared.
I'd, I'd bring back Toanosaurus rex. I'd let it loose in parts of England, to be honest, but
so atheism, it's, so I can remember, and I don't know if this has any resonance for you at all,
but I can remember listening to you on the radio, and I can't place this, I know it's a long time
ago, and I would think it's after the initial success of the office, I think, and I think it's
Steve Wright, if I might be wrong, and he said something like, oh, you must wake up in the morning
and say, thank God for my amazing things that are happening. And you said, why would I say thank
God, I'm an atheist. Right. And it was the first time I'd heard the word atheist on kind of public
radio. Well, I mean, yeah, there shouldn't even be the word, should there? If people didn't invent
gods, I wouldn't have to deny them. And it's just, but it's like, I, I was told when I sort of started
breaking America to not mention I was an atheist. Really? Oh, first thing I did on every
first thing I did, why, what, what am I going to do? Imagine, imagine not doing something
because people hate you because of what you are. That's, that's, you know, that's my only thing I've
got. I'm a white, rich middle class man, but I'm at least I'm hated for being an atheist. Do you
know what I mean? I'm oppressed. I'm oppressed in 13 countries I'd never go to anyway.
Have you seen a change in your, of the last, I mean, 20 years or so, about how
atheism is perceived? Well, I mean, you sort of do it. I, I, there's part of me that does it because
I think I should, that there is someone being persecuted now that might, you know, I can't,
I can't change the world. But what I mean, maybe someone in a, in a Western world that, that thinks
they shouldn't come out because it's a bad thing, because it's still a bad thing in Western society.
In America, they took a vote up America, right? Probably that big bit in the middle of America,
but we were voted least trustworthy group, joint bottom with rapists. So there's still a thing
about, I better not say I'm an atheist, I annoy my mum or dad or granddad or school. There's still
that. So you do that. Some of it, I do it as an intellectual pursuit because someone asked me a
question. I'd rather give the right answer than the wrong answer. I'd rather tell the truth than lie
because it's easier. You know, I think the, people think I run into churches and go, it's all fucking
bollocks. I don't, I, I don't, I don't care. You know, I don't, but if I'm asked if I believe in
God, I'll say no. I mean, you know, the tricky one is, I did a film called the invention of lying
where I did a scene where my, thank you, seven people saw that film. Where my mother in that
is dying and it's because I'm the only person in the society can lie. She says, I don't want to go
to nothingness. And I go, there's not nothingness. It's a beautiful place you go and you're young
again. And I invent heaven, right? And that comes from the fact that when my mum was dying, I did
face dilemma. If she'd have said, do you think there's a God? That's, that's a personal thing. And
that's, you know, so yeah, I, I, I try, I just try and be honest, really. And the other thing is,
if, if someone else's kid, five year old asked me, do I believe in God? I sort of think, what
shall I say here? And I say, well, I don't, but a lot of people do. What do you think? You know,
I try and, there's still a level of deployment. It's not, it's not always my place. You don't,
you know what I mean? But, you know, my house, my rules, if someone asked me somewhat on Twitter,
I'd tell them the truth. It's, you know. And Richard, in the last sort of 20, 30 years,
have you seen a change in how atheism is perceived? I'm not a sociologist. I haven't done the
research. I'm not a psychologist. So I, not sure, would only be a subjective impression.
The statistics suggest that we're growing in numbers. Obviously, in Western Europe,
but also even in America, I think the number of people who claim no religion in the United States
is now more than 20%, which is large compared to any particular religious denomination. So I think
that the, the statistics show that the trend is in the right direction. But as Ricky says,
other polls show that we're down there with rapists in, in terms of public. I think I have to
lump us in with, you know, agnostics, which I, again, I keep trying to explain that on Twitter,
that they're not mutually exclusive, you know, one deals with knowledge, one deals with belief.
And so, you know, people say on Twitter, it's a logical to be an atheist. You should be agnostic.
And I say, well, I am, I am as well. Don't agnostics get on your nerves a bit?
Well, no, because we, we're all agnostic, aren't we? We're all agnostic by definition. If, if we
accept that no one knows knowledge, I'm being very diplomatic here. But if we accept that no
one knows that there's a God or not, we might be wrong. We're 99% sure. But let's say we, we don't
know. We're all agnostic. So take it out. It doesn't matter. Now we ask about belief. What do you
believe? What's your best bet? But when someone says they're agnostic, isn't it sort of attempting
to go, why don't you just think about it a bit more then? Because it, well, I just think that there's
a, there's a, yes, but there's a category mistake. I, some people do do it because they don't want
to say they believe in God, you know, but if you, you shouldn't ask an agnostic if there's a God or
not, you should ask them, do you believe there's a God or not? Because then they can't say I don't
know because that doesn't make sense. Well, you mean you don't know whether you believe or not, right?
You know, so yeah, I think the, the, the really sick making thing is people who think because,
because they're agnostic and we can't know for sure, therefore the likelihood is 50-50.
Very different. I mean, it's, it's, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm agnostic, but I think, but I believe
that the likelihood is about 1% or less. That's not really agnostic, is it? Yes, it is.
Yes. If we accept that we don't know, if it's a default, we don't know, no one's come back
from heaven, no one's proved it. You can't prove the non-existence of something. And why would you?
The periodic table of non-existent things is infinite, you know, it's like.
So if we accept that, that's, that's a knowledge, that's a category of knowledge. But if you just
say, what do you believe? Yeah, you have to step up, you have to say what you believe. And if you
don't believe in any God, you're an atheist. That's the other misconception. People think that
atheism is denying the existence of God, right? It's not, it's just not accepting the claim
that there is a God, you know. But if there were three doors which says God exists, God doesn't
exist, I don't know. That doesn't make sense. There's three doors, it says God exists, it doesn't
exist, I don't know. But you not knowing is irrelevant to where there is or isn't a God.
You again, you've done a sleight of hand there on a category mistake, because one is knowledge and
two are beliefs, right? I've even finished my question. No, what? No, no, there's always,
I'm saying three is always there. If you had to choose one. Yeah. It's, I believe there's a God.
I don't believe there's a God. I don't know, he's irrelevant then, isn't it?
Crocoducks. So moving on to my Twitter, Twitter questions. You spoke about lying there. What's
the biggest lie you've told to impress somebody? Is that a question that's been submitted?
On Twitter. The biggest lie you've told to impress somebody? It's quite a tricky question,
actually. Oh, the biggest I've told to impress someone? Yeah. I honestly can't think of one.
Yeah, Richard doesn't think. Not only can I not think of one, I'm quite confident there's never
been one. You've never told a lie to impress anyone? I've told a lie to not hurt people's
feelings. Yeah, that's different, yes. I suppose that's impressing them because I want them to like
me by not saying, so can you come to my party? I say no, I can't, I'm giving blood at the orphanage
or something. No, because I don't want to say, of course I'm not coming to your party,
I hate you and all your friends, it would be all waste. So my lies are usually because I haven't
got the nerve to be honest when it's hurting someone's feelings. They're all white lies.
Yeah, okay. But I don't think I've lied to, like on a CV or something. Oh, I didn't write the
question. Don't turn it back on me. There could be anything you want. Richard, there are three doors,
I believe in God. I suppose that works if you say which answer sums you up most, that's allowed,
I think. What, with the three doors? Yeah, there is no God, there is a God I don't know. I'd go for
there is no God, because I'd identify with choosing that door. But there's still a category
mistake, because one deals with knowledge and one deals with belief. Now the category mistake,
you have a background in philosophy, of course, your first degree is in philosophy. Is that my
only degree? Oh, God. Your last degree. Yeah, you made it sound really good. I could have just nodded.
Yes, that was my first degree. I thought you'd have been a lie to impress. Exactly, yeah. In fact,
my first degree was biology, which I did for two weeks, and then swapped to philosophy. There were
nine o'clock lectures, it was 40 hours a week. I suddenly got to university and thought, I haven't
come here to learn, I've come here to join a band. Do you know what I mean? That's a category error.
Philosophy was, yeah, I did philosophy, I got a degree in philosophy. Have you ever found that
useful? Well, only that everything is useful that you learn. Well, that's not true, is it, really?
I suppose critical thinking is useful, but I think I already had it, or I wouldn't have
done science and philosophy. So I don't know that it's useful other than it's nice to know stuff,
it's fun. I mean, I take it as one of the best things about being alive, learning stuff. I want
to know everything. I'm still in awe of the world. Honestly, I wish this wasn't about me because I'd
be quizzing him. He'd get fed up, he'd go, shut up, I'd be asking him questions all the time, you know.
And if we turn to your work for that, in fact, actually this is a question to both of you. I
think what's interesting is that your work is incredibly innovative. So if you take selfish
gene or you take the God delusion, it's a very innovative work and the God delusion in particular,
I mean, came out of a time when atheism wasn't a popular thing to be writing about and you went
for it. The office, I mean, just phenomenal in particular, I mean all of your work, but the
office, we just sort of focus on that. Where do those ideas come from? What's the process behind
innovation in that? Well, it's very different because Richard's dealing in
what's true about the universe and I'm making stuff up. So I wouldn't put myself alongside
scientists. But for me, it's, as I get older, all I want to be in art, in comedy or whatever,
is just more honest and look deeper. That's all I want to do now. That's all I try and do.
And my being, first of all, it's even done before. That's what you don't want to do. You want to
keep going, you know, this is new. But I do want to, I am fascinated with honesty and bravery,
even in something as lowly as comedy. I think is that the best thing to, and not without
consequence, I think people think that sometimes you're just trying to offend for the sake of it.
That's too easy. That is too easy. And I imagine when people say, oh, yeah, anyone can just be
offensive. I go, go on then. Set out on arena and just be offensive. See, you know what I mean?
It's a ridiculous thing to say. So that's never the aim. But I am aware that some people will find
everything I do offensive because everyone's different. But that's no reason why you shouldn't
say it. That's the good thing about freedom of speech. You have the right to piss off lots of
people at once. Is that your thoughts as well? Well, I think that the, to say that offends me,
as though that was somehow an argument, is what's really pernicious. And I think Stephen Fry said,
you're offended. Well, so fucking what? Yeah. Yeah. And Christopher Hitchens said slightly more
moderately, you're offended. I'm still waiting to hear your argument. But that's what it is.
That's what offer people have found out now. It's sort of tip for tap, right? And some of it was
a rebellion against the first wave of political correctness where they said, well, if you can't
do that, I'm offended by that. Now what? You know, and it was, it was, but it's another form of dogma.
It's another form of shutting you down, putting the suffix phobia on the end of some things. That
means you can't discuss it anymore. And you've got to be very careful about that. But particularly
in comedy, most offence is taken when people mistake the subject of a joke with the target.
They think that subject is a terrible contentious, terrible thing to laugh about. Well, no, look at
the joke, though. You know, and they don't, they go, no, you shouldn't joke about so and so. I've
been asked by journalists, is there anything you won't joke about? And I say, is there anything
you won't write about? Because straight away, they assume a joke is making fun of the terrible
situation or the victim or the, and, and, and I don't do that. I actually don't do that. And
it's fine if you do. I think humour is exempt from those things, but I still don't. I still have
a conscience when I, and I try and make my jokes bulletproof. Now, of course, you've got to make
them bulletproof for 10 years time, which is a, which is a problem. And is it a question of the
audience perceiving where it's coming from in a sense that, you know, if you're a racist and you
do racist material, clearly that's a very ugly thing. Yeah. I think the actual, what I mean is,
I think people, you can do a joke about race without being racist. And I think that's,
I think people think that you mustn't joke about race, because they assume it might be right.
They haven't looked at it. And some people just, they just, it just scares people a little bit.
And some people are offended on other people's behalves. You see people in the audience looking
around thinking, can I laugh at that? Maybe I shouldn't. And they go, why? And I, I, that's why
I deal in taboo subjects, because I want to say, well, you can laugh at this. Look, here's an example
of something you can laugh at. And I give them examples. And I, I almost, I defy them not to laugh.
Because it's okay to laugh at bad things. It is okay to laugh at bad things. But you're not
setting out to offend. I'm not setting out to offend. And I think the targets are my joke of
valid. I can defend every joke I've ever made. I can even argue that every joke I've ever made
is politically correct. But that, that's another, that's another matter. But yeah,
not that that matters, because there's a difference between being correct and being
politically correct. And, and it's been mugged and changed. And now it's a different beast than
it was, you know. But no, I think you're allowed to joke about anything. It's, it's what the joke
actually is. And sticking with your, your work for the moment, if there was a weird parallel
universe where you could only have written one book or only made one television series or, or film,
which one would you be most happy with? I would be most happy with the extended phenotype.
Oh, surprising. Which is, which is the one book I've written for a professional audience, although
I hope other people can read it as well. How interesting. So I, I thought you would, you would
go a selfish gene or God delusion, but oh, you've written those as well. Just to remind you.
I'm actually, I admit pretty pleased with all my books, I must admit. But I think the, the, the,
the one, I think perhaps the one where I made the most original contribution is, is the extended
phenotype. I was quite agreeably surprised when you said you thought the God delusion was,
you know, innovative. I'm not sure it's innovative. Sorry, Paul ropes and singing to me. It's my alarm
clock reminding me to take my pills. I love Paul ropes. Do you need to take your pills because
we can chat on if this is going to get good. I think the God delusion was normally, I mean,
no one was doing books about atheism at that time as far as I can remember. No, that, well,
it's not quite true actually, Sam Harris was. But, and I think, but, but I mean,
there's really nothing in any of our books that's not foreshadowed in say Bertrand Russell.
Why I'm not a Christian and so on. But then you mentioned the self-esteem. I think that,
that is more innovative actually. And I think the extended phenotype is more so. Okay, Ricky.
I'd probably go with the Old Testament. Just because of how popular it was and how well it's
sold. You did phenomenally well with that. I'd be just think how rich, I mean, could I do better
marketing and I'd do better deals. Yeah. Than those goat herders did. I'd have a top US agent.
And yeah. I heard a, I was listening to Woody Allen routine, which is the vodka routine. He said,
oh, he said, my rabbi is terrible. My rabbi is terrible. He's giving a sermon. He forgot the
10 commandments and listed the seven dwarfs. That was a great joke. Anyway, I digress. So,
if, if, if I didn't allow you to agree that your work was with the Old Testament, if, if you weren't
allowed to go, which of your, your TV series or films would you go with? Well, I mean, the office
brings to mind again, because it was the, the first thing I'd try my hardest at and, you know, so, yeah.
Did you know the US office I'd choose?
Did you know from the get go with the office that you'd got something very special there?
Yeah, I thought it was special. I thought it was different. I sort of came to it with a big
list of sort of don'ts more than do's because, you know, you, I was very late in life. I'd worked
in an office for 10 years and I think I was like 38, 39. So I knew this was a, you know, a sort of
second bite at the cherry. So I knew it had to be special. And I was happy with that. I could walk
away knowing that I'd done something. But is it true that when it was exported to America, they got
a different cast and, and... Oh, yeah. Well, we sold the rights for them to do it. Why didn't they
just take your version? Because there was only 12 and I was too lazy to do any more. And there's
a thing over there they want that syndication. So they want 100 episodes of something and then the,
the money is exponential because it gets shown in rotation. And you know, so, and they did 300
something episodes. Were your episodes shown as well? Yeah, but it was on BBC America. And I think
it was the, it was the highest rated show on the channel and it got like a million and a half.
So the US office was getting 10 million a week and the Super Bowl episode got 25 million. Yes. So
it's a, it's a different beast. It's just a, each episode we made ours for about 120 grand.
By the end that theirs were 3 million an episode. Yeah, yeah. So it's just, it's not even, it's not
even to be compared. I look at it like I sold my DNA, but it's not my, it's not my... Yeah. I mean,
I was rather shocked to discover that one of David Attenborough's really major series was redone with
an American voice with opera Winfrey instead of David Attenborough. And I thought that's utter heresy.
I mean, I do. But presumably
she just literally overdubbed the footage. She didn't go and remake it or with different,
no, I think that Steve Carell is a spider.
Yeah, no, they just started again just because Americans want things
by Americans for Americans. Ours wouldn't have been big in the big middle bit, you know, it's,
it was, and it was different. It was different. They did make it differently.
It was more optimistic.
It wasn't mine artistically, but honestly, it was much more lucrative for me than my version,
you know. So someone on Twitter once sent me,
the US version of the office is better than yours. How does that make you feel? And I sent back
fucking rich. But that happens with TV, obviously, Americans by ideas and remake here. It doesn't
happen with books. I mean, if an American publisher, we love God Delusion, we're going to get Sam
Harris to do it. That wouldn't really... No, that's true. But what they do is change the title.
All right, it's extremely irritating. I've actually... It was called Mega Jeans.
I've actually bought the same book twice, but I didn't realise it was the same.
And on one occasion, I saw it, you know on Amazon, it says, if you like so and so, you will probably
like so and so. Same book. Really? That's a fantastic algorithm, because it is correct,
isn't it? If you like that. Yeah, that's great. So what, they change your titles? I've never
allowed it, but many of my colleagues have had the titles changed. Right. And I find it unnecessary
and really damn nuisance. It... Matt Ridley says it's because the publishers like to feel
important. It's the only thing they can do. And so... I assumed it was marketing, like they wouldn't
get that title or certain. Yeah, they call it marketing. Yeah, they call it marketing, yeah.
So in the... We were chatting beforehand, I was checking with some friends, and one of the
questions came up about comedy and the fact that we couldn't think of many, if any, comedians
who were religious. I'm not asking for example, I'm just saying, do we think it's a thing that
most stand-ups tend to be agnostic or atheist or...? I think so. I think that's because a lot of
comedians are critical thinkers. I think a lot of them are science-based. They're intelligent.
Well, I don't want to say... Well, yeah, but yeah. But then, you know, a lot of religious people
are intelligent, but they've been got at an early age, and it's like... Yeah, I think they're braver.
Some people... There's still a thing of not saying, I'm an atheist, because they...
Because people think that it's a bad thing to be. You know, parents still
christen their kids and send them to school because they think it's a respectable thing to do, you
know? And I... That's sad, but I get it. There's a couple, though. There's a couple. They don't put
it in their act, I don't think. Tim Vine is very devout Christian. That's true. Yes. Yeah. But in
general, they tend to be, I think, more skeptical or... I think that's because they are... They look at
things from all angles, and they come up with funny ideas. And I try... I look at the idea,
and I think that's what's wrong, and that's what Dogma does, is that people try and give ideas
human rights, so you leave them alone. And you don't have to. You can ridicule ideas without her
in anyone. And some people say... That deserves a round of applause. Oh, thank you. And they found
it shut some people up. If they say, that's her, you know, you could be accused of racism or anything,
if you criticize an idea. And it's people jumping in the way of a bullet and saying,
why are you shooting at me? And it comes back to Richard's point that I'm offended. That's not an
argument. It's not an argument. It's like me being offended if someone takes the mickey out of maths.
It's like... Go on. Yeah, fine. Yeah. Do you know what I mean? You can laugh at maths. It doesn't
affect maths. It doesn't affect maths. And I like asking this of all performers, when you
you've done a lot of live work, when you go on stage or before you go on stage, do you have any
superstitious rituals that you carry out? No. Really? No, I'm not superstitious, am I?
Is this a trick? No. If I said yes, I'd go down a vault.
Look at this footage and deny it. No, really. No, I probably have loads of
sort of neuroses and OCDs and things that happen, nothing based on superstition. It's
worrying that the audience is, what's the air conditioning like? Is there a squeaky door?
No ice in the drink. Someone's putting off. I have all those things, but I have no
superstitions. No. Did you mean superstitions? Yeah, I mean, some performers touch wood or wear
certain socks or nothing. Well, I wear the same clothes because I can't be bothered to think
about what else to wear, but I don't do touch wood. Okay. No, I don't touch wood. No.
I don't ask. No, I don't. No. I just, I burn some incense, say a couple of prayers.
That's it, really. And in terms of changing minds, in terms of getting people to be more
skeptical or rational or scientific, both of you enormously influential, but with two different
ways. Obviously, you're using comedy a lot of the time and you're depending more on factual
arguments. How does that play out? Is that playing to the same audiences? Do you think it's equally
persuasive? Well, I think Rich is more driven in his thing than I am. What do you think about
changing minds? What do you think? I'm known to be not very good at it. I tend to just,
as you were saying earlier, Ricky, I tend to just tell the truth. And that isn't always the right
way to go about it. Marketing wouldn't approve, I suspect, of just simply going out and telling
the truth. I had a rather nice encounter with Neil deGrasse Tyson, who said something like,
you just put it out there. There's no act of persuasion. There's no act of seduction going
on. You just simply say, here are the facts. Take it or leave it. And I had to say,
well, I said, I gratefully accept the rebuke. But I then went on to say, I'm not the worst of that.
And I quoted Alan Anderson, who was then the editor of New Scientist, who said,
I asked him what your policy is at New Scientist. And he said, our policy at
New Scientist is science is interesting. And if you don't agree, you can fuck off.
Yeah. Yes. That's exactly. Yeah.
Yeah, I don't, I don't, in the greatest scheme of things, there are probably worse things than
people believing in all the different gods. It doesn't affect me because I'm, because I'm free
and liberated and safe. And, but yeah, you can still be annoyed. It's ignorance that annoys me
more than anything, whatever it is, it's not, I don't want to keep going after religion, because
that's only one form of this belligerent willful. And it's not even that is you, you can't sort of
help what you believe in. Most people aren't going around thinking this will annoy people.
I'm trying to oppress people's rights. They just think, I believe in God, because that's how,
that's how my brain worked when I was little. And now I think, yeah, it's probably a God.
And most religious people aren't crazy. It's something else. Again, it's something, you know,
and we, we worry about the people who believe the bad bits in their holy book, as well as the
good bits. Most nice people who believe in God, they can tell the difference. They do, they know
the nice, they cherry pick and they know the nice bits from the bad bits. They don't do the bad bits.
And my point is, if you know the bad bits from the good bits, you don't need the holy book.
You know, you're already a moral person.
And with afterlife, which I think is phenomenal. Thank you.
Clearly, obviously you talk about atheism in there, but it's fundamentally about kindness
and living a good life, I think. I think it is. I think the question is, when you, when you lose
the best thing about life, is it still worth living? That's that. That's what the question
starts with. It started with a high concept, really. Imagine you lost everything. You wouldn't care
about anything. You could do what you wanted. So that was the comedic dramatic. Where did
that thought come from? I don't know. I don't know. I think it might have been
sort of two years of this thing that you've got to watch what you say. Like it wasn't
to say the right thing. It was to say the thing that was least offensive to most people,
which is nonsense. We'd still be in the middle ages. We'd still be putting leeches down our
pants. You know, every, every scientist committed heresy at some point, every great invention,
every move forward in progress was going against some sort of crazy dogma at some point.
And it wasn't that there was more crazy, mad, nasty people around. It was that they weren't
ashamed of it anymore in the last few years, you know? In my day, racists were ashamed, right?
No, they're not. And the backlash was people saying, oh, you can't say anything. And I just
thought, well, imagine if you could, you just could. You didn't care about the consequences.
You wouldn't care about offending anyone. Because we do. Even myself and Richard,
who want to tell the truth, we do things we don't want to do all the time because we're
worried about it. If we're mugged, we hand over the cash because we don't want to get hurt, right?
But imagine if you didn't care about living or dying that happens after life. You think,
bring it on. I'm not scared anymore. So that was the idea. If you weren't scared about
consequences, if you weren't scared about politeness, if you weren't, you had nothing to lose.
And that was the seed of the idea, really. But then of course, it becomes about kindness,
if it becomes about overcoming. People trying to save you. The comfort of strangers,
and the people who care. And that's the thing about grieving and depression. The thing that
came out after life that shocked me, I've never had a reaction like it, even the office. I've never
had a reaction like it because it was an emotional reaction. And I found out that people come up to
me all the time and they say, oh, I lost my mother. I lost my husband a lot. And you think, oh, yeah,
of course, everyone's grieving. Everyone's grieving this year about something. And the older
they get, the more that happens. And that was never an intention. But I think it, I think people
hadn't seen, certainly a comedy, but they hadn't seen something that dealt with grief. That man,
he was just, he wanted to die. And then I had to make it funny. So yeah.
But also this character is dealing with grief, not from a religious point of view at all.
Well, I wanted that. I wanted a bit of a play on words with afterlife, like he thought his life
was over. And he doesn't believe, he doesn't even believe in an afterlife. He hasn't even got that
comfort. So what's the point? And, and I went down to sort of a nihilist road and I, I wanted to
bring him out to say, well, there's still a point. We've still, you've still got a few years to enjoy
everything else. That's the, that was the sort of philosophical question. So to answer your
original question, I think I am quite positive. And I think I am quite optimistic. I'm an optimistic
person. I think it'd be all right. You know, I think it'd be all right. If there's a meteor heading
towards earth, five billion people are praying to their God and a few hundred scientists to get
Bruce Willis up there.
And, and you talk about the impact. I think, again, this is true of both of you, the impact on
people's lives. That if you say on afterlife, that's has a resonance with people. Well, I think
people want to see things that they haven't seen before. And I think this is what happens with
marketing and people who are worried. I think everyone sets out with these good intentions.
I'm going to do an uncompromised thing about something that's going to say things that's
never been said before. And then soon someone says, if you take out a couple of the swear words,
we can put on a nine o'clock. If you change that to so and so, we might, and then soon they've,
it's watered down and it's, you know, I remember once I was one of my first things at Channel 4,
11 o'clock show. And I did a sketch. It was about, there was a thing about
people who claimed benefit when they didn't need it. And I played this sort of,
sort of bigoted, crazy right wing journalist who, who would always come down on the wrong side,
right? And, and he was saying, my character was sort of saying, what you should do is, right? If,
if someone, you know, claims their death, set off a fire alarm and see if they run out of the
building, right? So it was all that sort of stuff. Channel 4 said, can you change that to the blind
because the deaf are very militant. So their moral judgement was how many letters they'd
have to write. Also, it doesn't work if he's blind because he can hear the fucking bell.
I wonder why they care about getting letters actually. I've often wondered that. Because
people think that one, one, now is worse. Now people are terrified of one complaint and now,
you know, they're held to rounds, particularly the BBC, you know, I've, I've, you know, talked
to people down like executives by saying, I'll write the letters. Sometimes they want to know,
I've explained the joke, why it's okay. And they go, okay, never a complaint. I've never had,
if I let a complaint, it's never been upheld. You know, because if you can, if you're clever enough,
you can, it's not just putting stuff out there and trying to offend everyone. It's, you know,
you can explain it. Some people just want to be heard. I work in my normal job,
people would complain. I'd call them back and they go, oh, didn't think you'd call back.
They were already happy that you'd called them back. Some people want to be heard because
they're never heard. And then people are scared of a complaint these days. And there's no reason for
it. But with, with afterlife, how does it feel to, to get that feedback from people that it's
much more emotional? Are people saying that that touched me that has resonance? It's great.
It's really good. I feel very proud of that because it's just a, I suppose it's just another
little layer to it. And, and I'd certainly rather that than I hated it. I was offended,
you know, I don't, I don't want people to hate things I do and be offended. I want them to enjoy
it. You know, I'm a comedian. I'm not a politician or, you know, a religious leader or I, I put
stuff out there because I think they'll enjoy it and, and pay me. And Richard, obviously your,
your books have had enormous influence on, on people's lives. How does that feel?
Well, I do very much appreciate getting letters from people who say you've changed my life.
And I get a fair number of those. I get an enormous number who say that my books on evolution
decided them to go into science at school. And only this week I was seeing a doctor
and he, and Australian doctor in the hospital. And he said, the end, I want to thank you.
The selfish gene was what made me take up biology and hence made me become a doctor.
I love that. I mean, that, that's really a wonderful, wonderful.
And, and perhaps more, perhaps more relevant to this meeting, the God delusion,
enormous numbers of letters from people who say you saved me from my religious upbringing.
You, you, you, you articulated something that I, that I felt myself but could never quite find the
words to, to say myself, I am no longer a real, I'm freed from the shackles of religion.
And, and that I find it again, hugely gratifying. There are many who say,
there are many who write in great distress because they have lost their faith and are
unable to break the news to their parents or their spouse. And in particular, poignant are the
clergy people who've, we've got a project in America called the clergy project,
which is designed to help clergy people, clergymen and clergywomen who've become atheists
and can't escape because it's the only living they know. And so that's poignant when they,
when they're stuck, they can only earn their living by, by going on preaching sermons and,
and things like that. So, so the clergy project does that. And I like to think that maybe I,
I help them as, as well, people who, who need to escape and find it very difficult to do so.
I think that's, I, I think that's really important. And it comes back to the point we made early about
our ideas not having human rights, because I think people think when we criticize religion,
we're criticizing, we're criticizing people who are religious, which is, couldn't be further
than the truth, because we think they're victims too. Absolutely. I mean, the word Islamophobia
is all about that. It's a, people think that if you criticize Islam, you're criticizing Muslims.
Quite the contrary, they're the primary victims of Islam. Well, exactly.
We are, we're almost out of time. But just before we finish up here, just to turn our
attention to the future, you have amazing pieces of work that you've carried out.
What, what direction do you see yourself going in the future? Downhill.
Just, just, seriously, it's just, just awful, awful. Yeah, I've got a bar back. I wake up,
I just, I ache, my knees have gone. I don't know, it's, what's the point, really? I just,
I want to be, when, when, when have we got the head in a jar? That's when I, that's where I'm
on a skateboard. Me in a jar, on a, on a hoverboard, whizzing around, 200 years old. Right.
I want to do more afterlife. I'm, I'm starting filming next week actually. Afterlife too. Thank you.
I'm going to do a follow-up to Humanity next year with Super Nature.
Thank you. So, and then, I don't know, just get drunk.
Thank you so much for your sharing insights, not only about atheism, but about your, your work
and the, the, the fan of the being a crocker duck. And before I thank my two guests properly,
there's some other thanks to be done, which is Simon, who is in charge of the,
this wonderful venue, the Troxy here, has, has given us the help to get the venue.
Can I just say that I've knocked over a glass of water, I haven't actually wet myself on stage,
just to make that absolutely clear. Can I be your chair? No, okay.
A real rock and roll death as you electrocute yourself with your little head mic.
Debra Hyde and Chris French from The Skeptic, who have organised the event this evening.
And the Centre for Inquiry and of course the Richard Dawkins Foundation again for helping
to organise and start out the event. But most of all, my two wonderful guests, it felt like a
very special evening, I think you'll agree. And congratulations on the awards. Thank you, lovely.
Thank you very much. Yeah. It's not gonna happen. So, Richard Dawkins for fuck's sake, what do you mean?
Thank you. Richard will be signing books afterwards. But I think you'll agree, a fantastic and unique
evening. Ladies and gentlemen, please give a huge round of applause to two wonderful guests,
two amazing people, Richard Dawkins, Ricky DeVice. Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you.
Richard Dawkins, Ricky DeVice. Thank you.
I hope you enjoyed this episode of The Poetry of Reality. You might consider subscribing on
ThePoetryOfReality.com. That way you get the content without the ads.
Anyway, thank you for listening and see you next time.
