If you're watching this on YouTube, you might have noticed that this episode is a week delayed.
But if you want to get early access to our episodes, consider becoming a paying member.
If you enjoyed this episode, please subscribe and share it with your friends.
Thank you for all your support.
Well, Stephen, I find myself somewhat in awe, both as one of the world's most distinguished
scientists, but also a physicist, where physics is in some sense a sort of senior science. I mean,
the bedrock of all other sciences. I'm a mere biologist. I suppose biology has the complexity,
but physics has the fundamentals. Of course, we physicists feel that way,
but we're much too polite to say so. Yes. It has been said that whereas most
distinguished scientists tend not to be religious believers,
there's a slight tendency for biologists to be even more atheistic than physicists. Do you have
heard that? What do you make of that, if anything? Oh, I don't know. Perhaps it's just that biologists
have bloodied their knuckles so much fighting over evolution that they've become a little bit
more militant. And I think physicists perhaps tend to, since they hope that they're approaching
some ultimate understanding of the laws of nature, they tend to use God as a metaphor for that.
Einstein famously did. Hawking has, without necessarily meaning very much by it.
That's been always my impression that most physicists who say they're religious, if you
actually probe a bit deeper, it turns out that they're religious in the Einsteinian sense.
But you probably know some genuinely, I mean, genuinely Christian or genuinely Jewish who really,
really do believe. Oh, absolutely. I know a number of general relativists for some reason,
people who work in Einstein's general theory of relativity who are devoutly religious. I don't
know why that in particular. I knew one astrophysicist who said he was an orthodox Jew but didn't
believe in God. Yes. I mean, nobody ever says they're an orthodox Christian but don't believe in
God. I mean, because Judaism puts so much more of an emphasis on observance as compared to belief
that it makes sense in a way. I think Hinduism in that sense is like Judaism, that what's much
more important is the dietary rules and the keeping various Sabbaths and holidays.
You're honoring a tradition and in Judaism, nobody ever catichizes you about what you believe.
In fact, obviously, many of my friends are Jewish and I've asked them what they understand
about the afterlife and they don't have the foggiest idea. It's not part of the official
religion to have a definite idea about the afterlife. Very different from Christianity.
Yes. And I think also in Judaism, there's a tradition of continual questioning, isn't there?
Continuing sort of examining and turning your beliefs over. I suppose so, yes. The Talmudic
tradition. Of course, Christianity is more like Islam in that way. It's really important that you
believe in specific things and you're likely to get killed by someone if you don't believe the
right thing. Particularly someone of almost the same religion. That's right. But not quite.
Whenever I'm asked sort of what's the most convincing evidence you could think of,
which would really convince you that there is some kind of a supernatural being,
I think once upon a time, say in the time of William Paley, biology was it because the
prodigious complexity of life, the beauty of it, the sheer intricacy and the
stunning illusion of design which living things project. Paley himself said, I think something
like the heavenly bodies are not best fitted to demonstrate the existence of the theater.
I think that's just an accident of the time that Paley lived because at that time, the
physical scientists had done a good job of explaining the solar system. Although there
were still things that were not well understood. But you go back earlier, everything seemed to
require a divine explanation. Even Newton thought that although he could account for the way the
planets moved and the tides and the fall of fruits, he could not account for the fact that there was
a difference between dark matter and light matter between the sun and the planets. And in a letter
to Bentley, he said that that was the sort of thing that required divine intervention to explain
why the sun shone and the planets did not. Nevertheless, the eye as the instrument that
sees things with sunlight, surely Newton would have regarded that as even more of an evidence of
the divine, wouldn't he? I don't know. I don't know that he ever speculated about that. He had
great hopes for a unification of all the sciences in terms of various forces acting on corpuscles
of matter. I don't know how far he went in thinking that that would apply to living things.
That's an interesting question. Doubtless Newton scholars could tell us, but I don't know the
answer. Yes. But it's true that by the early 19th century, when Paley wrote, the outstanding problem
that seemed to require a divine explanation was the problem of life. And I believe Cardinal Manning,
at least this is what I learned from Lytton Strachey's biography of him, Cardinal Manning
became a devout Christian by reading Paley's book. He was so convinced.
Well, Darwin himself was. I mean, Darwin himself read Paley as an undergraduate at Cambridge.
They all had to, but Darwin was particularly impressed by it. And I think on the voyage of
the Beagle, he probably thought that what he was seeing when he roamed through the Brazilian
jungle and things was evidence of God. But although it's often said that it was Darwin who
finally killed that kind of Paleyism. And I think that's probably right. Nevertheless,
even before Darwin came along, it's never seemed to me to be a very logically coherent argument.
I could have imagined indeed, as David Hume did, that before Darwin came along, one would have
said, well, I don't understand where this illusion of design comes from. But a supernatural designer
doesn't help. We're still left with a mystery. And so, although it's very nice that Darwin did come
along and actually answer the question, even before Darwin came along, we didn't actually,
so to speak, need him in order to reject the idea of a supernatural designer.
We physicists are somewhat in that position. We hope for a set of very simple laws of nature
that will account for everything we see. But when we have them, there will always be a question,
well, why those laws? Exactly. And many people say, in fact, that Jesuit has argued to me that
that's where God comes in, that God ordained the laws, and he is the ultimate explanation.
And of course, the response to that is, well, you know, what have you really helped at all with
that? What explains God? What explains why God is the way God is? If you have some specific
understanding of that three-letter word, G-O-D, then you have the mystery, why is God that way
rather than some other way? And if you don't have any specific understanding of what you mean by,
I hear the thunder, I hope he's not getting annoyed with it. If you don't have any specific
understanding of what you mean by G-O-D, then what are you talking about? Yes, quite. Then it's just
an empty word. I suppose a biologist would put an additional spin on that, which is not just why
he's God this way rather than that way, but in order to do what he's supposed to be doing,
which is say, ordaining the laws of physics, to say nothing of forgiving our sins and listening
to our prayers and things, he would have to be a complex entity, which is exactly the kind of
entity that we are setting out to explain, and which Darwin in fact does explain. And so in a way,
Darwinian, the Darwinian theory raises our consciousness to the fact that any God worthy
of the name would have to be much more complicated than an eye or a brain or a heart. And therefore,
particularly, I love this, this is really great, particularly demanding of just the kind of explanation
which he purports to provide. Yes, once in just to change the subject for a moment, once in a
debate about this sort of thing, someone in the audience said, your view that there isn't any God
is not falsifiable. And I said, yes, it is falsifiable, a bolt of lightning to come down
and strike me dead on, and then it would, my view would be falsified. And I suppose listening to
the thunder reminds me, but going back to what we were saying, yes, it's a little bit like
the explanations, the Greeks were satisfied, Aristotle explained falling bodies by saying
they're going to their natural place, which is toward the, toward the center of the earth.
Well, when you say that, you really haven't learned anything more about falling bodies. It
hasn't helped you to say that. And in the same way, talking about a God who is complex and created
the world the way it is, you haven't learned anything. It doesn't help you to anticipate
anything you'll discover in nature. But I don't think one should underestimate
the fix we're in, that in the end, we will not be able to explain
the world, that we will have some laws of some set of laws of nature, we will not be able to
derive them on the ground simply of mathematical consistency, because we can already think of
mathematically consistent laws that don't describe the world as we know it. And we will
always be left with a question, why are the laws of nature, what they are rather than some other
laws. And I, I don't see any way out of that. And I just regarded as just another one of the
tragedies that we have to get used to, like the tragedy that we will die. And the tragedy, well,
I don't want to linger on tragedy, but I think essentially the position of human beings
is a tragic one. And the more we understand, the more clearly tragic it is. And
part of it, which particularly affects a physicist, is the tragedy of never being able to come to a
really satisfying conclusion of our questions, why? And what do we do in this tragedy? I think,
well, Shakespeare showed us that one way of living with tragedy is to mix it in with comedy.
And we can have, we can take a certain amusement at our position always seeking
why, why, why, never coming to the end. I think humor is one of the leavening
agents that makes our, the tragedy of our position possible. The Greeks in writing their plays
didn't understand that, that you could mix comedy and tragedy. There's no comedy and
suffocates. But Shakespeare understood, and I think that's what's so great about Shakespeare.
That's right. I mean, I mean, moving to the, to another level, I love the comic novels of
Douglas Adams. Have you read any of his literature? Oh, well, I think you might like them because he
uses comedy, but in a rather sophisticated scientific way. And so, and so his jokes
will, would really appeal to a modern physicist who, who understands.
Well, I've heard of the one, you know, what is the, the secret to everything? It's 43 or no,
no, yeah, they're much, much better than that. I mean, I can't think about that. You might,
you, you might enjoy it. But going back to the, to the tragedy of never finally understanding,
I mean, you're making pretty good progress, working your way back through the first three
minutes and getting, where are you now to the first picosecond or oh, it's something.
We don't, I mean, if our presence, there's so many powers of 10 that I don't, I don't even know
what English word to apply to it, but we certainly can directly observe the universe as it was when
it was 380,000 years old. That's the microwave radiation that comes to us, essentially undisturbed
from that time. And that's been a great success story in cosmology, the detailed analysis of this
radiation that fills the universe. And it's not quite uniform everywhere. It's the non-uniformities
that are so interesting. And so important for what happened later, of course. Yes, well, they,
they are the non-uniformities that ultimately grew into the proto galaxies and then galaxies and
clusters of galaxies and allowed us to, to arise. But looking back earlier than the first 380,000
years old, we, we have theories and the theories work. In fact, some of our theories that describe
what happened when the universe was three minutes old, tell us the chemical composition with which
the stars started. And that, that works too. I mean, the predictions come out right. There's a
certain amount of hydrogen, a certain amount of helium, a certain amount of certain rare isotopes
of hydrogen helium, helium 3 and hydrogen 2, that we can calculate the amounts and that's what we
observe in the oldest stars. So that actually, more accurately, that's what we observe in
the intergalactic material out of which the stars form. So in terms of things we can actually observe,
I suppose you could say we've traced the history of the universe back to the first 3 minutes.
Earlier than that, it's just pure theory, except that these non-uniformities in the
microwave radiation, which is so important, which we're studying with radio telescopes,
and which we believe and have every reason to believe grew into the distribution of matter we
see in the sky, these non-uniformities, we, we believe we have a theory for their origin
in terms of a pre-Big Bang phase called the period of inflation. And it works. That is,
it predicts certain properties, for example, the strength of the fluctuations as a function of
how large they are. What's the probability of seeing a fluctuation this big as compared to one
that big? That theory works and it deals with a period of time which is incredibly early in the
history of the universe. So early that you really begin to wonder whether there really was a beginning
or should you even talk about a beginning? I mean, it's so, I don't even know how to say how early
it is, but it's way earlier than the first 380,000 years or the first three minutes. It's an incredibly
small fraction of a second after the beginning. And those theories seem to work, but you know,
that's only going back so far. Then you, you have to go back to what started inflation,
what started this inflationary period. And we have theories. There are some
attractive theories, but they can't be tested. We don't have any observational handle on them.
Even without an observational handle, however, if you've got a theory which is
even plausible, I'd be grateful for that. Well, there is a theory of chaotic
inflation due to Andre Linday at Stanford that there are certain fields.
They're the kind of fields we encounter in our modern theories of elementary particle physics.
They're known technically as scalar fields that fill the universe. And essentially,
they're chaotic at the beginning. One does not impose any particular initial condition
on the universe. It's just as complicated as you can imagine, which is a nice beginning,
because you don't have to fine tune any initial conditions. And this burbles on.
And you have fluctuations which are continually increasing and decreasing. It's all very
complicated. Every once in a while, surely by accident, a patch of this fluctuating field
happens to become smooth. That is, it doesn't vary much over a sufficiently large
region of space, just by accident, not by any design. That region, you can show according to
a reasonable dynamical assumptions, will then blow up, will inflate, will increase in size
exponentially, becoming smoother and smoother, turning into the inflationary phase, which we
think preceded our big bang. But this didn't just happen once. It happened again and again,
and perhaps time without end. And our big bang that we are, that is all we can observe directly,
that is 13.7 billion years old, and we now know that number to 1%.
That big bang is just one episode in a chaotic universe, which is always burping off these
big bangs. So does that mean there are lots of universes then? Well, what we call a universe,
our big bang, there are lots of them. I guess for linguistic purity, one should reserve the word
universe for the whole thing, the whole shebang, and talk about each of our big bangs as a sub-universe.
But very often, people refer to each big bang as a universe, and then they use the term multiverse
for the whole thing. And I think it's erupt. It's up to you what language you use.
The multiverse idea has some very attractive features. I mean, it arose out of thinking of
theories of inflation, but it has had interesting byproducts because
if this idea is correct, and we don't yet know, at this point it's just a speculation,
but if this idea is correct, there's every reason to expect that in the different
big bangs that occur, you will have different conditions, different values for what we call
the fundamental constants. And so that the fact that the constants of nature are suitable for life,
which is clearly true, we observe, may not be a universal fact. It may just be an accident,
just as the fact that the temperature of the earth is suitable for life is not true of planets in
general. Obviously, we have to be on a planet in which the temperature is suitable. I don't know
exactly what the range is. Most people think water has to be liquid. We could argue about that.
It doesn't leave very much range. It may perhaps life could arise in liquid methane,
but clearly there are some limits. I don't think life can arise at one degree Kelvin. I don't
think it can arise at 100,000 degrees Kelvin. So there's some range of temperatures in which life
can arise. And it's only, as you say, it's only on the planets that happen to be in that fortunate
position or in the universes that happen to be. And then this is then carried over by analogy into
our universe that it's only in those big bangs where the values of the constants are suitable
where life can arise. In other words, if there was, I don't think there's really any evidence for a
very precise fine tuning of the constants of nature. That's interesting because some physicists
seem to think there is extreme. I know I've argued about that. One of the examples that is often
quoted is a certain energy level of carbon, of the carbon nucleus. If it was 10 percent higher
or 10 percent lower than the nuclear reactions that build up oxygen from carbon and stars wouldn't
work. This was Fred Hoyle's argument. Well, Fred Hoyle was the one who realized there had to be
this energy level and that nuclear synthesis wouldn't work well without it. Well, the fact
that there is such an energy level that just that energy does not require a fine tuning of the,
I think, and I've argued with people about this, I don't think it requires a fine tuning
of the constants of nature because that state of the carbon nucleus is essentially
a bound state of a beryllium 8, I'm getting very technical, beryllium 8 nucleus and a
height and a helium nucleus. That's just the condition that you need in order to allow
nuclear synthesis to occur. Even if you change the constants of nature, the value of the energy
of this state would change, but it would still be a bound state of a beryllium 8 plus an alpha
particle plus a helium nucleus and so it wouldn't make much difference as far as nuclear synthesis.
There is one constant that seems to be fantastically fine tuned, but we don't, again, we're not sure,
and that is the constant called the dark energy or the vacuum energy or the cosmological constant.
This is the energy in space itself, not associated with any particles or radiation,
but just an energy so many calories per quart of space everywhere in the universe,
whether it's matter there or not. The amount of this has been measured, it's been observed that
it's not zero, it has a small finite value, to give an idea of the value, it's about the amount of,
in a volume the size of the earth, whether the earth is there or not, just in that volume of space,
the amount of energy is the energy in a few hundred barrels of petroleum. Not a lot for a
volume the size of the earth. That energy is detected by its effect on the expansion of the
universe. It's causing the expansion of the universe to accelerate and that's something
was discovered ten years ago by two different pairs, two different teams of astronomers studying the
speed and distance of distant galaxies. Now we can, we try to calculate what this energy is
from first principles. There are various reasons why we can't calculate, well we can calculate
certain contributions to it. For example, we can say fluctuations in the electromagnetic field,
just due to the quantum nature of radiation, not down to arbitrarily small wavelengths,
because we don't understand anything at very, very short distances, but just down to the shortest
distances at which we think we understand physics, which is roughly a hundredth the size of an atomic
nucleus. Those are the shortest distances that have been probed in our accelerators. So counting
the fluctuations in the electromagnetic field or the gravitational field or any other field,
down to the shortest distances that we have probed, the energy that we can, we can calculate
what energy that gives space and it comes out to about 56 orders of magnitude larger than the
observed value. That is a one with 56 zeros. Now it, well you just have to shrug your shoulders
and say, well there are the other contributions we can't calculate, like the contributions from
fluctuations with even shorter wavelengths. They clearly cancel. But it's a, it's a pretty
accurate cancellation. It's a cancellation that's accurate to 56 decimal places. And that has us
disturbed. And there are, I mean it's possible that that will be explained in a way that has
nothing to do with the multiverse. It may be that for some fundamental physics reason that we don't
know, the universe is evolving toward a state where that vacuum energy, that dark energy is
exactly zero. And it's small now just because the universe is old. And it's not far from that
final state. No one has constructed a theory in which that's true. I mean it's not only a speculation,
the theory would be speculative, but we don't have a theory in which that speculation is
mathematically realized. So it, but it's a possibility. But the only other explanation,
well it's not even an explanation, we don't have a candidate theory, but the only explanation that
seems to work is that this is just one of those things that varies from sub-universe to sub-universe,
from big bang to big bang. In most of the big bangs, it's very large. It's much larger than what we
observe. And in those big bangs, they go through, because this energy drives the expansion of the
universe, depending on whether it's positive or negative, the universe either blows up so rapidly
there's no time for galaxies or stars to form, or it crunches, it recollapses so rapidly again
there's no time for life to form. So it has to be small for life to exist. And it's about as small
in fact that's interesting. It's not much smaller than it would have to be
to allow life to arise. And the fact that the cancellation is so precise means that the number
of universes in the multiverse you need to postulate in order to anthropically be comfortable
with it is very very large. And it must be at least 10 to the 56, or in fact if you think you
have some idea about fluctuations at even shorter distances I think you would say at least 10 to the
120. In fact that's a little disturbing, but a completely separate development, not
motivated by this at all, has taken place recently in string theory. String theory you know is our
best hope for a theory unifying all the forces of nature, gravity, and all the other forces,
all the particles. It's the most, it's been a little disappointing that it hasn't led to any
specific breakthrough in understanding what we already know, but it still it's the best game
in town, the best hope we have for a really fundamental understanding. It was realized a
number of years ago largely through the work of Edward Whitten that what had seemed to be
about half a dozen different possible string theories was really only one string theory,
that there's there's just one string theory which but it manifests itself in many ways.
And in fact not in half a dozen different ways, but the solutions of string theory
are incredibly numerous. And in fact the estimate that people usually quote although it's
it's highly approximate is something like 10 to the 500 solutions of string theory.
And these solutions fill out what what string theorists call a landscape. And each one of them
may represent a possible kind of big bang. Now again this is very speculative because we don't
understand string theory at a really at the deep level that we need to understand it. But this
is already upset some religious leaders, Cardinal Schoenborn, the card the lord of well you've
had problems with him with regard to evolution. He wrote an op-ed article in The Times a few
years ago in which he he attacked the neo-Darwinian synthesis is that the right word? Yeah. And
he attacked the idea of evolution without design, but he also attacked the multiverse idea. Yes.
And that did my heart good to see that because you know you evolutionary biologists get all the
fun attacked by religious zealots and here Cardinal Schoenborn at least knew enough about
cosmology to realize we were worth attacking. I'm glad you enjoy it. I must say I don't mind
either. No, I mean isn't it better than being ignored? Yes. There are teachers of biology in
this country who tell me that they are intimidated. They don't dare teach these contentious subjects.
And I find it hard to understand because I should have thought it would be more interesting to
teach something controversial, but they're frightened of being I don't know attacked by parents or by
maybe the children themselves sometimes. Well, yes, I mean the I think
there are school boards that are very backward. I've I testified in front of the
Texas State Board of Education, which is particularly influential because of textbooks.
Yes, that's right. It's at that point they were honestly confused. They really thought that
intelligent design was an alternate scientific theory and why not present both scientific
theories and they were not anti science. They thought it was science. They thought it was science.
And they were I think I think they their mind was changed by scientists coming before them
and telling them no, it's not science. It's it's jiggery, pokery. I mean the myth has been assiduously
promulgated. Oh, that's right. They've been taken in by it. I mean there are people who are
much more difficult to deal with than I found the Texas Board of Education and I think and we
won that argument. Now it's coming up again in Texas. I think this is beginning to be a problem
in Europe. Yes, and I understand it's very much a problem in the Islamic world that there's a
strong prejudice against teaching the theory of evolution. Yes, that's true. In fact, perhaps of
teaching basic science at all. The Islamic world took a turn away from science sometime in the 12th
or 13th century, which is really quite tragic. Given their rather good role in preserving Greek
science before. There's a lovely line in Philip Hitti's book about the Arabs. He's talking about
the great period of the House of Wisdom and Baghdad at the time of Caliph Haroun al-Rashid and
al-Ma'mun. And he said while al-Rashid and al-Ma'mun were studying Greek and Persian philosophy,
Sholomein and his lords were dabbling in the art of writing their names. Yes, that's right. Very good.
And coming back to the alleged fine-tuning of the universe. I was interested in one of the things
used in many things, but I've always tried to explain it as an amateur because I'm not a physicist.
Having accepted the word of physicist that there is an element of fine-tuning, and I've tried to
lay out three possible explanations. One would be God, which as I've said isn't an explanation at all.
One would be the multiverse and then anthropically with hindsight saying we have to be sitting in
one of the universes that could give us. But the third one, which I've attributed to you, possibly
wrongly, would be what I call the macho physicists who say, well, it's just that we don't understand
why these things are the other way they are. One day we will, when we have a theory of everything,
it will be understood. But it sounds from our conversations though that I misrepresented you
there. Well, I don't know. I mean, I really am not impressed with the amount of fine-tuning there
is, with the exception of this one, the dark energy. And that, you can say qualitatively,
the amount of dark energy now is comparable to the amount of energy in matter now. It's a few
times larger, but it's not very different. Maybe there will be an explanation for that, and a
fundamental explanation. People have aimed at that sort of thing. Stephen Hawking, for instance, has.
So I think it's fair to say we don't know. If you discovered a really impressive fine-tuning,
that if you change some otherwise arbitrary parameter, numerical quantity, by 1% in either
direction, life would become impossible. And that was just a free constant in your theory.
It could have any value. Then I think you would really be left with only the two other explanations,
either a benevolent designer or a multiverse. But the benevolent designer, we know can't work,
because it begs the question that you've raised. So that leaves us with a multiverse, doesn't it?
Well, it doesn't solve the problem, but it opens up the realm of possible speculation
in a way that I can't even imagine thinking. But it changes the nature of the game.
But the multiverse would be really an explanation then.
Very satisfying. I mean, I've heard it said that physicists somehow think it's cheating,
but I think it's rather elegant. I think it's rather beautiful.
Well, we've had to live with this before. There wasn't time when it was thought that the distances
of the planets from the Sun were dictated by geometrical principles. Kepler had a theory like
that, although it was only the ratios of the distances. And it was somewhat of a disappointment
to learn with Newton's theory that we were never going to have a fundamental theory of
the distances of planets from the stars. I mean, each planet is the distance it is because of
a historical accident that can't. When will we ever be able to explain precisely why the
Earth is 93 million miles from the Sun? Clearly, we're not going to be able to do that. The only
explanation is a rather fuzzy, anthropic one, which allows for it to be 92 or 94 million miles from
the Sun. The difference between that and the multiverse is, of course, we can see that there
are lots of planets. We have only discovered a few dozen planets in this universe, but our theories
tell us their vast numbers, because a large fraction of stars seem to have planets. So,
the existence of the other planets is no longer a speculation. Well, the existence of the other
Big Bangs is a pure speculation right now, but it may not always be. But it's not the case that
the existence of the other Big Bangs we postulate only for anthropic reasons. You have other reasons.
That's right. In fact, Cardinal Schoenborn in his op-ed article said precisely that
the multiverse idea was invented in order to avoid the appearance of design in the universe,
and that's simply not true. That's not true. It's historically not true. Okay, right. Now,
going back to the planets, which is a much easier case, of course, I think you can turn
this argument quite interestingly on its head and point out that since there are obviously
going to be probably billions and billions of billions of planets,
if, which is perfectly possible, only one of them has life, because we know nothing else than that,
then we would have to say that our theories of the origin of life, in our theories of the origin
of life, we are looking for a chemical event which has to be quite staggeringly improbable,
because otherwise we would expect the universe to be teeming with life.
Well, you're the biologist. You would know better than I do. How improbable do you think it is?
That's a quite separate question, and it's an interesting question, but what I'm saying is
that the statistical argument allows us to postulate an event which would be so improbable
that we would ordinarily call it impossible, because it only has to happen once.
Yes. And with hindsight, we have to be on that planet.
Right. I mean, our existence tells us nothing about how probable it is for life to arise,
given the right conditions. Even the fact, apparently we know now that life arose rather
early in the history of the Earth. That helps a bit. That's an additional fact.
But even that doesn't help very much, because suppose life had risen on Earth,
not when it did, but a hundred million years later, still very early as the Earth goes.
The Earth is four and a half billion years old, but still very early.
Well, that means evolution would now be a hundred million years behind schedule,
behind schedule. And we would not be here talking about it. And so the condition,
well, I don't know, does it take two billion years for intelligent life to arise once life starts?
Possibly. I mean, maybe it takes that long to get a eukaryotic cell.
However, I don't think there is a schedule once you get out to, I mean,
it's not clear why the dinosaurs didn't produce intelligent life. They might well have done,
in which case it would have happened at least 65 million years earlier.
So I don't think you can say that it took, as you say, two billion years from the origin of
the eukaryotic cell in order to get intelligent life. I think it could have happened much earlier
than that, or indeed much later. But I can't believe that something like that worm that all
the biologists study, C. elegans, which has about a hundred neurons in its nervous system.
I don't think that could ever. No, no, no. But I mean, that's a multi-celled organism with a
nervous system. But it still is not going to learn quantum mechanics. There's no timetable in the
sense that 65 million years after the dinosaurs went extinct, only then had evolution kind of
breasted the tape of it. It could have happened 10 million years earlier or 10 million years later.
Well, it may be that we're on the tail of the Gaussian. That is, it's very improbable that life
arose as early as we did, as it did after the formation of eukaryotic cells.
And if that's true, then there's a strong selection that it's only
life that arises very early in the history of the universe that has a chance of becoming
intelligent. That has time before. And if that's true, and we don't know that it is, but if that's
true, then the fact that life arose very early on Earth does not argue that life arises readily
whenever the conditions are right. It might be that it's still an incredibly unlikely thing,
and it's only on the doubly rare cases where it arises very early that it then becomes intelligent.
Yes. And of course, we don't know how rare life is. It could be very common. I think we pretty
much know that intelligent life is rare, because otherwise we'd have been visited by radio transmission.
The Fermi argument, where are they all? And so I think you have to say that maybe there's a
cascade of improbabilities. There's the origin of life, perhaps the origin of the eukaryotic cell
or something like it, and the origin of intelligence and technology. We've got through all those hurdles.
Even that, we've sampled, in terms of how long it takes to reach us, we've sampled only a few
tens of thousands of light years, even assuming people can travel at the speed of light.
Or that they send us signals. So we've perhaps sampled a volume of our galaxy.
It's a pretty small sphere, isn't it? Ten thousand light years, but it's only one galaxy, and there
are billions of galaxies. So it may be that life maybe occurs a few times in each galaxy.
I would have thought, yes. And then it's still quite frequent.
Well, wouldn't it be exciting if signs of a completely independent life were found even on
Earth? I mean, it might be that one could find organisms that had a different genetic code.
Well, Paul Davis is actively looking for this. It would only take a different genetic code,
I mean, because as far as we know, the DNA code is universal, the minor, minor details.
But a different genetic code, either not based on DNA or based on, even based on DNA, with
completely different lookup table. There's nothing very attractive or elegant or efficient about
the genetic code we have. No, I mean, Francis Crick devised a much better one. Yeah, I heard that.
Yes, yeah. What a pity. Yes, what a pity. That's right.
You know, I'm quite an opponent of manned spaceflight, not because I think it's
bad in itself, but just because it's incredibly expensive and it's sold as a way of doing science.
And I don't think it is a good way of doing so. I think spaceflight, unmanned missions are very
important. I'd like to see lots of unmanned missions to Mars scooping up soil and examining it.
But I must say, if they discovered something on Mars that required human inspection to decide
whether it really was a sign of life, that would change my mind about. Wouldn't it be staggering?
Wouldn't it be amazing? But I don't see that happening. And I don't see why
we would want to send a very limited number of humans to Mars examining just very small regions of
the surface rather than hundreds of robots. Yeah, that's pure. That's public relations,
isn't it? That's that's that's some kind of mystique about putting people into space. I've
argued about it. And most astronomers, I think, would agree with me. Yes.
Yes. Aeronautical engineers or whatever they are disagree. They love the idea.
It's a challenge to them. Yeah, that's right. And of course, politicians love it.
What about talking about big science and presumably you're excitedly looking forward to what CERN
starts to produce? With a certain amount of terror that, you know, they may discover great things
like the particles that make up dark matter or they might discover signs of supersymmetry.
They probably will discover the so-called Higgs boson, which in theory of Salam and myself is
responsible for the breakdown of the symmetry between the weak and the electromagnetic forces.
But it may be that they'll only discover the Higgs boson and nothing else. And we'll be left
looking at our toes and wondering, what are we going to do next? You know, there may be nothing
exciting, really new, that can be reached with the large hadron. But it was worth doing, nevertheless.
Oh, well, we have to find out. And of course, there's a good chance that they're going to
discover something very exciting. But I have fears that might, in a way, it's less frightening
if they don't discover the Higgs boson, because that would be a contradiction of our good theories.
And then we would all go back to the drawing boards. And we have various alternative theories
that might explain that. And it would be exciting for a while. But if all they discover is a
Higgs boson with roughly the properties that the theory predicts and nothing else.
I see what you're saying. Nevertheless, wouldn't you say to a young person,
now would be a very exciting time to go into physics because of this? I mean, in Britain,
they're moving away from physical science and drugs.
It's not only cut at support for this, it's cut at support for a number of telescopes,
other things. It's cut at support for the next linear collider.
Yes. No, it's kept at support, I think, for CERN. I think Britain has maintained its support for CERN,
which is the laboratory where the large Hadron collider will be placed.
Well, I would say that anyone who goes into physics right now would be a little bit too late to
participate in the work of the LHC. And whether or not it would be a good career move depends
on what they're going to discuss. I think I'm thinking of theoretical physics that,
depending upon what they discover, mightn't there be a sort of opening of damn walls?
Yes. If they discover something exciting, then by all means. But if all they discover is the
Higgs boson and it has the properties we expect, then no, I would say that the theorists are going
to be very glum. Right. A moment ago, you mentioned Abdus Salam. Can I ask, was he one of those who
was a genuine religious? I mean, I've heard it said he was a devout Muslim and I've always wondered
about that. Well, when I first met him, I visited Imperial College in the academic year 61-62.
He had a bottle of starch in his desk drawer. He wasn't an observant Muslim. He wasn't
completely observant. He was religious. And as the years went by, he gave up alcohol.
But he belonged to a sect, the Amidae, I think that's what it's called. I'm probably not pronouncing
it correctly, that has beneficially declared heretic in Pakistan, his home country. And as a result,
for many years, he wasn't allowed back into Pakistan. But he was quite religious about that.
I mean, I regard all religion with a certain sense of bemusement and the Amidae sect seemed even a
little bit more peculiar than the other branches of Islam. But he was quite serious about it.
He had two wives, one of whom in Oxford. I know her. Yes. And the other is a very conventional
Pakistani woman who lives in London. And they both came to the Nobel Prize in 1979. And they
alternated appearances at the official events. It's interesting, because although he was quite
devout as a Muslim, he deplored the anti-scientific attitude that he found in the world of Islam.
He told me that he had tried to get the states of the Persian Gulf, which are very oil rich,
like Dubai and so on, Bahrain. He tried to get them to put money into building universities that would
include a component of basic science. And he said that they were very resistant to that,
that they wanted to go into technology. They were enthusiastic about technology. But they did not
want to do fundamental science. But yes, they thought that was corrosive to religious belief.
Probably rightly so. Yes, I suspect that. But he didn't think that then. He didn't think it was
corrosive. No, his point of view was that of many well-meaning physicists. I know in America who
think, oh, there's no problem. Science, religion can happily coexist. I think, in fact, although
it's a slow process, and there are many exceptions, that in the long run, science is eating the lunch
of religion. Yeah, I think so too. And that we already have seen a great weakening of religious
belief. It's obvious in Europe. I think it's also true in America. I think Americans believe in
religion on the average. They believe that religion is good for you. But when you ask them, what do
they actually believe about the afterlife, or about how are you saved, they're likely to tell
you, well, it isn't so important what you believe. The important thing is to live a good life. Yes.
I've heard that so many times. Me too. So I think if I really cared about religion,
and I looked at the state of religion in America, I think I would cry over it. Religion is
a mile wide and an inch deep. It doesn't go very far. It doesn't make me cry. It makes me laugh.
But we're running out of time. So can we resume after? I began by saying I felt humble as a
biologist. And one of the reasons is the sheer mysteriousness of physics, which I suppose is
nowhere more true than in fundamental particle physics. But as a biologist, I try to come to
terms with why it's so hard to understand. And I'm wondering what you think of this, that
something about, well, natural selection equipped our brains to control medium sized bodies,
which is moving at medium speeds in roughly two dimensions rather than, well, in three dimensions.
And therefore, things like multidimensionality, things like particles mysteriously going through
two slits, or one depending on when anybody's looking at them, and the slightly less mysterious
aspects of relativity. Our brains were never equipped to understand that kind of thing,
because we didn't need to. But if we had been denizens of interstellar space traveling at
near the speed of light, relatively would be second nature to us. And if we had been
the size of fundamental particles, we wouldn't find mysterious, the things that I at least
find mysterious. Do you find them mysterious, or do you cope with them in your own mind?
I think you're exactly right about why they seem mysterious. We cope with them using mathematics.
We have mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics that are perfectly satisfactory.
We know how to calculate things. A course in physics is a series of problems the student has
to learn, how to calculate the energy levels of the hydrogen atom, the classic problem that
convinced people that they were on the right track during the development of quantum mechanics.
Occasionally, perhaps we lose our sense of strangeness because the mathematics become so
familiar to us. I think there are things that are
truly strange, and that even though we can deal with them mathematically, we shouldn't lose the
sense of strangeness. Not relativity, which no longer seems to me paradoxical or weird,
but quantum mechanics is really strange. The interpretation of quantum mechanics that developed
in the early 1930s under the leadership of Niels Bohr and Copenhagen, the Copenhagen
interpretation, I think is fundamentally flawed. It divides the world into physical systems and
observers, and that can't be right. Observers are parts of the world. They have to be described
by the same quantum mechanical language as everything else. The first person who thought
seriously about that and tried to develop an alternative way of looking at quantum mechanics
was a graduate student at Princeton, Everett. But his solution to the problem is in a way
even weirder. There is something called the wave function, which evolves in a completely
deterministic way, and there is a wave function of the universe, which governs everything,
including all our observers and their apparatus and the physics journals in which they publish
their results. And all of that happens during a measurement, and a subsequent publication
is all described in the evolution of the wave function. But if you believe that, then you
really have to believe that since in an experiment, we can have a particle which has neither a definite
spin this way or this way, but is a superposition of the two. When the spin is measured, it's either
this way or this way, one or the other, with different probabilities. In Everett's interpretation,
both are realized. The universe splits into a world in which the electron is spinning this way
and the observer sees it spinning this way, and another world where it's spinning this way
and the observer sees it spinning that way. And this happens not only in physics buildings, but
continually throughout the universe, so that the wave function of the universe is infinitely
more complicated than we normally think of the universe itself as being. It contains components
for every possible history of the things in it. Now, that's so weird that it's hard to think in
those terms. Yeah, it seems to me to be ever so slightly less weird than the Copenhagen
interpretation. Well, it's less weird in the sense that... It's just hideously uneconomical. Yeah.
Well, I would say the Copenhagen interpretation is just hopeless because the split between
observers and observers can't be different from electrons and spins and so on. There is a hope,
which I nurse, but I don't see being realized, that eventually we'll find that quantum mechanics,
as we know it now, is just an approximation and that when an electron, which is in a superposition
of states in which it's spinning this way or this way, when it interacts with some big thing like
a physicist, a macroscopic body like a physicist or his apparatus, actually there is a physical
decay of the wave function into a wave function where the electron is purely moving this way
or purely moving the other way and that, in fact, the history of the world has not split.
There has been an evolution of the wave function, which is not the kind of thing that occurs in
quantum mechanics as we know it, but represents something that's specific to large bodies. I think
some people have thought that perhaps gravitation has something to do with this, that after all,
large bodies are the only ones where gravity is important. Gravity is incredibly weak force on
the atomic level. That would make sense of the whole thing if that were true, but it requires
a modification of quantum mechanics and there are papers that suggest possible modifications of
quantum mechanics. Well, that's a great hope, isn't it? That would be wonderful. I think that's the
best hope, that we will find out that quantum mechanics, as we know, it actually breaks down
for very large things. Now, it's true that the predictions of quantum mechanics have been verified
for electrons that are separated by macroscopic distances. We can verify that there really is
what's called an entanglement, that you can have two electrons that are meters away from each other
where the physical state is not a state where one is up and the other is down,
but one which is a superposition of left up, right down, and left down, right up.
So these two particles know about each other. Yeah, and it's just what you expect quantum
mechanically and it happens over macroscopic distances, but they're still just electrons.
They're not big, heavy things with gravitational fields. So it may be that these experiments
that verify quantum mechanics at macroscopic scales don't really settle the argument,
but I tell a story in something I wrote, a true story that a friend of mine who was a physicist
at the University of Texas who now, incidentally, wound up at Oxford,
Philip Candillus, was standing next to me waiting for an elevator, and I asked him,
whatever happened to so-and-so, mentioning a graduate student who had seemed very promising and
then we never heard of again, and Phil nodded his head sadly and said he tried to understand
quantum mechanics. Well, I try and try and try, but I never seem to get anywhere.
And the amazing thing is that we don't need to, that you can live your whole life calculating the
energy levels of atoms and molecules and calculating cross-sections for elementary particle reactions,
using quantum mechanics every day as part of your intellectual toolkit and never confront these
problems. Well, I've met physicists who have said, well, why bother? I mean, the mathematics works,
and that seems to me so unsatisfactory. It is unsatisfactory, but it's not professionally
unsatisfactory. No, I can see that. It's only humanly unsatisfactory. I can see that. But there's a
slight analogy. It's nothing like so profound. I think I've heard you say all right that many
physicists going back to the God question don't really care. I mean, they don't think it's an
interesting question. I can't quite get that. I mean, it does seem to me that, I don't believe
in God, but it does seem to me that you've got to care about it because if it's true, it's one of
the most profound things in the world. That's right. I agree. Well, I think the expression I used is
that most of my friends in physics don't care enough about religion to qualify as practicing atheists.
Yes. They just don't care, and they don't want to think about it. And I do think about it. I try
not to think about it too much. I mean, clearly one could let it run away with you. I've visited
organizations of people who are atheists and who gather together for mutual comfort. To me,
it smells a little bit like a church. Yeah, they're not very identifying some of those
meetings. But I mean, they're very well-meaning people. And I agree with them, but I wouldn't
build my life around it. You go along to give them a bit of moral support. Well, they invited me,
so I went. And I think maybe you and I have also some slight difference in our attitude toward
religion on the aesthetic level. Well, perhaps not, but it's been part of our lives for so long.
So much history has been bound up with it that you can't not not only be interested,
but have a kind of respect for it the way you would have respect for someone who you don't
particularly like, but who is still very powerful and has played a large role in your life.
I'm not sure the respect is the word I'd use. But certainly, I mean, when you think of the great
music that's been inspired by it, and obviously because that's where the money was, I mean,
it's not only because that's why the money there is. I mean, some of it, yes. But some of it seems
to have a really religious feeling to it. I don't know about music, but you know, in poetry,
there are poets. Well, with John Dunn, I don't know. I mean, he was such a Randy preacher, but
with someone like Herbert or Gerard Manley Hopkins, I think there really is a religious
inspiration there. I do too. I mean, I used to be a suit. And I think giving up religion,
we would lose Gerard Manley Hopkins. And I'm sure Hopkins didn't make that much money from it.
But we wouldn't lose Shakespeare. There's not a bit of religious inspiration in all of Shakespeare.
That's right. And that's one of the I mean, that's that's considerably more important than Hopkins.
Yes. Nevertheless, you can't read Shakespeare without knowing the Bible, because I mean,
you can't you can't take. You have to know about it. And he uses witches and
he has Hamlet worrying about sending Claudius's soul to hell. But there's not the slightest feeling
that Shakespeare himself took that very seriously. No, that's right. But I mean, I am in favor of
religious education in the sense of of education in the Bible and I suppose other holy books as well.
And also the Greek myths and the Nordic myths as well. Or you can't you can't understand some of
it is great literature. Some of it isn't. I mean, the Bible is a mixed bag of a friend of mine who
more learned it in these things than I am said, it was really an anthology of Hebrew literature.
And some of it's good and some of it isn't so good. Well, sir, in the in the King James version,
it is some of it is the Old Testament question. Yes. I can't read the Hebrew. But but but I'm
told that, for example, my favorite book, Ecclesiastes, which in in the in the 17th century,
English is ravishing. I'm told that in Hebrew, it's very good as well. Yeah. Well, in fact,
a in Israeli told me that the King James version is closer to the Hebrew Bible than modern English
versions because the Hebrew Bible had a archaic flavor when it was written. I see. Yes. And you
get more of a feeling of the Hebrew Bible by reading the King James. I remember I went to a
Catholic mass and a friend took me to and I went to be friendly. And they use that line,
which is in the King James version is now we see as through a glass. Yes, they translate into
modern English. Now we see as obscurely, not clearly or something like that. It was it was so
bad. Yes, yes. Vanity of vanity, Seth the preacher, always vanity that's translated as
hopeless, hopeless or something like that. Just awful. I mean, if you really want to kill religion,
translate the holy books into into modern speech and and that that'll go a long way towards it.
And of course, we would an architecture, we would lose so much those wonderful cathedrals and mosques.
This I remember how impressed I was with the al-Aqsa mosque and yes, yes, Jerusalem. Yeah,
you can't get away from that. And I wouldn't I wouldn't wish to. But but it's done so much harm.
And well, I use this metaphor that it's crazy old and to used to be beautiful and quite fond of her.
And we fond of her in a way, but it'll be better when she's gone.
I think that's right. That's right. What do you think about? But you said I won't regret it at all.
I won't regret it at all. But but but I get the point even even so.
In American education, in my own field of evolution, it's it's there's a very,
very serious attempt to subvert science education that doesn't seem to be happening in physics,
or is it? Oh, I don't think it's happening. I've never heard of anyone attacking the
the teaching of cosmology, but they don't go into it very much in high school. And at the college
level, there's no attempt. I mean, I you're not saying that at the university level, there's an
attempt to subvert the teaching of evolution. Well, I think I think so. Is it really? Yes,
I wasn't aware of that. I'm I've I've known teachers who
in almost every class they teach, there will be a significant minority, not maybe even quite a
large minority of students who will ostentatiously fold their arms and kind of look defiant when
you when you start talking about maybe even walk out in extreme cases, go and complain to the
dean that they've been offended. Their religious beliefs have been offended. One of the things
that may help may work in this direction is that we I think we over rely on student evaluations. Yes,
I think student evaluations should not be given very great weight.
Precisely, well, partly for this reason, because they provide a incentive for the teacher to teach
in an ingratiating, comfortable way. Yes. And well, I taught a course in the course in the history
of science. In fact, I will again in the fall. And I went a lot into the interaction of science
and religion. And I was sort of hoping that some student would get upset and that we would have
an interesting interaction. But you know, I'm at a position where I can, I can live with it.
I think for someone, say, an assistant professor, who doesn't have tenure, it's a serious problem.
It's not a serious problem for me. I was actually looking forward to a little Donnie Brook. But
it didn't happen. I don't I don't think somebody of your clout and prestige might actually
just look around and perhaps ask whether there are any junior professors of biology who are
having a hard time. No, that would be interesting. Perhaps you could put your weight behind them
if they are getting in trouble. Yeah, well, I the only one people in the biology side here I know
are senior professors. But that's an interesting question. And I certainly will ask the question
if I have a chance. I had assumed that the universities just as you know, American secondary
school education is pretty terrible on the average. American university education is pretty
good. And when you get to graduate education, it's excellent. I assume the same was true about
academic freedom that there's a lot of pressures at the high school level, much less so for
undergraduates and none at all for graduate students. But I may be wrong about that.
That may be. I have heard the story about Texas having a particularly disproportionate influence on
on textbooks. Oh, yes. Well, that's just economics that
for historical reasons, Texas selects its textbooks at the at the high school level,
excuse me, at the state level. And so it buys a lot of books all in one package. Yes. I remember,
you know, I gave a talk once soon after coming to Texas to a
convention of high school science teachers. And they were interested in just this sort of question.
And I was talking about how it's important to resist pressures and teach evolution and
all this sort of thing. And they sat there, they had heard that before. And then I said,
I really didn't see why the question arose because it seemed to me that every high school
teacher should be able to select his or her own textbooks and to to fit the kind of course that
he or she wants to give. At that point, I got a roar of applause and I got a standing ovation.
Because much more important to them than the question of what they taught is their intellectual
independence. And they they really chased under the system of having prescribed courses with
prescribed textbooks. Our daughter did not go to a public, well, what we call a public high school.
She went to the equivalent of an English public school. A private private school. Yeah, and over.
Yeah. George Bush's old school. And although she turned out differently. Yes, I'm glad to hear that.
And her her professors, her teachers, they weren't called professors, her teachers
designed their own courses, chose their own textbooks, and they were very much more stimulating
courses that they were. I there is this dirigeced tendency. People attack the idea of government
doing things. They say government is is inefficient. And then they do their best to make it inefficient
by forcing it to behave in a bureaucratic, uniform way. Everyone has to use the same textbooks.
I think people should be much more relaxed about
people, even though they're employed by the government, doing things in the same kind of
freewheeling way that you do in private business. And every once in a while, a taxpayer's dollar
will be wasted. But I bet the taxpayer will get better value for their dollar that way
than under the present system. Thank you very much. It's been a great privilege.
Enjoyed it. Thank you. If you enjoyed this episode, you can show some support by subscribing
to the podcast, sharing it with your friends and leaving a review.
