We decided to do a video of the
All right, I've hit record, so let's go and see where we work up.
We already jumped the gun slightly, but let's rain it back in and see where we go.
So we're going to think about building reality tunnels, and I think we're going to start
with a little thinking around your work on the justification systems theory as a framework
to begin doing this.
So Greg, the justification systems theory, take it away.
Great, man.
Thank you.
I look forward to connecting this to Daniel's work and our thinking about sort of where
we are in the 21st century.
So just, what I'll refer to as just, which is justification systems theory, I built
this framework called the Tree of Knowledge, and what it does is it divides reality into
four different planes of existence, labeled matter, which is the material world, and then
life, which emerges out of that as a function of genes and cells and their communication
and information processing, and then mind, which corresponds to animals and neuro-information
processing, and then ultimately humans, culture, and the culture person plane of existence.
And if you're familiar with the Tree of Knowledge, it's four upside down cones, and then it has
joints between the dimensions, like what is it that gives rise to them?
It's a just or justification systems theory is the idea of what makes us transition from
non-verbal or pre-verbal primates, is hanging around on the savanna in clusters of who knows
50, 150, or whatever individuals, and then argues over the last 200,000 years, and in
particular, and in accelerating rates, the last 100,000 years, last 50,000 years, last
5,000 years, there's been a real acceleration and an evolution of capital C culture.
And capital C culture refers to the shared language-based beliefs and values that people
develop, and just refers to these as justification systems, okay?
So in order to get oriented, then you sort of want to say, okay, well, what do I mean
by that?
It's like, well, we want to differentiate society, so society's all the buildings and
it gets into design and all of the material cultural stuff, the technology that we develop.
And then how does it is that we actually share in a world with each other, okay, like how
do we connect?
And language is a portal for that, and then language is organized into meaning-making
systems that legitimize what is an opt, and these systems are called justification systems.
So that's basically, it's a framework for thinking about what human culture is as justification
systems.
So then the issue is, well, where the hell these things come from, okay?
Why all of a sudden did these things take off, and how do they connect to the human mind,
all right?
How do we understand that?
And justification systems theory is the theory about those points, okay?
So let's go back to the history, and what is it about humans that are really unique?
Well, there are a number of cognitive features, mental ability features that we have that
are really unique.
One of the most obvious ones is language, okay?
So other animals communicate, they actually have really sophisticated communication systems.
Bees will engage in waggle dances, and birds have remarkable calls, and chimpanzees engage
in all sorts of facial expressions and other kinds of signal, but human language is a fundamentally
unique kind of communication, okay?
And many people wonder about the why, where do human language come from, and we can certainly
get into that some, there's a lot of mysteries about exactly what gave rise to that develop.
But virtually everybody, although they ask questions about why, the argument essentially
is as well, maybe tool, use, and social behavior, and our ability to imitate, and our ability
to understand intention, these are all good hypotheses.
Of course, we start eating meat, we use fire, our brains get a lot bigger, but whatever
the case generally, the idea is that once language gets on the scene, okay, then it
serves as communication system, and allows us to store and share information really
cheaply, all right?
And then it allows us to engage in intergenerational learning, so we accumulate knowledge over
the generations, and that's what gives rise to culture.
And all of that is 100% right, as far as I'm concerned.
But it's not the whole picture, okay?
Just add some really key pieces to the picture, to help us understand both the structure of
culture, meaning the structure of these belief value systems.
It helps us understand philosophy, and it helps us understand human psychology.
Let's see how, okay.
So let's say, here you are, we have right before full language happens, all right?
What you have is this capacity, increased capacities for us, for social harmonizing,
communication, what in the origin of the modern mind, Merlin, Donald calls mimetics, where
we remind with each other, we imitate each other, we understand, and we use sort of broken
language, okay?
Broken language would be something like, there, antelope.
In other words, you have words that you yoke together to give some sort of meaning.
But there, antelope is not a proposition, okay?
You just go, you don't think about it at all.
What happens when you say, there are the antelope?
Now all of a sudden, you change the game, because you created a propositional meaning,
which by the way, is the fundamental unit structure of our language systems, is propositional
meaning statements, okay?
Now something really interesting happens when you give rise to a propositional meaning statement.
It makes a claim about a state of facts of the world, or a value statement about the
world, okay?
It's a claim that, the cool thing that the justification systems notes, is the cool thing
is that claim can now be challenged, okay?
So you can say the antelope over there, now you can say, oh, no, they're not.
Or prove it to me, okay?
Because now that a propositional state has made a claim about a state of affairs.
And what then gives rise to the, and the capacity to ask questions.
So propositions set the stage then, when you have full claim statements, now you can say,
where, why, how, what, all right?
And what that means then is that proposition now has faces, what I call the first layer,
which is the problem of justification, all right?
The problem of justification is how the hell do you decide what propositions are legitimate
about what is true and what we ought to do?
And what this says is that what happened then is a dialogical process, meaning a discussion
process.
John Verbeke is talking about a lot about dialogue lately.
And he's really absolutely correct that our reasoning systems are really designed to engage
not in some unbelievable genius sitting on a mountain somewhere, but their conversations.
Daniel, what do you think?
Oh, and what do you think?
How do we justify our actions together, okay, and determine what is legitimate?
This gives rise to social pragmatic reasoning.
And there's a book on what the Ignecbov reason by Mercer and Sperber, who kind of, you know,
took some of the ideas that I had anyway, and they argued about them and advertised
them, and they showed that human reason given and reasoning processing about justification
and argumentation, okay?
So now all of a sudden we have this idea, and I want to then suggest that our fundamental
units of meaning shouldn't be thought of as propositions, but should be thought of as
justifications, all right?
What that means is that this is the actual way they function in the world.
They legitimize is an ought, and then we behave, we invest, and we influence each other based
on these units, okay?
They also get networked in together to create justifications systems, all right, which are
systems of these bricks of understanding, they get put together in more of a house.
All right, so we got the problem of justification, all right?
And then the dialogue around justification, these start to build these systems of justification.
So that's key.
That's an advance on our understanding of language, but that's not exactly where the
justification doesn't end, system series I meant there.
It orientes more directly to what's called the justification hypothesis, which is a subset
of an idea underneath justification systems, here's the way it works, okay?
So now we have these propositions and this ability to ask questions.
The other thing that language does that other people haven't picked up on is it's in window.
It's great for sharing information, but it's also a window in thoughts in a way that fundamentally
no other animal has to deal with.
So I say to you, hey Owen, why do you feel the way you do, okay?
Now imagine the classic example I use is let's say I'm parabonded with somebody and
I go off hunting, right?
And then you come in and you're interested in my mate, okay?
And I come back and I notice you're hanging around and say, hey Owen, why spend so much
time with her, okay?
And let's say you've asked her to plant some seeds earlier in the day, what's the first
thing that you say?
You don't say, hey Greg, I'm thinking about separating the two of you and taking her
as my mate, even though that's what you're thinking, okay?
And then what you say is, hey, I'm just hanging around, she's planting me to show me how to
plant seeds.
In other words, you adopt the narrative, the socially acceptable narrative that takes
into consideration the social influence and impact of you sharing your thoughts on the
social world.
You don't share the most self-centered thoughts that you have, okay?
You share the most socially acceptable thoughts so you can navigate the social influence dynamics,
all right?
So the problem of social justice is the problem by which we have access, we ask questions
about what your private thoughts are, and then the question is how do you create a narrative,
the socially acceptable social justification narrative of your thoughts and actions, okay?
So now what we have is the social justification problem.
The solution would be then an internal narrator that interprets the underlying biological,
phenomenological state and does so and legitimizes it in a way that takes the social acceptable
context into consideration, all right?
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
I'm not just gonna say to you, I wanna fuck your chick.
That's right.
That's right.
You're not.
You're gonna put it in the context.
Now, if you had power, if the influence matrix were different, dynamics were different, you
might say that, but everything's gonna depend on your place influence matrix, so you're gonna
calibrate, and I just say, hey, if you have a boss that you don't like that much, notice
how much you talk about your boss when you're alone with your wife or with your friends
who are totally on your side, and then you go tell your boss what you really think, right?
You tell you in a narrative, it's very different when you're in front of the boss if you care
about your job, all right?
So everything changes depending, and then just pay attention to how people explain what
they know relative to the social context and what their influence interests are.
Everything changes, and we're unbelievably sensitive to it, you know?
So one example I gave when I was, when I was dawned on me, I was running late to my wife,
I'd been late before, so she was gonna be primed to be a little annoyed, and I was already
20 minutes late, and then I hit some traffic for five minutes, maybe five minutes more
late, she comes in, where you been?
Traffic was horrible.
You know, I didn't say, hey, I really wanna do what I was doing, and for 20 minutes I was
gonna be late anyway.
I had another excuse that was outside my responsibility, and I was, and that just came natural, and
I argue as a clinician, you just see this everywhere.
People are instantaneously, and in fact, we now know the left hemisphere, if you know
neuropsychological research, left hemisphere really is designed as an interpreter, it interprets
even when it doesn't have nothing to split the left hemisphere off, okay?
So what does this all mean?
The Justification Office offers a really new way to understand the evolution of forces
that give rise to fundamental insight.
I'll say that again, it's the evolutionary analysis that give rise to Freud's fundamental
insight.
What was Freud's fundamental insight?
We have a biopsychological system that has selfish drives, or at least primitive drives,
okay?
We have a social scenario that says, hey, this is what's legitimate, and this is what's
not, and we have a rationalizing, or I would say justifying, ego that must navigate the
reality of the drives that you have, and the social environment that dictates what's legitimate,
okay?
So it's a big, so now what we have is we have a way of understanding Freud's insight with
an evolutionary social-psychological understanding.
So that's what the justification hypothesis says, and what that gives rise to then is an
updated model of Freud's tripartite, where you have an experiential, animalistic system,
a private narrator, and a public self, okay?
And then you filter between those domains.
So there's the filter between the experiential into the private, we call that the Thoridian
filter, and then when there's the public into the private into the public, in fact, I can
pull up a diagram if you want, but anyway, I've shown that around, all right?
So that's the three domains only reframed in a much more modern understanding, okay?
So now we have justification hypothesis.
This orients us to kind of understanding the evolution of the feature of language gives
rise to the problem of justification, the problem of social justification, and that shapes our
interpretive narrator.
If you want to understand human nature, okay, you want to understand the nature of being
inhuman, you understand that we are primates that became persons, all right?
And the nature of becoming a person is that we are social justifiers, all right?
That I have a self-awareness and legitimize our actions on the social stage and take responsibility
and our other people hold us accountable.
This is culture, person, plane of existence, where you say, hey, why the hell did you do
that?
You're 10 minutes away.
You gotta be held accountable, and then you give accountability, and you can look at things
like how we've designed law.
The first question of law is, is the person competent, and have they been a person that
socially, we don't hold five-year-olds accountable to the law, because they're not fully functioning
persons.
Okay?
You go crazy and have a brain tumor.
We decide, no.
We under about your intent, you know, first degree murder, you thought about it, it's in
your self-awareness system, you justify it accordingly, well, we're going to punish you
because that's the highest level of person, okay?
So we have a system that helps us explain human consciousness, and then we come back
to the insight before, which basically was like, okay, what is culture that we generate,
what evolves, and what we're residing?
And then that starts where we started, which is like, hey, it's these systems of justification.
Okay?
So these things now take off about 50,000 years ago in full, all right, and what happens
if you just trail the obviousness, so if you have the problem of justification, you start
asking questions, why, why, why?
And we see cultures will first develop animism, so they believe the world is magical, if you're
living in the jungle, how the hell you figure it out, well, there's all these gods, there's
all these spirits, animals are doing stuff, you're embedded in that, and you create animistic
fusion of magical systems.
I love the idea that you start with logos, which is like solve the hunting problems during
the day, and you start to develop a mythos about, hey, this is the story of our tribe,
the path of the dark energies of the sun.
Absolutely.
Let me ask you something unprocessed at this point, right?
So you've covered a lot of terrain, and you were talking about how, as you explained this,
the emergence from matter of life, from life of minds all the way up to, you know, the development
of language and these justification systems, and you've described a little bit like, and
detail how they are operationalized with the hypothesis, justification, hypothesis that
it creates to adjust to our behaviors, et cetera, and there's a lot there that I want
to unpack.
But now you were talking about animism and mythos and the emergence of mythos and, you
know, 50,000 years ago.
So Manuel de Landa, I don't know if you know him, he's...
I know of him, not well.
Okay.
And so he's got this idea of the machinic phylum, and he essentially reports that kind
of in the vein of the laws, something very similar to what you're talking about, which
is that in his words and in a specific analysis, that's technologies have lineages, they descend
from each other, and that that development, just like the joint points on that emergence
theory that you have, he calls them singularities.
These are moments where all of a sudden, you know, all the circumstances of evolution,
of technical development converge, and then boom, we have a new state, a new sort of plane
on which to talk about things.
So looking at that, and you were talking about myth and about evolution, and there might
be many people listening who, when they hear the word evolution, might think that there's
a right way and a wrong way to evolve.
And especially now today, that's where we're in charge of steering ourselves, that we look
back through history, and is there a right way that this emergence happens?
Is it a one-off vertical process, or how does that emergence occur, and how does it sort
of converge into these nodes of these joint points that you talk about?
Yeah.
All right, so there's a fair amount there that I'll pick up on and riff off of.
So I'm, okay, let me, I'll go with the joint points really fast.
So things are evolving and emerging all the time, okay, and there are small emergencies.
The joint points try to capture four huge emergencies, like these are the macro-emergences.
So the emergence of matter itself, the emergence of life, the emergence of mind, and the emergence
of culture, all right?
And they're very, they're unique and interesting events, and the nature of them as such, according
to the language and frame provided by the Tree of Knowledge, what makes them unique is
that they give rise to a new plane of complex adaptive behavior, okay?
And the way they do that is because whatever complexity-building feedback loop happened,
and each one of them has its own little mystery in it.
So we don't know the answers to all this by any means.
Let's just take a light.
We don't know exactly.
We know the parts of life, and we know that cells is key, self-ysiology, the emergence
of the cellular structure.
You got a membrane, you have RNA, DNA, you have organelles and proteins, and their ideas
about how all of that stuff came together and then created natural selection, genetic
information storage, epigenetic development, and a physiology.
These are the key elements of that, okay?
But they came together to create a complexity-building feedback loop, okay?
That was, and then grew, and then there was all of these different kinds of explosions
and, you know, sort of like species singularities springing off of that, right?
And that, the Tree of Knowledge just depicts the life landscape as the Tree of Life, as
the second dimension of complexity, as all of that emergence and splitting and recombination.
The way I think technology does operate very similarly to that.
We'll talk about what I think about technology and how I think technology is now going to
merge and fuse with culture in the 21st century in a different kind of way, right?
But so then you get the jump from life, then you get into mind.
There's a complexity-building feedback loop in each case, and the Tree of Knowledge then
frames each one of those, okay?
And it gives you a particular way, sort of a meta-theoretical framework, also recognizing
that there's a lot of mystery, so there's just a lot of that's unknown, all right?
But what the Tree of Knowledge says is, okay, so we have evolution, cell theory, and genetics.
We don't even have a good idea that there's a joint point around mind, i.e. how to get
to animal, and that there's a joint point around culture.
In fact, that's my whole theoretical analysis, is that we should be thinking about joint
points from life to mind and mind to culture, not identify explicitly what they are.
Then I propose behavioral investment theories you're going to get into, that's the life
to mind, and that provides, like with the Cambrian explosion, about, say, 500 million,
550 million years ago, you get the animal landscape, and that's what I mean by mind.
And then, you know, as we've talked about over the last 200,000 years, justification
says, here's the complexity-building feedback to go from primates to persons, okay?
And then there's all these different beliefs and ideologies that are happening, and that's
what the cultural dimension, but what humans are doing, of course, is that the Tree of
Knowledge just is a representation of reality, it's not reality.
Reality is that humans are also building all of these material cultural elements, okay?
In other words, they're constructing both for tools and then increasingly for sacred
symbols, okay?
They're building these systems of understanding, like you see in the cave paintings.
So you see, we see these dramatic cave paintings, 40,000 years ago, 30,000 years ago, of these
animistic depictions of half-man, half-animal, mystical traditions, okay?
And so what I think is starting to happen in the evolution of justification and of technology
is people are seeking meaning-making systems, because the problem of justification then gives
rise to the problem of why?
Why do you are you doing what you're doing, okay?
And I love, there's a great book called God, a Human History by Aslan, okay?
And this is very relevant for the idea of the 21st century, as far as I'm concerned,
and why I love Alexander Bard's Synthesism, by the way, okay?
And here's the story by Aslan, is he asked the question, why did we transition technologically
into agriculture?
Like, why did we go from nomadic, you know, hunter-gatherer kinds of tribes into horticulture,
which was made sense, because horticulture allowed you to combine the best of both worlds
for many.
And so horticultural lifestyles are pretty good.
What you notice from early agricultural lifestyles, technologically wise, if you study the bones
of people who lived in that area, they're malnourished, beaten, and injured, less healthy than a nomadic
or horticultural tribe.
So why the hell would people even evolve into doing that?
Okay?
That's one of the great questions.
Well, the answer is actually ontological design types of things.
And at least according to this, what he says is that what started to happen is more and
more technologically elaborate temples and activities were being engaged in.
Humans were then building bigger and bigger things.
And there's a temple at Gobekid Tempe, which is in Sturkey, all right?
10,000 years old, 12,000 years old, right at the cusp of what we understand when agriculture
started to shift.
And it's a giant temple they discovered a couple of years ago.
It's longer than that, but they've published it.
So what they show is that what Aslan argues is that to build this temple is a year-round
project.
Okay?
And the kinds of activities, worship activities that were taking place then would be there
for a year.
So that starts to explain now if you're located at a place, so it has to be, why then do we
go agriculture?
We go agriculture because we start building these types of temples.
Why are we building these temples?
Because we have to answer, we ask the question, what means anything?
Why the hell is shit happening?
What's my ultimate purpose?
Every culture asks, what's my ultimate purpose?
And every culture answers it by some form of mysticism in God.
God put us here for a purpose.
And then to justify that, we build, we engage in, to show our appreciation for the sacred,
we build things like temples, and we get the temples got bigger and bigger.
So then you get this whole idea that the concept of God and our need to express that is actually
what drove the transition to agriculture, which would have drove the transition into
the building of civilizations.
And so now we go ahead and...
I've just been reading up on René Girard recently, whose ideas around sacred and God
and what it is that allows communities to found themselves.
And he thought, he had this idea of the mimetic theory that basically the trap that people
fall into is that we see other people doing shit and we copy each other.
So someone's got a pretty bit of stick and then I want the stick and then someone else
wants the stick.
And all of a sudden everyone wants that stick and we're at each other's throats.
And then it moves to a point where we don't even really care about the stick anymore.
We just care about the fact that I'm pissed at you and you're pissed at me and everyone's
fucking pissed.
And that can lead to some real ugly shit because it's like you've said, we're basically just
chimpanzees that need to manage ourselves.
But here this idea we have to scapegoat.
If we can find one person to pin everything on and go, right, he did it or it did it.
And so if we just get rid of that thing, then social harmony will be re-established.
And then it turns out, according to his ideas, that it actually works.
So what happens is this scapegoat figure becomes both this, this like evil thing that
needed to be cast out, but also fascinating and divine, precisely because the community
was able to link up around it.
And so sacrifice gets an explanation and we can also see the genesis of what an idea
of the sacred is.
It's something bizarre that everybody focuses towards that creates a kind of unity within
the community.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And now I think that's a fascinating, you know, I am not an expert under our, I find
his explanation of the scapegoat in terms of how we need to justify what we feel inside
and how we reduce cognitive distance, how we organize, how that can be an organized force
in a community that would go through these sort of traditional cycle waves.
Very, very, there's a lot of compelling both anecdotes for that and there's a lot of intuitive
sense of thinking that that makes it a future term.
It's like a node that the culture needs to orient itself around something.
Right.
We were talking about temples, right?
And that's exactly it.
Right.
We build a temple.
Again, it's doing something with this sacred figure.
Then we're not going to get it because other than getting pissed that I just put it on that
stick, it's, let's all build the temple together.
That's so cool.
So it feels like the process of the justification hypothesis and people engaging within these
systems and exchanging with each other starts to converge naturally.
That's a very weird word, but it feels like they start to converge around these memetic
desires, around these sacred scapegoats.
It feels like that's the genesis of the sacred and perhaps correlating to what you were talking
about and talking about the temple in Turkey, Kublaiki Tepe, and that the Neolithic revolution
as a point of the emergence of sedentaryism.
That moment as the moment where the current gods were born, were they born in that moment?
Were they different from the previous gods?
What differs?
Is this something that relates to our study of desire and the sacred and maybe of designing
interfaces for the sacred and for religion?
Right.
I think that's a wonderful question because to me what you start to get at is this tension
between the local contingencies of the gods that are then born for the particular specific
purpose versus the archetypal processes by which the human primate and its phenomenological
structure, its intuitive sense-making, if we go to a Jungian type of version of archetype,
that will carry a collective unconscious structure that then projects onto the patterns of the
world that have emerged over the evolutionary history.
So I have a thing called the influence matrix.
The influence matrix is an underlined structure of what the process dimensions of our relationship
system are.
The argument is that we have an archetypal template in our minds, our hearts, for relational
value and social influence.
This is when important others see us for who we are and they value us and we get social
influence and validation for that.
We are prepared to have that as a template and when we get that, we come prepared to
love that.
That's nourishing.
Likewise, to be rejected, to be discounted, to be held in contempt by people you care
about, to be ostracized, all of this is terrifying.
So these are fundamentally templates, not unlike sweetness, saltiness, savoriness in
terms of our taste.
And what it means is then we'll project patterns.
If this is an archetype, then how do you achieve that?
Is there an archetypal human male masculine hero figure that achieves this kind of relational
value?
Is there an old wise man?
Is there the trickster?
There are particular kinds of ways in which nature crushes us or elevates us.
So these will be the archetypal structures and then they'll interact with particular
types of real contingencies of what the particular local culture, the local history, the local
sacred shaman say to be the key features.
And then they'll evolve in unique ways and create unique characteristics even though
they'll have an archetypal background.
They will also evolve at particular characteristics based on technologies that are available.
I was just going to say, notice what happens when we get the temples into civilizations.
It's not accidental that all of a sudden we start going monotheistic instead of polyethistic.
I don't think it's inevitable.
Obviously, Hindu systems didn't do that.
But there were really good reasons to believe that organized in the way that they did.
It's not accidental that monotheistic systems emerge around civilizations.
Well, not only that, the idea comes up in Bard's writing is that once we got sedentary
and we invented the written word, that produces the idea of something eternal and unchanging,
which then feeds into the theological grammar.
We get the idea of the one unchanging God precisely because communication has gone from
being a word that I say and then it's gone to a word that I write down and it's there
forever.
Yes.
And I actually, and so I think that that's fascinating.
And I also think that the, for me, that the written word is to writing in mathematics
is the technological root and anchor point of what's going to give rise to the digital.
So if we, if we trace, when does the digital and the digital is the merger of material
culture.
So we're in the tree of knowledge languages, material cultures out here when it's just
an axe and a knife.
It's an extension of my culture, but it is not, there's no informational interface with
my system of justification.
There's feedback.
All right.
And the way in which I can extend myself and build it, but it doesn't talk back to me
like Siri talks back to you.
Okay.
So when we start writing, we have external memory and then we have a written record of
permanence.
So yeah, that changes our relationship.
Marshall McLuhan's work on the medium is really crucial here for how this completely
and changes our relationship, our psychology.
Now our extended mind is different than just the tools.
It's actually the extension of our language mind into the world.
Okay.
Then we build printing presses, okay, which then and make everybody literate.
Then we start building computational machines.
Then we electronic computational machines.
Then we network them all together in the internet.
And now we're starting to create informational interface so that, okay, now we're going to
put a little chip in my head and that's going to allow me to control the mouse that moves
things around as I think move to the left, move to the right.
And that's why the 21st century is going to see this digital information interface,
okay, whereby technology loops back into us, fuses with us.
And that's, you know, passing your seat belt, right?
Yeah.
Because just in the same way that the bone excavations of the Neolithic reveal a lot
of pain and war and all that, something similar is going to happen.
I have no doubt.
And I was going to say something.
When you mentioned technology and the emergence of writing and math, so we invent the gods
based on the technologies that we have, they come hand in hand.
So when monotheism is a special case for a reason, but whenever we became sedentary,
we needed to update the old gods, the nomadic gods, and we needed to invent new gods.
We invented the gods of the crops and the gods of the home because there was no earth
in the home and a series of cultural values that came from there.
The seat of the sacred perhaps, Owen, kind of to try to steer towards what you asked
in the beginning of the podcast, I feel like the seat of the sacred in the emergence of
all of this lies not necessarily on maybe tracing the lineage, but tracing the intensity
of feedback between technology and humans.
In other words, the agricultural gods emerged because we ourselves became agriculture created
by the cults.
Obviously, the feedback loop is a very big dynamic here.
So I guess my feeling and what I'm trying to get towards is trying to figure out how
we map these intensities across the landscapes.
And that might be a good clue to figure out where will the sacred emerge because obviously
the intensities of all justification systems produce an image, a likeness of God and human
minds which in turn produced settlements.
So maybe in a similar fashion, today we could also map those intensities and we map them
through the feedback loops of interfacing with writing, with math, but now with extended
mind and with this weird turning inwards of things.
Amen.
I think those intensities lie the most now.
Okay, so for me, if we use Peter Lindbergh's, those are the emergence of, let's think about
the waves of justification that we've gone through and see where we are on the justification
landscape.
So we have the pre-modern indigenous.
What's pre-modern indigenous?
It's pre-civilization.
This is the three of us in our 150-person tribe hanging out, building narrative about
what the hell is going on.
The nomadic and we're embedded in nature and we have, and it's going to have lots of different
themes but every little tribe is going to be different because they're not necessarily
going to come in contact with us.
And they start to start in the emergence of civilization, agriculture, writing, and the
actual age requires transition into the formal systems of justification.
That's what I call sort of written formal systems of justification.
This is the history of Buddhism, the history of Confucianism, Zoroastrian right before,
Judeo-Christian, the Jewish tradition.
These then are formal systems that are necessary to regulate large-scale systems of civilization
and writing and the priests, now you get the priests who actually are then able to confer,
hey, this is the interpretation and then they study and then you have aspects of all that.
So then the formal systems of justification then merge from the actual age all the way
up through the modern age, the modern age of the Enlightenment.
The Enlightenment happens in the combination of the industrial age and what it does, the
liberal democracies and modern science has a system of justification.
And that shifts and creates all sorts of dynamics, of course, in relation, for example, are we
a one-world atheistic system where it's basically just the physical world or is there a two-world
natural, supernatural, in terms of archetypal models about whether or not to make sense
out of the world and how to.
But it opens it up, it creates the universal rights, we see slavery, all of a sudden then
everyone's got value, potential for universal rights, so modernism opens up, changes the
equation there.
And then we get the idea that we're going to move towards the end of history because
the liberal democratic systems of justification are so dominant that they start wiping out
all the other systems and we're all going to converge.
But there's the postmodern twist in that, so that the nature of these modern systems,
A, they create all sorts of different kinds of externalities and potential problems, and
B, we see the idea of how much sense making do they actually allow and how much equality
and social justice do they allow.
Well, not enough, let's put it that way, not fucking enough.
So all of a sudden we're relative to the complexity of the world and the knowledge problems that
we have, that technology and empirical science with all its silos is telling us about.
And the ways in which human behavior is changing, the system's not nearly up to the task.
And in fact, the structure of it, philosophers gave up on it and scientists were like, whatever,
we're going to go to study.
So there's no architecture of knowing.
So what happens is we get a fragmented pluralism and purism at the knowledge side, and then
you get a serious problem of justice issues that the modernist thing is, a white male
European heterosex, you know, kind of modernist frame that has much more normative shit built
into it than they're reflective about.
It eliminates other cultural indigenous variables.
And so what do we get?
The postmodern critique.
The postmodern critique is basically like, listen, you're way overshot what you can know
and you have to contextualize all your systems of justification, that's my term, not theirs,
but that's basically the issue in the powered influence histories and contingencies that
gave rise to it.
And as such, you can't step out of that.
So you're all bunch of justifiers.
I mean, I learned feminism was my first intellectual awakening.
I was like, holy shit, you know, you take a perspective on this.
I've been soaking in some masculine justification in the 80s that I wasn't aware of.
All right.
All right.
So now what happens?
Once we have all of the fragmented confusion, once we have all of this system of new technology,
once we have the postmodern critique, it gives rise to a fragmented pluralism, a crazy
fragmented pluralism, that is Peter Lindbergh's culture war 2.0, a multipolar war.
We're no longer in broom church and that kind of basic structure.
We now, the whole system, because the macro system of modernist justification is fracturing
what was regulating the global system is now losing its legitimacy and authority.
And we're getting all of this.
Yeah.
And that's precisely the kind of the trucks of the question that is cast upon us right
now.
As I say, the fifth jump point of the 21st century, like there's many routes that this
could go.
There's the route where we triple down on humanism and somehow try to save whatever
systems of justification and institutions and technologies are a bad sort of vector.
We see within this vast pluralism, the emergence of other sense-making, psychic technologies
as well, especially the ones that are enabled by new technologies.
Could we be seeing the rise of weird new animisms that because memes are so mobile that the
psychic technologies, the basis of psychic technologies will need necessarily to stop
being humanist, positivist, Russoian, Cartesian.
Could be there's perhaps many others we see in some weird characters like Dugan.
We're using that as justification for geopolitical movements as well.
And I find that remarkable.
Why?
Because it's precisely at this point where we're trying to figure out where to go on
which justifications system to base our world order, our technological system and our psyche.
And that's precisely the great question right now, right?
I feel one of the things about humanism is that paradoxically, it's actually pretty
shitty for humans along a lot of lines of the axis.
It produces great material prosperity, but also why the fuck is everybody so depressed?
Why the fuck is everybody so addicted to shit?
And my sense, it's precisely because this particular system of justification doesn't
do anything for existential questions, it doesn't really answer who are you or what
is your place in the cosmos or why should you be a good person.
About the best answer it can give you to that is don't do bad shit because suffering sucks.
I think that is at the basis of a lot of trying to attempt to derive an ethics rationally.
It's just pain sucks so don't do things that are painful because it's painful and it's
just totally tortological.
There's a step of faith that is involved in other justification systems that precisely
because they understand themselves as being based on faith.
You're allowed to experience yourself as having a place in the universe that isn't backed
up by some kind of rationally derived principle.
And it feels like where we're at at the moment precisely because of the post-modern fragmentation
that you've just described Greg.
Not only is there this kind of like within humanism, this absence of that which makes
the human full, there's also an increasing desperation for that.
I think that people are clinging ever more intensely to things that give them something
akin to what we would have once got an out of religion which tends, it's what happens
with the phenomenon of cults which throughout the 20th century for example throughout the
due to church structure we're always kind of like increasingly the cult becomes a more
attractive place to situate your sense making and it's something that we're all doing kind
of unconsciously.
Another word for it is reality bubble.
Sorry Greg, just a small word where to add to go one's question, feels like those cults
are technologies to alleviate the discontents of civilization.
So maybe it's even humanist, maybe it's in the Freudian terms, civilization itself.
Absolutely.
Okay, so lots here, lots here, alright and this is where we definitely want to be in
heading towards.
So a couple of things, so the modernist age, alright, the modernist, you're absolutely
right as far as I'm concerned, so the problem with the modernist, in fact this is both analytically
true and humanistic spiritually true in the sense the following, the modernist age fucks
up in that it doesn't understand the human mind.
It doesn't understand scientifically how to describe the human mind with an appropriate,
what I now call it, we're appropriate descriptive metaphysics, in other words what's your language
system for actually describing what you see, so it reduces everything into physics which
is ridiculous, okay, in other words there's a real problem of physical reductionism inside
what modern science cans us in terms of its language and conceptual framing, alright.
And what that basically translates into is it robs us from whatever the metaphysical
spiritual is, how to hold on to that in any way that would be coherent, and even what
is that gives us rise to basic metaphysical understanding of things like love and accomplishment
and then essentially it says, well try to go for that, but it doesn't half-heartedly,
it doesn't have much of, and essentially that it reduces to wow just don't have pain and
do what you can and have fun while you're here, right, it's a very, it's not an aspirational,
it's not good for the aspirational spiritual moral, okay, it's weak, deeply weak in relationship
to that, and that is one of the discontents that give rise, well if you're disenchanted
and some other system is able to give you cognitive closure on what it is that you have
purpose and you yoke the old archetypal needs to be part of a group and you have a belief
system that you're certain of and the people around you believe it, that's a hell of a
lot better than this fucking chaos out there for a lot of people, hence the appeal of cults,
right, it's unbelievable, you know, oh so I know what it is, I have a community,
these are archetypal signals of what we're used to, if you build it properly they will come,
yeah, exactly, okay, so now we're like, all right, so now the the modernist systems coming
down and sort of giving rise to this chaotic post-modern fragmentation, we are now impopulated
the planet in this weird way that makes us, I mean, you know, you can read Steve Binker's
Enlightenment, now I do, I think it's impressive in terms of what we've accomplished, but I don't
think we can keep going, we can't have just infinite growth, right, on an economic consumption way,
plus it's empty calories, look at how anxious and impressed we are, yeah, there's a fundamental
shift that needs to happen and we need to rediscover religion in essence, okay, what do we
mean by that, we need an affirmative vision for what the good is, an affirmative vision,
now let's come back to all of these different systems of justification, okay, that are the
multipolar war, the beauty of just, okay, is that it allows you a language to see them all as systems
of justification, all right, so now I can step outside the stream of culture and basically observe
it rather than be in it, with the language it's like mindfulness, it's like it's a meta move,
it's like, oh, I can now sit down and just see all these individuals in their stream of justification
trying to find the justification system that's right for you, okay, and they're attached to their
influence and their interest and the people around them and they're building their narrative about why
they're good, look at Peter Lindbergh's narrative, it's like, hey, here's the core, this is what
they're defied against, this is what their core issue is, these are the who the leaders are that
represent it, okay, so you get this multipolar landscape of justification, now the question is,
well, wait a minute, if I step outside it, then the question is, is there any meta principles
of justification, okay, or the meta principles of justification, like things that actually
transcend the local cultural narratives and give rise to a sense of what is transcendent beyond
culture, okay, and my answer is absolutely yes, all the wisdom traditions, okay, converge on
certain kinds of concepts that overlap enormously, okay, and when you look at the way in which
wisdom traditions overlap, it gives rise to what I used to call an integrated pluralism of morality,
okay, it's a universal relational view of the good that overlaps a lot, now some
emphasize like agape and love, okay, I emphasize things like dignity, well-being, and integrity,
those are my big three meta values that transcend local human relations and they transcend local
justifications of particular cultural systems, they're universal across meta justification,
I can go into each one of those big three and how they complement each other,
but the point of it is, is that any other macro-level value system or wisdom tradition
will have core values that actually overlap a lot with this, so that you can see a center of
meta justification from a number of different perspectives and emphases and that's what gives
you this integrated pluralism of it, I think that's kind of a point where I want to not fully,
let's not agree, but I want to add another twist to the question which is, I think it might be also
an interface and a technological problem, in other words, it might not be enough to say that
all the wisdom traditions converge in a certain point that therefore let us all move towards
that point because we have no tech to get there, we haven't got the right tools or interface to get
there, in very much the same way as you said the modernists did not have the tools to understand
the human mind, therefore reduced it to physics, now in the beginning you talked about language
as a technology, as these justification systems, but rather I'm going to sort of twist it and talk
about it as a technology, I feel like technology, words are not sufficiently adapted technology
to address this question, the question of the meta values towards which we could,
should, or might move towards, in other words, it's one thing to say that that's a place where
we all would like to go, another thing is to actually go and I feel like that might be an
interface, a ritual, a technological problem, and obviously that's where our ontological design
might come in, but the question then, ontological design is just the interface, and that's again
where the question of the pathos versus the mythos and the logos comes in, right, what matters is
that pathos is intransmissible as a tyric, and to build something that sees down from that as
a proper mythology is the work that the old traditions took thousands of years to be able to
achieve, and that we might not be wise enough to be able to build it today. Hey man do that,
we have to be, well certainly, I mean that's, so to me this is where these, I've always,
so that when I found Bard's Synthesism, which happens to be right here, it'll be Synthesism,
okay, I went apeshit about it because it fused exactly the same thing I was seeing from across
the pond 20 years ago when I built the Tree of Knowledge, and basically it comes about exactly
the point that you just raised, Daniel, and here's how, okay, so it's called the Tree of Knowledge
for obvious reasons, I hope, in relation to reference to the Tree of Knowledge in the Bible,
okay, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, all right, and ultimately I emerged into a garden,
and so that's the Tree Theory of Knowledge behind me, the first branch of which is the Tree of Knowledge
system, all right, and these are all mythos references, so it's in the Tree in a garden,
okay, it's got eight branches on it, which are like eight, the eight wheel, you know, the eight
fold path, there are all these different nested mythos relations as it tries to delineate a
psychic logos, articulation of pure and practical reasons for being, that's the system, all right,
so when I built the Tree of Knowledge back in, you know, late 1990s, and I saw these stacked,
okay, cones of dimensions, planes of existence, okay, and each one's an emergent dimension as
this information process to communication system, all right, and I also see, so you get to culture
and this idea of an aspirational metaculture that transcends culture has exactly with it this idea
of God and the ultimate concern, the thing that would be above the tree, it's a metacultural
image, that's one aspect that offers, so this is this wisdom idea of our ultimate concern,
and could we build an ultimate system of justification, okay, and the other thing it points to is the
emergence of a, just at a concrete level, it points to the emergence of the digital landscape,
all right, because there's a novel information processing system, okay, so sitting where as I
sat on the Tree of Knowledge and looked up, it was, I was looking at both God and the emergence of
the digital age, whether I was in the technological sort of grounding fact world, that's the digital,
and whether I'm looking in the aspirational world of moral, and the idea then is, is that what it
basically locates you is sit on an understanding of science in the 21st century and orient yourself
toward the moral and the digital, ground yourself and then figure out how to build a bridge,
ultimately that's the compass, and yet potentially what Scytheism is about, I mean creating God in
the internet age, and transcending atheism, theism and atheism into believing in the concept of God
that also is, the internet is the digital is the machine, right, so anyway that Bard and I
or whatever many other individuals are able to, or whatever construct, it's like that close
encounters of the third kind, you know, everybody's seeing the mountain, I don't know if you know that
movie, but it's like people start having the image of the mountain, you know, and it is to me, so that
then, and now nobody knows what, nobody knows what technology is coming, but that at least it
gives us your guardrails to frame the pathway through the fifth joint point and to build bridges
between wisdom traditions and technological emergence and uh, frame of ontological design.
you
