Okay, so I'm going to start and maybe other people will join.
You know, I said that there might be some of her acquaintances going to join in a second. So let me share my screen.
Yes.
Share my desktop.
Okay, so y'all should be seeing the spreadsheet on top here. And I've also got the PDF document open. And I just thought I would kind of start from from this.
Let me make sure it looks like I'm recording as well. So, okay, we're good.
So the first task. Well, step one is just to for people who had no experience with Excel to kind of get them to looking at some YouTube videos.
So I hope that's that worked because, you know, one YouTube video leads to many others. So, and they're going to be a lot better at explaining Excel or any spreadsheet program than I would be able to do.
Or any spreadsheet program than I would be. And then the next part was just to get familiar with the data and actually I think a lot of the text I put in here, which I thought would be helpful kind of confused people.
So
Highlighted one sentence here for this exercise. We're going to look at the data for Mississippi and we're going to look at their data.
Which starts sometime in about March and then they project all the way through the end of December.
And then here's where I tried to help out. I said, the data from that website is really unfortunately
Confusing and I think it reflects their approach to life, which isn't helping the American public very much.
But anyway,
So I found the data that we wanted and put it into the spreadsheet.
And so I wanted to
Use that data. So there's no
Data entry that anyone would have to do or anything like that. So let me go to this spreadsheet real quick. So this is the raw spreadsheet.
And just kind of the beginning of Excel.
This is, I just clicked in a cell that has the word Mississippi in it. And this is the Macintosh version of Excel and it's not actually the latest version.
I haven't bought that because this one isn't broken entirely yet.
And so this is a cell and you can click around and go to different cells.
You can highlight more than one cell.
You can highlight more than one cell. You can highlight things in a column. You can highlight a couple of columns. You can go across and you know so and then I can use my copy and paste if I wanted to move these numbers somewhere else. So I'm going to hit command C
And you see it's got the little maybe I don't know if you can see it on your screen, but it's got the little ant races going on here. So just as an example. And this isn't part of the homework.
I'm going to click in this cell and paste it. And so I've duplicated that data and you can see the ant races are still on over here. So I could actually click down here and do command V and do that again. So it's very easy to move data around.
In fact, it's too easy. I'm going to undo that and undo that it's too easy to move it around. I'm going to hit escape to get rid of these ant races.
And, and one of the bad things about Excel is if you get data or if you pass off your data to someone else and then take the spreadsheet back if they accidentally mutilated your data, you might not detect it until it's too late. So that's why people
Sometimes for really important data, use a database so that you can control and prevent that kind of thing. So the one, one of the tricky things, which I think gave some people a hard time. So the word date is a cell.
Deaths underscore mean so this isn't identifying what's in the column beneath it.
So, and then deaths mean smooth. So these are columns out of their original data that I selected. I mean, they have, especially in the August data, they have like 40 or 50 columns. And so I narrowed it down and put those into a single spreadsheet.
One of the things that prevents you from using some of the automatic graphing that Excel might do is this cell here. So what I did was, I took the data from Excel and put it into a single spreadsheet.
And I typed in August 27 2020 deaths as my text, but then I spread it across four cells. And so
And I did that here with this thing in yellow. So these are five cells. So there's not. So like, let me put the
Let's see, let me start over here. I'm going to put the I'm clicking on column queue. And if I just use the arrow and go left, it's going one cell at a time. But when it hits this one, it's covering five cells and then it goes back to one. So being able to spread like a header like this across several cells is good for organization, but you kind of have to be careful when you
Go to do things like make a graph or make a calculation or something like that.
Okay, so
All right.
Okay, so this old version of Excel isn't perfect. So I just got a couple of warning messages for some reason.
It's a bug that I can't fix without buying the new version. And I know when I get the new version, it'll have other bugs in it. So I've kind of lived with it.
Okay, so what else did I say about this and they get familiar with it. So I called out. Okay, so the data that I put in here. So these first three columns come from the March 26 file that they put out.
And so I put the location name in here because that file actually has data for all of the states for the US as a whole for several other countries and so forth. So if you went into that link and downloaded this data, you would have to find, say, the Mississippi data or the Tennessee data, depending on what you wanted to look at.
And so I copied these three columns from that. And then in another file that they put on their website, which was the August 27 data, I copied these four
columns, they had actually a column for the total population of all the states and so they think that the population of Mississippi is a little over 3 million.
And I've seen different numbers for that actually so I don't know. So I'm not testing the validity of the data in here. I'm just saying let's use it to make some graphs. Okay, so
so this column is the daily number of deaths. So for example,
both spreadsheets agree that there are no deaths until, aha, there's one on March 19. So up until March 19, there's no deaths.
And then, and then zero again. So all the way through March 24, there was only one death in Mississippi. Now this first table,
the real data ends on March 24. And I colored the next cells yellow. And so I did that by, I'd highlight some cells that I want to color. And you go up here. And here's the fill and I could make it green.
Or any other of the colors that you can get on your computer. So I'll just put it back to yellow. So I highlighted that because what I want to do at some point is graph this data up to the yellow bar as one part of the graph and then the rest of this data on down as the rest of the graph.
Now the August 27 file, I'm just going to scroll down until I see yellow.
And see here's the deaths.
And this actually there's something cool you can do. Let me go ahead and do that. If I highlight this row, I can say keep everything above it on the same screen with me no matter what I do.
And that is under the window menu. And that's called freeze pains.
Okay, so now as I scroll down.
You see those first two rows stay there so I don't have it helps me remember what the columns are. So going to go all the way down. So there's some days that they don't have any
data on which might be a problem when you're making a graph. In fact, you can see it. And then all of a sudden here's where so the real data actual measure deaths.
The last recorded was on August 24 they recorded eight deaths. And again, I don't know if that matches what's in the state's official repository.
And then here they took off with the model so from that point on. So because it's a computer model, you can have a fraction of a death so 22.799 people died on would have died by their model on August 26 and so forth.
Okay, and this goes on out and this one is projected all the way through December 1 of this year. So that's kind of interesting.
The other model only predicted to the end of August so you can imagine that back in March, we thought this would all be over by the end of summer right so they didn't predict any further than August so so we when we make graphs that's how far we'll go on that.
So,
so that's the way the data is organized and so there's really well and then this this column here is because when we plot the actual deaths you'll see, and maybe you can see it in the hand out here, let me just go to that.
So here you can see this is the actual deaths up to this point. And it's up and down, of course, because that's the way, you know, you can't coordinate people dying very well so some days, a lot of people die and others fewer people die.
So one of the things you can do is smooth this data, do some kind of averaging. In fact, that's what they did for this column. And so I just included that data to see if that actually reveals any trends maybe but also just to make another more complicated chart.
Okay, so that's kind of walking through the data. And I guess now I'll just start trying to replicate the graph now.
Rather, so I did it kind of in three or four steps here to try to so that people could have some success before they got to a more complicated graph, like this one where there's two curves on one graph.
And then the final one is this graph where there's actually five things plotted here.
So I thought I would just try to go ahead and and start on this one.
So I want to. So it's really easy to make this graph using a built in graphing function or let Excel make some decisions for you but I'm not going to do that because I want so you know the student, the student who's successful would have had a graph that
just like this.
You know, saying I want, I wanted to see them get the colors the same. I wanted to see them do so you see here's green. So this is the, and here's the legend. So the in the data file March 26, the deaths measured or green that's this data, you can maybe see
that there's a blip there that's that one person that died before in March.
And then the black data is the model data for March 27 and you see that's a nice pretty little curve.
And then the with the later data, the blue data is the actual deaths or the dark blue is the actual deaths.
The light blue is the smoothed actual deaths so you can see it. It's a little bit more easy to see that there's a couple of bumps and plateaus in there.
And then this is the this red is the model death starting at the end of August all the way through December 1.
So let's see if we can replicate that and of course
doing that live in in front of people it's not going to work perfect.
So, so one of the other things you can do in Excel. So these columns are very long they go off my screen here even if I made Excel fill up the screen. It's not very convenient.
So what I'm going to do is
make it split the screen so to do that I need to get rid of the option I turned on so I've got to turn off split.
Okay, but now, and the way this normally looks. This is at the top here, but you can if you grab those horizontal bars where's what's it doing that for
split. Okay, this is this is what it normally looks like and the PC version may look a little different, but there's this little box with two parallel bars in it and when you see it you can grab it and pull it down.
And then that basically splits the data into so my cursor my box is up here. So if I move my cursor, the top box, the top half of the screen moves up and down, but the bottom is not moving.
And then if I go down here and click in this box, I can scroll this down. So this is good because it lets me see the beginning and the end of the data.
So, let's see how that will go. So what I'm going to do I'm going to start a graph so I'm going to click in an area I could put it on another tab if I wanted another tab.
I could go down to the bottom here and click or another insert sheet, and I could make a graph on another sheet, but I like to make my graphs on the same sheet that the data is on if I can, because it makes it easier to navigate and find the data I want to plot.
Okay, so I clicked.
Oh, I didn't know we could do that.
Okay.
Well, yeah, because you gave me.
I'm sorry.
I said I didn't know we could put on the same.
Oh, okay. So you knew how to do it, but you.
I didn't know we could do that.
Okay.
Yeah.
I put it all on separate red sheets.
Yeah.
So,
that's probably just poor wording in my instructions.
But so, can you tell me what in my instructions made you start typing this in manually somewhere.
Part of the reason was like, I guess it was some of the help that I got, because personally, I just figure we're supposed to have like four different data tables. So I just automatically assume we were going to put them on four different spreadsheets.
So they wouldn't like intermingle with each other or something like that.
So that was like my personal like reasoning on it.
Okay, so that's why I put it.
And, you know, again, that's not wrong.
And, and what I'm Maryland, what I'm trying to teach the kids is if they're in the workplace, of course, their boss or their supervisors or organization may have a preferred way that graphs look, for example, when they write a report.
So there, my goal is just to teach them how to find the buttons to change stuff, really.
And so, okay, so, again, pick the pick the cell.
And when I, and I'm going to go to the chart tab.
And, and there's a lot of types of charts here and so, and it takes some, I mean, if you go under other, for example, there's all kinds of charts.
And so it's useful sometimes just when you have a chart to highlight it and then pick one of these others and, and see what happens.
Some of these assume the data is in a certain format in your table, and so forth.
But this is some exploring that you might do at some point. So for, I guess these, for example, if you're someone who's interested in stock prices, you could make your own stock market charts.
And, and use some of these formats to do that. I've never done that even though I do follow some stocks. So, so the one that's actually most useful is under a scatter chart.
It may be that someone would pick a line chart. Now what they mean by a line chart is that the values on the x axis are evenly spaced.
And so, for example, if you had data, say the color of people's hair is, is your end is, well, no, yeah, and you're going to count you got a room full of 1000 people and you're going to count redheads, blondes, brunettes.
You're not going to ask anybody whether they colored their hair or anything. But anyway, so you might have along the x axis you might have blonde, brunette, redhead, purple, I don't know.
And then this axis you might have
the number of people so categorical data usually goes better under these line charts.
So they're not really what we're after what we're really after is a scatter chart.
And what I'd like. So the example I showed, you don't see the dot for all the data points here. So when I look at the scatter charts, it's probably not this one.
And it's probably not this one because this has no lines in it. And this one has lines with dots. And this one is just plain. It's a smooth scatter. So we're going to, we have some data and maybe we would like a smooth line to go through that data.
This one might do is as well. It draws a straight line between the data points. And if our data is close enough together that straight line might look curvy enough for us. So again, play around with them. And once we get one made, we can come back to this and
just click on click on one and see what it does to the data. Okay, so let me pick a smooth, smooth line chart.
Okay.
I had somewhere in there I asked them to make it about five inches by what I say five by three or something.
So I could actually do that now. So this is blank. I haven't identified any data. But if I go to format.
There's a box here. Oh, it is it came up as three by five.
Of course, you can drag this and make it. Well, if you wait and get your cursor on it, you can make it as big as you want.
All right.
Let me undo that. And if I click this, it'll keep the same proportion. So I could resize it later and not mess up fonts or anything.
Okay, so now I have to tell what I didn't hear.
Okay.
Sorry, I just said, okay, I understand. Okay.
So now I need to select some data keyword select so there's a icon here that says select.
So let me so I'm just going to since I know I've got five things I want to plot. I'm going to go ahead and plot the first one.
I'm going to do it like I did in the exercise. So let me select some data and all of these windows are blank. In fact, you can see so we're not going to have this category label.
So as soon as I select some data, this box is going to go away. So this is kind of an unfortunate window.
Because it's giving you everything you need for any of those charts. But as soon as you select some data, it'll look different.
You can, and I'm not very good at it. If you have your data organized properly, you can just select your data in here.
But we're not going to do that. We're going to do it one item at a time. So I'm going to add a series.
So when we're finished, we're going to have five series on here. So add this series.
Series one.
Now the name. So the name for the series.
I can, the way I would select that I could type in here.
My first series.
Boom. All right.
And it did that and it put some more stuff on here.
But that's not what I really wanted. So my thing is highlighted. I'm going to go back.
Change it. I'm not going to say my first series. I'm going to actually select this little selector box here and I'm going to go to the data and select my title.
So I'm going to go here and say March 26 2020 deaths.
So I clicked in that box.
Then I hit enter key on the keyboard.
So here it's identifying which cells on the table hold my title.
So let me, let me just show you what that means.
So later, my boss comes to me and says, Dan, you never want to call.
I have the word deaths and a title of a chart. That's just against company policy.
So instead of going into the chart, I can go over here and I can say data.
And it's changed and it's done properly and it matches the format and all that. So if you can have your titles come from your data, that usually make. So for example, if we were going to have 20 variations on this chart,
but it's all from these columns, then I could change the title of all of those tables and one fell swoop. And that might be a cool thing to do.
Okay, so I'm going to undo that because I like the word deaths because that's what it is. All right, so I'm highlighting the table and I'm going to go back to select.
Okay, my x value. So I'm going to plot the dates from the start of this chart to the yellow line. So what I'm going to do.
Well, since I know what I'm going to do, I'm going to get that where I can see both of those on the screen here at the same time, just to show you what I'm going to do.
All right, so my first chart is just going to be the data up to March 20 in this column. So highlight my chart, go to select my x values or the dates, and I did the little selector box.
And so now I'm going to, I want to select all these dates. So I'm going to click in this box and I'm going to hold down the shift key and go down here and click in this box. And now, if you can see the ant races have covered the first 50 rows.
And this is what it looks like in the selector box and then I hit enter.
Okay, and my why data it had to put something in there so it just said I'm going to put the number one in there so I'm going to show where the why data that I want is.
And one of the mistakes you might make is if you don't get rid of this thing equals one it'll kind of mess up and give you error messages so I'm going to delete that.
I'm going to say my why data starts here, hold down the shift key and it goes to here.
All right.
And then voila.
Okay, so let's look at what it did.
So it set up the scale here, it goes from zero to 1.2.
And that's not what we're going to have in the last thing. And then the dates are, it picks some of the dates and spaced them out.
It picked a blue color it's kind of a thick line it's not really what I'd like.
This axis goes from minus point two so we're pretty sure that we're not going to have any negative deaths in this data set so I really don't want this to go from a negative number.
I'm going to have to fix that.
So.
All right, so I'm going to come back to and fix all these I'm just, this is the default that it comes up with. And again different versions might do different things.
So now I'm going to add in the model data so this is measure data I'm going to add in the model data. So I've highlighted that.
I have the graph highlighted. The select box goes away see it's select is not clickable. So I have to highlight the graph.
And I'm going to do select, and I'm going to add another series and I'm going to add in the model data.
And I don't have a good name for this I'm going to just say, March.
Data.
All right, the dates for this I need are going to be different so they're going to go from March 25. So I'm going to select
that and so now I'm going to say March 25. And then I'm going to scroll down and the best way for me is to just grab this
slider and then all the way through
August fourth
and enter
and then my why values correspond to that. So I'm going to select them get rid of that.
Scroll back up
press mark the yellow thing.
Okay, I like that.
Scroll down
and shift select that and enter.
Okay, let's see what we've got now.
Okay, so see there I've made two two sets of data are now plotted on this graph.
Now they don't match the colors in the assignment so we'll have to go over that.
The dates I want on the assignment the dates are vertical and horizontal because here you can't read them right.
The axis has to change.
I want some vertical lines on this grid so I can maybe see
what the timing is and so forth but we're still adding in our data so let's go ahead and add in the other data.
So I select my graph and I say select.
I'm going to add another
series. So
I'm going to let its data car name come from
this box here.
I'm going to select the data source so I'm going to do the model data first or the measure data first so I forgot to scroll where I could see my yellow line down here.
Okay, there's my yellow one. So my dates go from two six through 825 so I shift selected those and got that whole column of data selected and I hit enter.
And then the why values that go along with that.
I'm going to fix that
to not be equal to one. I'm going to say
the why values start here and they go down to here.
Alright, so I picked a lovely color.
So
excuse me, Dr. Bearden, one question for you. Yes, from the date you went to the 25th but on the on the deaths you went to the 24th. Was that intentional or was that a mistake?
Okay, you're right. I did make a mistake. So that's great. Thanks for pointing that out. So I can actually see the selection range here.
And it goes from row three to row two or three for the wise.
And looking here there's two or three.
Yeah, so I got the wise correct.
But the X's went to here so I'm just going to click in this box and change that to a three and now the numbers match and that should be good.
And you're right. That didn't really make any difference right now but when I add the next thing to it, it could be confusing because it's I don't know it might break it who knows.
Okay, so here's what I'm going to do. I'm going to, I've been working for 45 minutes. I'm going to save this document.
Because when I was helping the physical science kids, I accidentally, there was a dialogue that popped up and I just hit return and all my work was gone so always when you're working in Excel or Word, every 30 minutes to an hour you better save your work just
not good if it if it goes away. Alright, so now I'm good. I've got two more series to add. I'm going to. So look at this. So what you can notice now the this blue data.
It's there because it's still in the legend, but it disappeared because the green fell on top of it.
And so I'm going to have to make a decision or figure out how to get the blue to show up on top because if you look at the
graph here that well I got to change the color to green but here the green is from March 26.
And so I'm going to have to restack these so that certain things are on top.
Alright, but let me continue to add the data that I want. So now I want to add the model data after
starting June 20 or August 25. So I'm going to add another series. I don't have a good title so I'm going to just write August
model data.
Now if I wanted to have a nice title that I could Excel will let you do things like put strings together and so forth.
Text strings I don't know if you're familiar with that but you could have another cell somewhere on the spreadsheet that is the actual title for this data.
And instead of typing in a word like August model data.
You could actually just click on a cell, but I just type to the end which is also possible.
Okay, so now I'm going to select the X range for this so I'm going to say I want this graph to go from August 25.
All the way down through the end of the modeling which is December 1.
And you might see the ant races there.
Alright, so I selected the X and now I need to get the Y values so let me get to where I can see the Y values.
Select get rid of that.
So select that number and I'm trying to make sure I don't make the same mistake again.
So you can also. And so what I'm doing is because these columns are so long. I'm so I'm clicking on the first cell, and I'm scrolling till I see the last cell shift clicking to select those two and everything in between.
I could also just highlight a cell and drag.
But when you have a couple of hundred rows to go sometimes that gets messy so I just developed a habit of select the first one.
Find the last one and shift click on that and that'll select all the data in that column.
And then enter. Okay, and it picked a lovely purple for that.
Okay, so I've got all my data in there.
It kind of matches the assignment. Oh no I didn't put everything I've got to put in the smooth data.
I need one more thing so I'm going to.
And that graph disappeared because I accidentally clicked down there.
Okay, I'm not going to.
The smooth data is all zeros up to there. Let's see I need to move this.
Okay.
I can't remember what I did for the smooth data.
It looks like it overlaps there a little bit so I guess I put all the smooth data in there from this point so let me select so I'm going to add
another series I don't have a good title for it but I'm so I'm just going to say smooth.
Smooth data. Oh I gotta have a capital S there.
Okay the x values I'm going to pick.
I'm going to start on March 10.
I'm going to go all the way through.
Well I'm not going to go all the way through because the smooth data.
If you look at this number and this number they're the same because the smooth data is the same as a model data so I'm going to go through the end of the real data.
So August 20 is 24th.
And these are all adjustable if you select the wrong thing then it's it's not a it's very easy to fix it and adjust it.
And then okay so now I'm going to select the smooth data column which I happen to know I've looked at the data and I know that column G is the column I want if I'm not sure.
I have to scroll up to see my column title there it says deaths mean smooth so I just happen to remember that so select that hold down the shift key.
And then select that.
Okay and it put it on there.
So I want to check to make sure I got that selection right unfortunately this thing is so long I can't make this box any bigger so I'm going to check that says that goes to 203.
And this goes to 203. Okay so I got at least it's consistent.
Okay so there's a graph with all my data in it. And if you're just doing it quick and dirty you might be done at that point you know.
So but you have the boss and the boss said on a graph that looks like this. So let's start looking at that.
How do you edit a graph.
You can for example.
Let me look at this purple line here I can if I'm if I get really close to it and double click on it.
I can get a dialogue box for that for that curve. So let's go ahead and play with that one.
So you have a marker. If our graph had the dots on it. I would play with the marker.
But we didn't want one. What we have is a line.
So let's let's look at that. Here's a color choice for the line. Let me look at my requirement I have read.
I'm going to say don't pick the color automatically I want you to go red.
And it changes.
And I didn't say how weighty the lines were but that looks kind of fat compared to the one in the required format so let me turn the weight down I think it's just like two points maybe.
I can change the weight. I could also make it dashed if I wanted.
So you have a lot of choices for how your lines look.
You can put arrows on it.
Okay, so if we're really pessimistic and we think that the numbers are going to go up at the start of December and there's going to be a huge peak before the end of the year.
There's a little arrow on it but so there's a lot of options in here.
I want to make sure for my case I usually hate shadows on graphs but if you like shadows there you go there's a shadow for that line.
It's just a tremendous number of stylistic options there so that's one way to do it.
There's also a choice here called order, and it sees that we have five series on here.
So what I really want to do and I really didn't mean to do it right now but now is as good a time as any.
What I want is I want the blue March 26th desk to show up and they're not showing up.
So I'm going to try to find that.
So if you think about it, it's like you look from the bottom up.
The top thing on the graph is this smooth data.
The bottom thing on the stack of graphs is this I'm going to move it down.
Mr. Bearden. Yes, ma'am.
I have to head off to zoom call will this will the rest of this be available like recording on iGrid.
I don't know how I'm going to get it. I don't know if iGrid will let me do that. I'll see if I can.
Okay. All right.
All right, thank you. Alrighty, talk to you later.
All right.
Okay, so I form out of that. Are you guys good to go still.
For a few minutes, Michael has of his work conference call and a little bit.
Okay.
Well, let me just go through some of the so we've got all the data in we're just formatting it to look the way we want really so.
One of the other things if you go to chart layout you can easily see they group some of the stuff here as well.
So let's look at axes. I want to get some lines for the vertical axis.
So I go to access options.
And I go to ticks.
Those are tick marks now I want.
Oh, no, that's this axis here. So I don't want to start out with negative 10 deaths. So I'm going to force that to go to zero.
All right, so now my graph starts at zero.
I could change the maximum.
I could.
Well, I left 60 on there so zero to 60 is probably good for that. So you can tell right away then the number of that maximum number of deaths per day in Mississippi was less than 60.
Okay.
I thought this is where I would find.
Okay, so in this choice here's grid lines so I want to look at vertical grid lines it says no grid lines. I'm going to say major grid lines.
Okay.
So the other thing I'd like to do is rotate these dates. So what I can do, I can double click on the element there.
And there should be some choices there.
Access labels.
How do I do this.
The dates inside Excel dates are always an integer. And so if you mess with this you actually can move the dates. I bet you don't move it by date it's by a number and that getting those numbers right is often tricky so
that that lets you like if you want to know the date and five days you can have a date and say plus five and then you'll get the date and the calculation.
How do I do this I need to rotate. I know it's not this box there's actually a data labels box.
No not data labels.
That's where it was I think.
How do I do that.
There's there's a box somewhere that says, or where you can adjust the angle, you can actually make them go at an angle. If you want.
Text direction. I want it to be.
Say counterclockwise.
Yeah, so that's that was a choice I made was counterclockwise, or you can pick a custom angle as well.
If you don't want to do 90 degrees.
Okay, so now I've got the problem that those go off of the box here. So what I'm going to do is I'm just going to grab, try to grab this access.
Come on.
I accidentally click outside of the box. I should be able to grab that.
There we go that access and make this go up. So now my dates are outside of that box.
Let's see what else visually okay the colors of each of these I can adjust those so let me.
And well so it'll be just like I did this one I can adjust the color and the line went. So let me double click the data series here. Oops, that's the wrong thing.
I want the data series.
Okay that one I got that one. So I'm going to make its line.
Dark blue.
I'm on the wrong one I accidentally picked that.
I want a brilliant blue.
So refreshing my memory on the assignment is to make a graph that looks identical to the one in the assignment.
Yeah, yeah, as much as possible. I mean, like here I didn't even select the same blue and I'm on the same computer. So,
it should be you know proved to me that you can change the color of your graph really is all I'm saying there.
Okay.
So I've got a darker blue and a lighter blue.
Okay.
Let me just play with it here.
Is that the blue.
Yeah that's the blue I picked okay.
And I changed the weight of it down to two points maybe it's 1.5 I don't know.
So I didn't say what those numbers should be because again that's probably artists choice now when I highlight a graph here you see the other beautiful thing you can do is you see the data that's actually in the graph is highlighted.
So if I had accidentally missed this I could drag this down and get the right boxes are the right data.
So that's another beautiful thing is when you do that. I hate it that I'm saying that there's anything beautiful in Excel but there is.
Okay, so
I keep clicking the wrong one.
Another way to format something is to go over here. So I can select the data series. I'm on the August 27 death.
I need to smooth.
I'm going to look at the smooth data and now I'm going to format it. And here's most of the choices for that. I want the line color to be light blue.
There.
And I can, and I also want it to be a lighter way.
I forget when I did it I had I think I went to two point line with and so that's one way to do it so now I want to get this bell shaped one and I wanted that to be black I think yeah.
So let me go I'm going to say I want the series which is the
March 26 or March model data.
And I'm going to format it now and I'm going to say the line needs to be black.
And the weight needs to be less.
Okay.
That's pretty close. The only thing I haven't done is to get this legend so to me that's a lot of wasted space I'd like my legend to be on the graph so I can highlight it.
Go to format now chart layouts and there's a legend.
And there's overlap legend I'm right.
Okay, so I guess I get to drag it to where I want it.
If I double click it I get some formatting options I'm not I filled it with a color.
It's kind of like green.
More like a gray or brown.
I guess it was that color maybe.
And you can also play around with the font in there.
And so forth so.
And now I can move that around that will move it where I want it.
Okay so that's kind of close and I can keep fiddling it but it's pretty boring stuff.
And so then there were a few questions in the exercise at the bottom just trying to get them to read the graph a little bit.
And so what I wanted to do in the exercise six was to try to answer some questions which aren't terribly rigorous but like with the smooth curve, which I can barely see there that was a bad color choice, but with the smooth curve I can see there's a couple of
pumps in the data and the smooth real data.
And so these dates also come from their data set so like that peak looks like it's about may 10th or something so were there any events that correspond to that would be a question maybe.
So, the opening of non essential businesses occurred on April 27.
And maybe there's a peak there due to that. Anyway, that's most of what they were asked to do for the most complicated graph.
The other graphs leading up to that were simpler, you know usually it was one, one data set at a time just to try to get them to step through.
Doing different things. Oh, let's see. Also the number of grid lines is different as well so you can adjust that there's a good place to do that.
So if I double click that grid line.
Now that's the wrong. The problem with double clicking in the chart is that some you can't always get what you want. There I think I got it.
Well that's not the best way to do it.
Or Matt.
