Lecture 8 Young Adulthood, Marriage and Parenthood
Over 90% of American men and women marry at least once during their lifetime, and most
people who marry do so for the first time, typically during young adulthood.
By the same token, 90% of those who marry have children, most of whom are born when
their parents are in their young adulthood.
So both marriage and parenthood are a normative part of the life experiences of young adults.
On the other hand, not everybody wants to get married or perhaps should get married,
and an increasing number of cases now children are born out of wedlock, and therefore neither
marriage nor parenthood are necessarily the part of the normative experiences of everyone.
The image of a happy family, parents with their children is certainly one to which most
of us have no trouble relating, and this is something that the great majority of men and
women aspire to, yet at the same time we are all painfully aware that marriage is a difficult
and often troubled institution, and the bearing and reading of children has both its tremendous
joys as well as very heavy burdens.
We are not entirely clear when the institution of marriage, as we more or less understand
it, came about.
It certainly goes back to prehistoric times if you not worry about the actual ritual,
and it does kind of make sense that if people are going to bring together, come together
and raise families, they have to do so in some kind of an institution which is sanctioned
by society, supported by society.
Therefore, one can encounter some form or another of marriage in virtually any organized
society about which we have information.
On the other hand, of course, types of marriages vary even within our own culture.
Monogamy, one man married one woman for life, still is the ideal for most individuals, but
in practice, serial monogamy, a man or a woman married to a succession of partners, perhaps
one, perhaps more, as a result of divorce or widowhood, is of course very common.
And being single with or without children is now seen as a perfectly viable and desirable
alternative for some people.
And particularly among young adults, the alternative to marriage can also be cohabitation where
a couple live together, either as a prelude to marriage or as a more permanent alternative
to marriage, which is less common.
And finally, we have already referred to gay partnerships which at this time, the law does
not recognize as marriages, but there is continuous pressure for this institution also to be recognized
so that gay partnerships are given parity in terms of legal, social requirements, benefits,
etc.
So that is something still very much sort of in the works, and it's impossible to predict
when and if that will come about.
Marriage fundamentally is a contract, and this is perhaps most concretely exemplified
in the ancient Judaic tradition of the Katuba or the Marital contract.
And in this instance, the primary objective of such a document is to make a legal arrangement
as to who is bringing what into this institution.
Now to us, very individualistic individuals in a society that prizes sort of independence,
the idea that there is a contract and money and properties changing hands during marriage
may seem distasteful, yet at the same time, certainly if one looks at the time and place
where such institutions, such rituals and such agreements were created, they do make
a good deal of sense.
These couples married much younger in biblical times.
They basically, a girl became marriageable as soon as she reached or passed through puberty
and she was be-throated and engaged to be married, and young men married a little bit
later than, let's say, 13, 14, but far, far earlier than is the case now.
Families were concerned about making sure that the couple had the financial where we'd
all to get settled even though they typically would not establish an independent household
but would move in and live with the husband's family.
Furthermore, since it was not expected that the young woman was going to be working for
earning a living, her way of contributing to the finances of the family would come about
through this parental investment.
The idea of contracts has been revived recently and now some couples also have these marital
contracts, sometimes in strictly legalistic terms of this is what I own, this is what
you own and if should the marriage break up, this is going to be the division of property,
but there is also, in some cases, an attempt to formalize the agreement of defining the
nature of the relationship, what are going to be the respective responsibilities and
obligations.
This doesn't seem to make much sense to a lot of people because it's very difficult
to codify emotion, it's very difficult to say contractually you're obligated to love
me, how are you going to do that, how are you going to enforce that.
So that doesn't work for most people even though it is again sort of an interesting idea, but
the point I'm trying to make is that despite all the love, all the romance, all that we
clock the institution of marriage with this emotional investment and that's perfectly
fine, we should also recognize that in some ways two people coming together and getting
married has important similarities to the establishment of a business by two partners
and that is also a key issue to bear in mind.
Furthermore marriage is not simply a private act, again in the western tradition, in many
traditions this is a public event, so a couple stands smiling and happy in front of the priest,
the minister, the rabbi, whatever the religious denomination and the congregation is there
to witness that these two are now coming together, in fact again traditionally you will remember
the officiating minister will say does anybody have any objection to this, it is as if it
is anybody else's business whether they should be getting married or not, but in a sense
it is.
So we are talking about both the establishment of an emotional tie that is the love romantic
aspect which is a purely personal decision, we are talking about the establishment of
a mutual business and we are talking about a socially approved and supported institution
which in a way is both private as well as public.
Now what the conditions are of this are exemplified very well in the Anglican marriage vows, it
is the custom now for some people to write kind of their own marital vows, it is sort
of do-it-yourself type marriage and that is fine if that's what people want to do, but
it's also important to remember that a lot of thought and wisdom has been distilled over
the centuries which goes into the kind of marital contract exemplified by the Anglican
marriage vows.
What does this say, to paraphrase it basically each man, each of the partners, the man and
the woman is asked will thou have this woman or man as thy wedded wife or husband to fulfill
the four following conditions.
Live together after God's ordinance in the holy state of matrimony and therefore in this
tradition now we have God sanctioning this relationship, it is not simply a human agreement,
in this case it is not the establishment of a secular business.
Two, let's simply use the phrase that is used by the man, it's exactly the same what the
woman will tell the man, will thou love her, comfort her, honor and keep her in sickness
and in health.
This is both the commitment to love as well as commitment to care.
So there are certain obligations that you are incurring in doing so, you are also in
some ways buying insurance.
You are not going to say I married you when you were well, now you are sick, I am not
a nurse or a doctor, I don't need you anymore, I will get another wife, husband who is healthy.
By following these vows you can't do that.
So you are buying insurance against the day where you yourself may be sick and promising
to do the same thing for your part.
Third is forsaking all others to keep the only unto her.
This is the monogamous exclusivity phrase that is being built.
Whatever else you have done before, whoever else you have loved, from now on this is going
to be a one to one relationship and this is a commitment.
Once again, people may enter into this with good faith and in a significant number of
cases that is not fulfilled.
Furthermore, there are others of course who do not adhere to this and say as long as husband
and wife ahead of time agree that they are going to allow themselves other relationships
sexual or otherwise, well then that's part of their social contract.
But that's not in this traditional form which says you can't do this.
And the last element is so long as you shall both live.
So this is now a lifetime commitment.
It is not for the short duration, it is for whatever duration your life will allow.
One important change here which has put this entire contractual basis in a new light is
that when these vows were originally created, people really didn't live that long.
So when you said until death shall us both as part, you were talking about 20, 30 years,
maybe 40 years.
You are talking about now more like 60, 70 years.
And therefore should this make a difference?
Should the fact that life is now much longer, should one say well it's impossible to find
a partner that's going to last over five, six decades, we should make an allowance for
maybe change of partners?
In this tradition the answer is no.
You get into this, you do it one person, it's for life and here are the requirements.
Now what this kind of vow does, assuming that people take it seriously, is that it makes
the expectations of what you are getting into clearer.
Now we talked earlier about moral judgment and how do you make these judgments.
To some extent you are entering into this contract and if you are doing it willingly,
you in a way giving up your freedom but you are gaining something else in return.
And what you are gaining is a clear script as to how to play the game at least as clear
as a principle can make you.
The marriage vows don't say who's going to wash the dishes and who's going to take care
of the kids, those things still have to be sorted out.
But the principles that are going to inform these negotiations are pretty much encompassed
in that document.
Now moving on to the issue of human motivation, why do people get married?
What do they get out of it?
What are the costs?
What are the benefits?
Now by putting it in cost-benefit basis, I don't want to appear heartless.
This is not an IRS audit.
We really are talking about a relationship that has an important emotional component
but we can't just go about this simply by listening to our hearts.
We have to also use our heads.
Now sex is pretty much in every marital contract and expectation.
This is one of the reasons why people get married.
And of course sex is critically linked to the begetting of children.
This is the usual way in which we have children.
What benefits do you accrue to yourself to the marriage in the sexual sphere?
In terms of benefits, first is availability.
You have a partner which all things being equal in the best of circumstances is there
ready, you're attracted to her, he or she is attracted to you.
And so there is a comfortable, easy way of engaging in sex.
And you learn each other's needs.
You know how to go about this.
So in the best of all worlds, it works fine.
There is a lot of talk about swinging singles and so on and so forth.
The fact of the matter is that if you count the amount of sex that people have, your standard
married couple that may not look like the most excitingly sexual people still have more
sexual activity than the swinging singles.
And part of that is because there is this ready availability of the partner, you don't
have to go through a song and dance to find somebody else with whom you will engage in
sex in some meaningful way.
You can always buy your way into it, but that's not the point.
The downside of this, the cost side of this is that you incur a certain obligation.
Now no reasonable person will expect his husband or wife to engage in sex each and every time
that this other individual wants.
On the other hand, you must want to have sex sometime under certain circumstances.
And if you consistently refuse to engage in sex, even the Catholic Church, which does
not approve of divorce, will annul the marriage.
An unconsummated marriage is not a marriage.
And so the sense of obligation that you're having to do something sometime we may not
otherwise do is the obligation component and therefore that in a sense is the cost.
Second benefit is that you have exclusive right and access to the body and the reproductive
capacity of the sexual partner.
Your spouse is not supposed to have sex or a child with somebody else.
This is yours.
That's the benefit.
The downside is that this restricts you in having sexual interactions with other partners.
And typically a lot of people sometime or another may be attracted, may be interested
in having sex with another partner.
When we discuss in a subsequent lecture problems of sexual dysfunction, one of the things we
will need to consider is that even in the best of circumstances, marital sex has a way
of gradually going stale.
And habituation, doing the same thing with the same person over and over in some ways
may make it less exciting.
So how to counteract that, how to counteract that numbing effect of habituation is one
of the things that we need to think about.
So exclusivity means restriction.
And all moral codes virtually uphold the benefits of monogamy.
And therefore, if either on religious grounds or on moral grounds, you are very concerned
about the fact that you want to be living your life sort of the right way, the chances
are that moral codes are on your side.
Now as I said, for some people, morality is a matter of a clear understanding and lack
of deception.
So you conceivably say that some marriages can incorporate an element of sexual freedom
and that still is considered to be moral.
Finally, you have the question of health and this is something now has become very, very
critical in the light of AIDS.
If you start with a sexual partner who is not, who is free of sexually transmitted diseases
and you are free of sexually transmitted diseases, for all intents and purposes you
never have to worry about catching a sexually transmitted disease.
It's as simple as that.
A final consideration on the cost side is a curious notion of self-validation.
Some people feel that simply being sexually attracted and desirable to one's spouse, it
doesn't really say that much about whether or not you could cut the mustard out in the
marketplace if you were in competition with others.
So there may be a tendency to say, well, I kind of need to boost my ego as it were to
confirm that in addition to counteracting boredom as it were by having a variety of partners.
Now we move on to the next important area and that has to do with psychological considerations
in marriage, a benefits companionship.
This is something that many happily married people and even not so happily married people
will say is one of the key benefits in a marital relationship.
Human beings are social creatures.
We don't want to be alone and there is a lot of gain psychologically and otherwise by having
a companion.
That's the benefit.
The cost is that by having a companion you lose privacy and therefore you have to make
allowance for the needs and idiosyncrasies of another human being and sometimes these
two things can be quite incompatible.
Love who is against love, everybody loves love and we have just gone through that so
that's clearly a great benefit if husband and wife love each other.
Yet as we discussed, love doesn't come cheap, it's not free, it requires maintenance, you
have to work at it and sometimes you have to give up something in order to maintain
that.
This is going to be a little repetitious now because we have already discussed love because
next consideration of benefit is the sense of belongingness, having somebody to go home
to.
I am using these phrases, these are the exact phrases I heard from these young adults that
I interviewed in that study that I described when we discussed career.
So this notion that I have somebody to go to, I have somebody to love, clearly are important
psychological benefits, the cost again is the sense of ownership.
I am not free, I am now tied to this person, I am bonded to this person and if it's an
ownership, not in a control sense but in a sense of a mutual love bond, that's great
if it becomes a sense that I have a rope around my neck and somebody has the end of the rope
then that's not a very nice feeling.
Finally there is an opportunity for people as they go through life to grow together,
to learn from each other, to support each other, to complement each other, none of us
are complete and to people a relationship that works is more complete than simply being
alone.
So that's a major psychological benefit.
The cost is that people unfortunately don't develop at the same rate and they do not develop
necessarily in the same direction.
So there is a problem of synchrony.
So if people begin to digress significantly in the kind of individual they become then
you have a problem of reconciliation and compromise, etc.
On your hand.
Finally we turn to the social considerations in marriage.
Now in our culture and in most cultures people who are not married are not considered to
be sort of as adult as it were, especially being married and having children indicates
that you really know what life is all about.
Now this may not be fair and there may be obviously people, there are certainly lots
of people who have a very good idea of what life is all about without being married and
without having children and people who are married and who have children who have no
clue about what life is all about.
But rightly or wrongly this is the social expectation of being fully adult.
It would be very difficult for a single man, unmarried man, let alone a single woman to
become for instance president of the United States.
Such an individual would be viewed with great suspicion as if there is something not quite
right about that individual.
There's nothing to do with the person's competence to run the country.
On the coast side there is the need for social conformity.
This means that quite a few people get married because they are expected to get married.
They may not really want to get married, they may not be delighted about the idea of getting
married but they somehow have to fit the mold and this becomes now something that one does
simply because one is expected to do it.
We see couples as the social unit and single people are seen as quote odd.
Single people are less likely to be invited to dinner parties by friends because somehow
they don't quote fit.
Now this is again very variable, we don't want to stereotype, it depends a lot on individuals
and social classes and so on yet there's no question that the married person, the married
couple is this sort of social unit and married people are more comfortable interacting with
other married couples than otherwise.
You marry not just a person but you marry into a family network.
Now in other cultures in different times this was a very important consideration, political
alliances were made through marriage and even now if you happen to marry into a family that
is well established, has all kinds of important connections and networks and particularly in
cultures where people pull strings to help each other out then you really have it made.
On the debit side if you marry into a family which is full of liabilities then you really
end up being burdened and stuck with the problems of other people and inter-family conflict
sometimes can be a very serious burden for a couple.
This is especially the case if people marry across religious denominations, across races,
in other words they cross the barrier of marrying somebody very different from themselves so
inter-family conflict tends to be more severe there although it does not necessarily happen
all the time.
We move down to economic cooperation, this goes back to the idea of marriage as a business
and how this works we will discuss more in the next lecture.
At the same time there is question of burden and dependency and if there isn't a feeling
that this is a cooperative effort that people, each person is not pulling his own own weight
the other individual is going to feel burdened.
Issues of division of labor, changing gender roles is an issue which has become very prominent
now in the lives of young couples and this is going to be one of the major themes of
the next lecture so we will simply move on and say that marriage can also confer social
status as well as become a social liability again depending on whether you are marrying
up or down or how suitable your mate is.
So a whole range of complex considerations enter into the institution of marriage.
Now do we think about all this before we get married?
Probably not, probably not in a rational sort of sit down and a cost benefit analysis manner
but at the back of our minds no wonder all of these things are operating.
So when two people throw their lots together it is a very complex decision some of it done
through conscious motives a lot more going on under the surface.
How do we make a marital choice?
Why do you marry the particular man or woman you did rather than somebody else?
Now how do we make marital choices?
The first consideration is propinquity, being around each other, being more or less in the
same place.
There are very few Bedouins who are married to Eskimos because they don't cross paths
because they live in different parts of the globe.
So you are likely to marry somebody with whom you have your crossing paths.
Closely related to this is the consideration of homogamy, similarity of background.
All things being equal people tend to marry somebody like themselves with respect to race,
ethnicity, religion, social class background, level of education, etc.
Now you can certainly cross boundaries and marry from some other background and none
of us marry our twin but all things considered homogamy would suggest that choice is very
much dictated or assisted by you're ending up being married to somebody who is pretty
much like you, A, because those are the people you are likely to encounter, B, because those
people are going to look attractive to you.
The third consideration, and this gets a little bit touchy, we have to be careful what language
we use, if you use sort of a free market model we are simultaneously looking for somebody
that we can love and we feel that we want to marry that person with whom we fell in
love with but at the same time we want to get the best possible deal out of a relationship
or the fairest deal.
And this kind of getting the best arrangement, the question of equity is one consideration
and exchange is the other.
In other words, you can balance the books by finding somebody who matches you more or
less point to point for all of the factors that are generally seen desirable in a partner,
all the way from physical appearance, social background, personality, earning capacity and
let's be gender blind about this, although in practice we are not.
In practice at least traditionally what makes a woman a desirable marital partner and what
makes a man a desirable partner have not been the same.
But for the moment let's say suppose these are the same, what do you do?
You find somebody matches you or you find someone with whom your assets and liabilities
balance out although they are not the same.
So one partner may be strong in one area and weak in another area, another partner weak
in one area and strong in another area.
Typically people who feel they are reasonably well balanced have a better chance of making
a successful choice because one partner doesn't feel being short changed and the other partner
doesn't feel like is falling short of what the other person is contributing to this partnership
and once again the idea of a fair exchange.
Now there is an interesting theory, the so-called filter theory that says that you don't in
fact pick somebody like a bolt out of the blue which is sort of falling in love experience
model but rather there are all kinds of suitable potential partners out there and you put them
through a filter.
The first filter is that of things that have to do with obvious attractiveness, physical
attractiveness, the way this person is dressed, sexual attractiveness.
You walk into a room and let's say that you are in the marketplace as it were of finding
a partner and you look and there are 50 people, let's say you are a woman and you may say
in your mind yes, no, no, yes, maybe under no circumstances, I hope so.
So there are a variety of reactions.
And this may be unfortunate because you are making your first cut on the basis of superficial
appearance and these may not be the most important characteristics in your choice of a marital
partner yet that's the way most people tend to do.
So if let's say X number of people passed master on this criterion of attractiveness
then you look at their more kind of subtle social characteristics.
These may involve things like religious affiliation, these may involve things, you know, what sort
of circles they move around in, will they fit socially?
You move from the physical to the social.
Then you have the question of consensus, are these person's attitudes and values about
important issues similar to yours and these are all the way from, you know, social attitudes,
what you like, what you discuss, what you dislike, to political values, religious values.
See we are getting sort of from the superficial into the deeper by going through these successive
filters and the sense of complementarity.
What's the difference now?
So far we were making judgments on the basis of kind of generic quality.
When you come to complementarity you are becoming more specific, you are not saying is this
partner good or good enough, you are saying is this what I want?
Will this fit?
It's a very important criterion.
If that is also fulfilled the final criterion is readiness for marriage.
Now people vary a great deal when and why under what circumstances do they feel they are ready
for marriage.
And the range goes all the way from the very well thought out, very systematic decision
that is based having all the pieces of the puzzle in place and making this both rational
and emotional move or at the other extreme making a very impulsive choice and jumping
the gun when most circumstances are not propitious for your getting settled.
Typically most of us make a choice somewhere between these two extremes.
Of course a lot depends on having met the person that you feel you need to settle down
with and that person's willingness to wait for you and a host of considerations that
we can easily figure out for ourselves.
But time and place will come and how one makes this decision, how one makes this choice,
both the choice of the person and the choice of the time are of critical importance on
how things are going to work out later on.
Now let's turn to those who do not get married.
The sequence goes something like this.
90% of Americans get married at least once, 10% don't.
Of those who get married, 50% of marriages end up in divorce, 80% of those divorced remarry
and 40% of the remarried divorced people divorce again.
So through this process we have people who never were married and those who have been
married but are single now.
The 10% who never marry consists of a variety of types of individuals.
Let's give examples rather than a comprehensive list.
Well one obvious reason why somebody would make a choice of not to marry is the individual,
the man or the woman who joins a religious order whereby this is not a rejection of the
institution of marriage in general.
It's not saying marriage is a bad thing but it's saying I am going to invest my entire
life in the service of God and therefore I am going to give up this privilege of being
married and you are making a conscious choice.
Or somebody may say I am a very ambitious person and marriage is going to interfere with
my career and therefore I would rather not marry.
This is more likely to be a woman than a man because typically men's careers are not
as handicapped by marriage as they are women, something may be changing now but we will
come back to.
There is the question of I want to maintain my independence, I don't want to get tied
down or some people may have an ideological objection to the institution of marriage as
such.
Somebody may say I will live with somebody but I will not get married because of various
political arguments.
The second reason why people may not marry is because they may have a sufficiently severe
handicap which may be physical, mental, psychological, economic which makes it difficult for them
either to find a partner or to be able to live effectively with somebody.
Now here the operative word is not handicap but disability.
There are some severely handicapped people who have no problem getting married and make
a wonderful success of their marriages.
So you can simply judge a person by simply the fact that a person is disabled, is handicapped,
you have to assess the level of disability and what does that mean.
Now those who are homosexual oriented are not allowed to marry.
So you have now a technical reason why some people who ordinarily would have been happy
to get married if they were allowed but they are not.
So we have exclusively gay men and women who are not married for this reason because they
are not allowed to be married.
And then fourth, you don't find the right person and you are unwilling to just settle
for anything less than that.
So these are matters of essentially ways of determining that I am not going to be married
either by choice, by force of circumstances and so on.
Now the two other categories of people who are single are the widowed and the divorced.
We are going to talk about divorce in our next lecture.
Let me simply say that widowhood raises two questions, age and gender.
The experience of widowhood is different in some ways for men and women because women
outlive men every decade of life.
As the population grows older there are many more widows than widowers and so this puts
a different slant on the ability of a person who is widowed finding a sexual partner.
The fact that men who remarry tend to marry a woman younger than, in other words, with
more of an age difference than in their first marriage, further encumbers this system.
And if you consider the fact that in the 65 plus year age group there are only 27 unattached
men for 100 unattached women, you see that if one is going to follow this monogamous
model of one man, one four women, lots of women are going to have to go without partners.
So an important reason for singlehood in the older years for women is the lack of simply
lack of warm bodies or availability of men that they find desirable and therefore they
have no choice or they may choose not to remarry because they do not want to sort of lose the
exclusive memory of their previous marriage and so they may decide I was married long
enough that was fine enough that are other pleasures and satisfactions and this time
it's not a question of not finding a partner but preferring not to marry.
There are instances where children object to the marriage of a widowed parent.
In this case there may be sort of psychological considerations as well as problems of inheritance
because if the parent surviving parent has a lot of inheritance to pass on, new marriage
will mean new family, new partner, new children and so on and so forth and things are going
to get, the pie is going to be sliced in so many different ways.
With the divorced as I said four out of five will remarry but 20% will not and here again
there is an easier for men to remarry than for women particularly in the older age groups.
So the same considerations we discussed earlier would also seem to apply and one additional
consideration is that some men or women who are divorced actually sour on the institution
of marriage and they say I don't care who is out there I am simply not going to marry
anymore.
Singlehood used to be seen as sort of a tragedy.
There were the confirmed bachelors and the confirmed spinsters and people sort of felt
sorry for them.
That attitude certainly has changed now and makes perfectly good sense for people to choose
to remain single.
Being alone is not the same as being lonely and since marriage is not exactly a bed of
roses for large segment of those who are married, not to be married is a perfectly rational
way of living your life.
Let's turn to the question of parenthood.
Now one of the great joys in life is in fact becoming a parent yet at the same time it
is not a light matter.
If you run down for the arguments why people become parents the way we did for why people
get married sort of a catalog of reasons which of course do not all exist in a particular
case.
You can begin with an evolutionary perspective and say that we are programmed to behave in
ways to maximize the chances of our leaving offspring.
It is technically speaking you want to be maximally represented in the next gene pool.
This means that there is some kind of a blind urge of which we are unconscious which makes
us behave in ways that will make us reproduce and reproduce as much as possible or rather
to be more correct.
People who have behaved the way I described are the ones whose genes stay on generation
to generation.
Now this is an evolutionary perspective which makes absolutely no sense in the case of a
single individual or even collectively we have more people now that the earth can support
so and most of us can barely manage to survive two or three children let alone as many children
as we can.
So we have to understand that we are not talking about sort of a prescription for each person
to have as many children as possible but if there is this programmed impulse in us to
reproduce then that's one of the reasons we will sort of willy-nilly or maybe giving
other explanations end up reproducing.
Real macroidal status I already mentioned this in connection with marriage, economic
advantages in agrarian societies, more extra hands, easier to make ends meet, insurance
against your old age, your kids will take care of you.
Once again they are taking sort of a broad political cross-cultural view some of these
things don't make sense in contemporary America.
You build power, political alliances by having your kids become important individuals.
There is very few for most of us that would replace the joy of being loved and loving
a growing human being.
There is a sense of shared love with the partner and there is something creative in bringing
children up, cog-wheeling of generations, there is vicarious fulfillment, your children
will be able to do the things you wanted to do and never did and it's a lot of fun and
stimulation to have kids around.
Now this is all on the benefit side and what about the debit side, what is the cost entailed
which will come to arguments against parenthood, one is overpopulation.
We are exhausting the earth of its ability to support us and therefore it would seem
in some ways irresponsible to have children anymore than we should simply replace ourselves
if that.
The state of the world is in a mess so people say do we want children, bring children into
this situation if things, this is a rather pessimistic view if you wish but also something
that can be defended.
Children are probably the most important reason why people lose freedom and independence in
doing what they want to do because the needs of children come ahead of everything else
and they should otherwise you should not become a parent.
So you are taking on a tremendous responsibility and particularly the young child's needs
supersede all other considerations, it's a tremendous cost in terms of freedom and independence.
In some instances and perhaps more often than we would like to think children compete with
the spouse in the marriage as we will see in the next lecture the birth of the first
child typically coincides with a loss in the level of marital happiness, this is because
of the stress of taking children perhaps because of other considerations as well.
Things are disrupted, certainly much more so for women than men, emotionally demanding
tasks of bringing children, one is often burdened with the sense of inadequacy, am I a good parent,
am I a bad parent, expensive, it takes $150,000 now to kind of properly raise a kid to adulthood
and parenthood is a permanent and irreversible state.
You can be married or unmarried but once you are a parent you are never not a parent,
you may hate it, you may disown it but that's not going to make any difference.
So this again brings back the question that there's going to be there, somebody to worry
about them and all of this is now creating new questions, new challenges, new concerns
about what does it mean to be a father, what does it mean to be a mother, what does it
mean to be married, how do these things fit together and is it necessary that one be married
in order to have a fulfilling life. These are issues we are going to address as well
as the fact that the traditional idea of a nuclear family, father, mother with children
as the norm is no longer the majority, no more than one out of four families fit this
model where same parents, same family throughout life but still we think of it as the ideal.
Widowhood used to be the primary reason why we ended up with single parents, that has
been superseded now by divorce and unmarried parenthood taking over and so right now 25%
of kids live in a single parent household and 50% of children will spend some time in
a single parent situation between the ages of 0 and 18. Finally, most single parents
are women and poor which raises yet other sets of staggering considerations personally
and societally and some of these issues we will return to in the next lecture.
