Lecture 10 Middle Adulthood, Midlife, Biological Aspects
With this lecture, we begin the third segment of our journey through adulthood, namely the
phase of midlife.
In this first lecture, we will look at the general concept of what midlife is supposed
to represent, and then we will cover the biological changes that may characterize the lives of
individuals roughly between the ages of 40 to 60, these, as we have emphasized over and
over by sort of arbitrary figures, just to give us an idea of where we are in terms of
the march of chronological time.
In the next lecture, we will turn to the issue of the psychosocial aspects of being
a midlife individual, and in the last lecture, we will focus specifically on the issue of
sexual function and dysfunction.
Now just as when we were discussing love and marriage with young adulthood with the understanding
that these issues are not restricted to that phase of life, but it's simply convenient
to focus on these issues that kind of come to prominence.
Similarly, the issue of sexual dysfunction is not something that just emerges during
midlife, and it's something that belongs to the rest of the adult phase of development.
That will be a convenient time for us to use this opportunity to look at that important
issue.
Midlife, unlike transition to adulthood, which is pretty much of a self-evident phase of
life, or young adulthood, which some reflection also appears to be fairly self-evident, midlife
by contrast is a little more ambiguous as a concept.
People all the way back to Aristotle and other great thinkers in different cultures
had already commented on and written about issues like childhood, adolescence, and of
course self-reflective, observant adults who may not be great philosophers have also
noticed all this, but nobody had heard of midlife until about 20, 30 years ago.
Now Dante's divine comedy starts with the line something like in the middle of our lives
we found ourselves in a dark wood, and this to some ear sound like Dante was referring
to the midlife crisis, but I think that is pretty much stretching the point.
Furthermore, not only the notion of a midlife is a very contemporary idea, this is a quintessentially
American idea.
You could say that this is an American discovery, or maybe an American invention.
And of course now, like a lot of other things in American culture, this idea has seeped
into at least the rest of the western world, but I am pretty confident that if you were
to go and ask an Indian living in the Calcutta station trying to stay alive whether or not
that person is going through midlife, it would make absolutely no sense to that individual.
Now midlife is with us however, and we have to address it and see if we can make sense
out of it, and I don't want to entirely dismiss the idea that there is certainly something
that is worth addressing.
Furthermore, we can draw important parallels between the transition from childhood to adulthood,
the transition to adulthood phase, and midlife, which is also something of a transition this
time from young adulthood to late adulthood.
The parallel also holds because there is a clear biological factor driving the transition
to adulthood, which is puberty, which is reproductive maturity, and in midlife, at least so far as
women are concerned, the opposite happens, which is exiting from reproductive capacity.
And just as reproduction is the last thing to mature in the cycle of development, you
will recall that image we had showing patterns of development, image we described as showing
patterns of development, and last to come is in some ways first to go in that reproductive
capacity is lost in women before other functions gradually yield to the change of ageing.
Now unlike puberty, however, there is a sharp disparity between the experience of the male
and the female, because with respect to changes of puberty, identical events take place in
the boy and the girl, whereas at the midlife end, it is women and not men who lose reproductive
capacity.
But the question is, are there other changes that men go through, which would also qualify
something of a midlife transition?
Well also, we're not talking about midlife in this country, as I mentioned earlier.
For one reason, at the turn of the century, the average life expectancy was less than
50 years.
And now we have latched on to age 50 as sort of the quintessential midlife point.
Well, if that's the end of life, how can you have that as the middle of life?
Furthermore, very few of us, although quite a few more than others than before, live to
be 100, so 50 also is not exactly the middle point.
Now this is getting more problematic, because when we come to the late adulthood phase and
talk about how ageing is being sort of delayed in terms of its effects, and according to
sort of popular books on this subject out there, people presumably are beginning to
think of 60 now as the sort of peak of midlife.
Well, we can't keep pushing this barrier, because if the idea of a midlife is going
to make sense, it should fit chronologically somewhere in the middle.
It may be better to modify the idea of what happens in midlife rather than keep shoving
it towards the later and later years of life.
You can see sort of fairly transparent games we are playing with ourselves.
Because in some ways, although we have to counteract the kind of negative notions that
with ageing, bad things happen and we sort of slowly go to hell, yet at the same time
there is also sort of a bit of a whistling in the dark now, where if we could simply
manipulate the ages and the way we define things, that somehow these changes are not
going to take place.
This is a theme I'm going to return to over and over again.
Important distinction also between midlife and the other phases is that obviously there
are dramatic changes that occur in the transition from childhood to young adulthood.
You're transformed physically.
There are very important changes that take place during young adulthood.
This is where you make the critical choices of your life.
This is typically where you pick your career, you pick your spouse, you settle down, and
even though all of these things are subject to a great deal of change, you may change
jobs, you may change careers, you may change spouses, you may change families, but big
important landmark decisions and events characterize this 20 years span between 20 and 40.
Very much less happens between 40 and 60 if we take that segment.
It's like the airplane now has reached flying altitude and pretty much keeps a steady pace
unless something drastic happens with respect to health.
If you're healthy and nobody dies and there are no disasters in your family, then these
20 years are relatively less dramatic and less eventful.
This is not to say that they're not interesting, they're not nice, they can be wonderful.
Nobody wants crisis after crisis even though that may be a wonderful challenge.
So we are really talking about a period of time which has typically a good deal more
stability.
Now this is going to change as we turn to late adulthood when the plane is going to start
gradually come down to land and the journey is going to end.
The question of time is critical and the perception of time and I will simply mention
this now and I'm going to come back to this in our next lecture because one of the important
shifts that takes place psychologically in the individual is this perception of time.
So put that on the back burner and we will return to it.
If there is one event which without question could qualify as a biological marker in the
middle years, that is the menopause.
The menopause is the period of time during which the female over a period of couple of
years loses whatever has remained of her dwindling ability to bear children.
Therefore I am going to concentrate in this lecture mostly on what is it that happens
to the female in biological terms.
Then we will address the question of are there comparable changes in the male and what these
are and that will bring closure on this question of what is the biological basis of what we
call midlife.
Now let's talk about reproductive capacity for a few minutes, reproductive capacity and
I'm going to speak about the female now unless I make a specific reference to the male.
Reproductive capacity is in place following puberty although it is erratic for a while.
So the fertility rates of early teenage girls are not as consistently high because the system
is still immature.
Now this is not a guarantee for contraception so a 12-year-old girl post-pubescent cannot
say while my periods are still irregular I may or may not be ovulating and therefore
I don't need to worry about contraception that is not the way to go.
But the fact is that it takes some years before the system is sufficiently regularized so
the production becomes more predictable and it reaches its peak in terms of likelihood
of getting pregnant somewhere between the late teens and the early twenties.
Now purely biologically speaking and I emphasize purely biologically speaking it makes more
sense for a woman to become a mother to bear children in her late teens early twenties
than in her late thirties.
However in this day and age the exact opposite is true for lots of individuals.
My great-grandmother got married at the age of 13 and she was a mother shortly after that.
My daughter is 27 years old has a graduate degree and is nowhere ready to settle down
and bring up a family.
Now biologically these two women are genetically related and not that different from each other.
Biology hasn't really changed but they live in two very very different worlds and therefore
we have to be mindful of the dictates of biology without feeling that we are in a lock step
and cannot deviate from it.
At the same time we cannot disregard the important impact of biology to our peril.
By the late thirties the reproductive capacity of the woman has already been declining.
For example a sexually active woman who has intercourse for a year without contraception
in other words is trying to conceive the failure to conceive in the early twenties only 7 percent
whereas the failure to conceive for the age group 35 to 39 percent is 28 close to 30 percent
and of all the babies that are born no more than 1 percent are born to mothers who are
40 years or older.
Now this is partly because women don't want to get pregnant in those years but also many
cannot so while there is much to be said for postponing pregnancy because of career and
other considerations we have to bear in mind that there is this biological clock that sticking
and women are exquisitely sensitive to that fact.
What happens that leads to the experience of menopause?
The change is taking place in the ovaries.
When we look at a section of an ovary there are immature cells that are gradually maturing
and at the time of ovulation the ovum burst through the wall of the ovary and goes on
its way in the fallopian tube where it may or may not get fertilized.
We discussed this already when we talked about the menstrual cycle.
Now for reasons that we don't quite understand in the late thirties this process reaches
a point where this ovarian cycle becomes erratic, the woman's menstrual cycle becomes erratic
and on average somewhere between the ages of 49 and 51 the process of ovulation ceases.
In some 8% of cases this may occur as early as age 40 in which case it is referred to
as premature menopause.
Now the consequences of these are two-fold.
One is no egg, no baby.
This is the end of fertility.
The process of egg production is the same as the process of hormone production.
In other words the follicle which is containing the egg also contains the cells that are producing
estrogen and progesterone.
So because ovulation ceases as part of the same process the production of the estrogen
and progesterone takes a decline as well.
And many of the changes of the bodily changes of the menopause are the direct consequence
of this drop in estrogen level.
So in some ways the woman's body reverts to the body that she had before she turned puberty.
Of course it doesn't become a young girl again but uterine lining, size of uterus, all of
these other things in some ways become modified because it is estrogen primarily that sustains
the size, integrity of these organs and now the system is basically starved for estrogen.
Before we go into a discussion of the specific symptoms of the menopause let's address
the question of what is this as an experience.
Now here culture has a tremendous overlay on biology.
Very fairly recently the menopause was viewed in rather negative terms.
Women were supposed to be crying over the loss of their reproductive capacity.
They were hinging their hands because the children were leading home and they were suffering
from the emptiness syndrome and so on.
So it was just a collection of bad news.
Well it turned out that this was partly because the people from whom this information was
gathered were women who were having problems and therefore consulting doctors.
So obviously if they don't go to see doctors unless they are having problems.
So once the method of studying them shifted from women in clinical situations to women
in the general population, menopause turned out to be nothing like the collection of
bad news that until then had kind of dominated our thinking.
Yes, reproduction is lost but by age 50 the overwhelming majority of women don't want
children.
That's the last thing on their minds.
There may be individual cases as we now read that women who go to great lengths to try
to conceive children postmenopausally but typically most men and most women and most
men at this age are done with the desire to have children.
So far as the emptiness is concerned, much as mothers and fathers love their kids they
are also delighted that finally they take off on their own and fend for themselves.
So we now have a very different perception of what is it that women go through but this
is not to say that the menopause is not still an important issue.
First of all there are various things that involve the changes of the menopause because
now the woman's body in some ways is becoming more like a man's body without the influence
of estrogen and so estrogen protects them from certain kinds of conditions I will list
shortly and without that they become more vulnerable to things like heart attacks which
is what kills so many more men than women in the period earlier when women are protected
prior reaching menopause in this respect.
Second is that midlife women many are now in careers, demanding careers they have to
fly back and forth just like men do and sometimes not always but sometimes some of the symptoms
of the menopause like the hot flashes we all know and I'll talk about can be quite uncomfortable.
So in a situation like this one has to also recognize what is the impact of these symptoms
on the comfort level of a woman who has to maintain this kind of a demanding schedule.
It's very important to bear in mind that the question of hot flashes or hot flashes as
well as some of these other immediate symptoms of the menopause result from the sharp drop
in hormones.
That is to say if the ovary gradually declines in producing hormones then a woman may have
no symptoms at all or very mild symptoms.
It is when there is a sharp precipitous drop that the most severe symptoms occur.
And these symptoms are first of all this hot flash which involves a temporary rise in the
skin temperature, the body temperature and is accompanied by this red flushed face and
sometimes with a sweating reaction.
Two out of three women have roughly this symptom and it may come occasionally once a day or
so or it may come forty-fifty times a day and of course it becomes in the circumstances
quite uncomfortable and may be accompanied with night sweats.
So as this hot flashes sweats is in progress this for some women is a source of considerable
discomfort.
For some no discomfort at all for the majority minor discomfort so everything from not being
bothered to very severely being bothered most people being bothered a little bit.
In eighty-five percent of cases this hot flashes lasts for a year but in a significant
number they may go on for five years because the ovary is not simply closing doors and
going out of business overnight it is slowly pulling out and therefore it's this the body
has to readjust itself to these changes.
Now so far I am assuming that this woman is not receiving any hormones replacement therapy
which will as we will see react to and undo some of these changes.
Symptoms also include are purported to include things like depression, anxiety, headaches,
spells and so on and so forth.
Even though there has been repeated reference to this now more current evidence points out
that these kinds of psychological reactions are not necessarily a part and parcel of
the experience of menopause.
Some women may have that but that doesn't mean that every woman who is going through
the menopause is getting depressed or is getting anxious and some of these symptoms may be in
fact reactions to the discomfort of the physical symptoms I described rather than otherwise.
So menstrual irregularities, hot flashes, these are the symptoms of the menopause itself.
Then in the next category which sort of starts 50 and on subsequently there are other changes
that may be less dramatic but nonetheless you know need to be dealt with.
One of the things that happens is that without the support of estrogen the wall of the vagina
begins to become thinner and the lubricatory response during sexual arousal.
During sexual arousal women typically will wet the vagina, there is a fusion of fluid
from the walls.
That reaction will cease, will get less so the woman ends up with a thin dry vagina and
this often makes sexual intercourse painful as we shall discuss in a subsequent lecture.
Because muscle cells you lose some of their tone, there is stress incontinence which means
that when a woman coughs or laughs or does anything that increases intra-abdominal pressure
she may lose slight amounts of urine or urinary urgency, frequent urination.
These are again more nuisance symptoms than anything serious.
It is only after another decade that you begin to get the more serious consequences of these
changes in the form of osteoporosis whereby the bones become thinner and more brittle
and the hardening of the arteries which lead to higher incidence of heart disease.
Now there are a number of factors that increase a woman's risk of suffering osteoporosis and
consequent fractures.
Some of these involve genetic or medical factors such as if you are white or of Asian ethnicity
then the risk is higher.
Having previous fractures, having female relatives with osteoporosis being thin especially if
you are short, these things increase the likelihood of this condition.
There are some medical conditions like chronic diarrhea or certain types of surgery on the
intestines, kidney disease, the use of drugs like cortisone, thyroid and so on.
Now there is not a great deal that a woman can do to control these but there are other
factors over which she has a good deal of control.
For instance, high alcohol use, smoking, excessive use of coffee like over 5 cups a day, increase
the chances, lack of exercise, a low calcium diet, a lack of vitamin D, or a very high
protein diet, a high salt diet, all of these things increase the chances of osteoporosis
and fractures and all of these to some extent one can say are things that a woman has considerable
control over and perhaps it's worth to re-emphasizing that diet, exercise are critical parts of
this regimen of trying to if not completely protect yourself from it at least greatly
reduce the risk of osteoporosis and fractures which particularly in older women obviously
are a very serious concern.
Now let's finally move to the question of the treatment through hormonal replacement.
Now when we talk about treatment here we are not talking about kind of curing a disease,
this is not a disease, this is a natural condition.
We are talking about replacing estrogen with the hope of counteracting or slowing down
or minimizing some of these problems that arise because the ovaries are no longer for
whatever reason able to maintain the normal levels of estrogens and progestins to which
the woman is accustomed to.
One of the benefits of replacement that is to say the woman now takes estrogen pills
more and more with a combination of progesterone, this is something of course that a woman
needs to discuss, understand and decide with her physician, there are very marked benefits
up to 40% fewer hip fractures and this factor alone reduces the chance of death by some 3%.
More dramatically there is a 50% reduction of the chance of heart attacks and the chance
of death is reduced by 31%.
This is a dramatic gain, this alone would be worthwhile for many women to be on estrogen.
It eliminates or greatly ameliorates heart flashes as well as it doesn't entirely prevent
at least counteract vaginal atrophy and takes care of the vaginal dryness problem.
So the benefits are very significant both with respect to taking care of the immediate
symptoms of the menopause and more importantly by counteracting the longer term health effects
in particular the likelihood of heart attacks which arise from arteriospirosis through this
means.
This is why now millions of women are on estrogen maintenance therapy and by some estimates
roughly one out of three women is using such treatment.
There are other women however who are not on estrogen therapy for a variety of reasons.
One is that they have certain fears that maybe estrogen therapy will cause breast cancer
or that it would lead to gaining weight.
Now let's deal with these two and then we will turn and look at what the actual risks
are involved in such therapy because like all potent medications hormones also have to
be looked at in terms of the risks they represent as well as the benefits they confer.
The question of gaining weight, yes middle age individuals but not just women and not
only at age 50 but as people move through the 40s there is a tendency there are changes
in the rates of metabolism and related processes which gradually lead to loss of muscle mass
and increase of fat cells.
Because this process is going on anyway women who take the pill and notice that they are
gaining weight and they are gaining fat they ascribe it to the estrogen and that in fact
is not the case.
So if that's the concern then the way of keeping one's weight down is through diet and exercise
and not by foregoing the benefits that estrogen pills provide.
Now what about the fear of breast cancer what about other concerns how should a woman make
a decision how well should one be informed.
There is in fact before we get to breast cancer a somewhat higher risk of getting cancer of
the endometrium in fact a seven fold risk except that this is not a very common condition
and it is often fairly easily detected and therefore the chance of dying from cancer
of the endometrium which is increased because you are now taking estrogen replacement therapy
is only one percent and even though if women use estrogen replacement therapy for more
than five years there is according to some reports 15-20 percent increase in the chances
of developing breast cancer which may be less if estrogen is used in conjunction with
progesterone that has maybe a protective effect.
The fact is that all of this doesn't result in anything more than an increase of three
percent of the chance of dying because of this condition.
So remember when we were talking about heart disease we were talking about 50 percent here
we are talking about one percent three percent so that in this regard of health risks where
death is involved clearly we are on the benefit side.
There can be a higher incidence of blood clots hypertension gold stones vaginal bleeding
in some instances a premenstrual tension type symptoms and therefore there is a certain
cost involved and every woman before she embarks on estrogen therapy must have this carefully
evaluated in consultation with a physician and understand exactly what she is getting
into.
Now we have so far been talking about women in general there are certain women classes
of women for whom estrogen replacement therapy carries far greater risk.
So in these instances its use is contraindicated these include women who have a family history
or a history of cancer of the breast or of the endometrium themselves.
If this is the case you don't want to be on estrogen replacement therapy and they have
abnormal unexplained genital bleeding liver disease and perhaps other conditions as well
which have to be carefully evaluated by a physician before the woman undertakes this
course of treatment.
Now what happens with the male is there such a thing as a male menopause is there a counterpart
of what we have been describing for the female.
There is frequent reference in the media in popular literature and some most scholarly
works describing this entity of the male menopause but what does that mean.
Now if we are going to be very precise in our use of language then to talk about a male
menopause makes no sense.
Menopause means cessation of menstruation men do not stop menstruating because they
do not menstruate to begin with.
So that does violence to the language if not to the concept.
If we use the term climacterium which does not have immediate reference to cessation
of menstruation that certainly is a term applicable to either sex and that would refer to sort
of a critical passage an important step and that is of course a legitimate way of looking
at whether or not men go through a phase of life in midlife which is comparable to what
is happening in the life of the woman.
First let's examine this with respect to biology and next we will examine this with respect
to psychosocial functions primarily in the next lectures.
Now what is the hormonal story in the male?
At the beginning at the level of puberty there is really no difference between male and female
in the sense that as we discussed in the lecture on puberty at the outset of the process of
puberty there is a sharp rise in the level of gonadal hormones.
So just as estrogen and progesterone production goes up in the female testosterone or androgen
production goes up in the male and you will recall from our discussion with respect to
the relationship of hormones to sexual behavior that this sharp rise corresponds in the male
to the appearance of certain forms of activities both sexual, relational, etc.
So far so good.
Then on there is of course this very important difference between male and female in that
female gonadal hormone production is cyclical that's the menstrual cycle.
And the male hormonal production by the testes is steady.
The testes keeps producing androgen it gets used up metabolized by the body and it makes
up for it by producing yet more androgen.
That is fundamentally a clearly different pattern but there is no sort of functional
difference as it were for our purposes.
When you come to the end you have on the part of the female this sharp decline eventually
going to the point where the ovary is not essentially functioning anymore as an endocrine
gland.
In the male there is a gradual decline in the production of testosterone but it never
hits the kind of rock button that estrogen and progesterone does in the female.
Now hormones once they have reached their peak that is to say testosterone has reached
its peak in the male at around age 30 it begins to gradually come down and if you look at
the graph it looks fairly alarming because it looks like the hormones are on a skid.
But there is an important difference here.
The level of testosterone in the normal male has a tremendous surplus so that while the
curve is going up and coming down like this the amount of hormone the male needs is somewhere
here.
So if this is all you need what is happening up there doesn't make any difference until
this declining curve cuts the horizon below which you become hypogonadal at which point
you most certainly have signs of deficiency of testosterone.
This is why as we shall see in the lecture when we discuss sexual dysfunction even though
androgen decline and androgen withdrawal has very clear and dramatic impact on a man's
sexual function.
If you give a normal male of whatever age additional testosterone you don't do anything
for him.
It's like putting water onto a glass that is already full.
The body simply gets rid of it because the excess is of no use.
Now with regard to fertility there is a similar pattern in the sense of also men also become
less likely to father children as women as they enter into their forties.
But there is again an important difference that the decline is not sharp as sharp in
the male.
Moreover men continue to be capable of fathering children though they are less fertile all
the way into their eighties.
Whereas with women once they reach the menopause that is the end of the story unless of course
now we have the technology of having postmenopausal women through hormonal preparations making
their uterus receptive so that through artificial means of insemination we read this is this
makes news postmenopausal women getting pregnant but in this sense they are sort of bypassing
the system as it were.
And this is not going to become the standard way in which women are going to have children
but because I raise this simply as kind of a possibility of how even the changes of the
menopause do not necessarily close the doors on a woman's ability to experience pregnancy
even though it is through this quote unnatural means.
Why their forties therefore the decline is there but it's different.
So all of this is building to the conclusion that there is really no good parallel between
what is happening in the female body and in the male body.
What is happening in the male body is similar but it is so much less attenuated that at
the level of function reproductive capacity or the kinds of changes that we describe which
are the consequences of a woman losing her major sources of estrogen and progesterone
the male does not have corresponding changes.
So purely biologically speaking it is not possible to make as persuasive a case for
saying that men also go through a climacterium the way that women do.
But if you move away from this biological reasoning and now begin to look at the experience
of the menopause as something not just a biological event but a psychosocial event then you can
certainly make a possibly persuasive case that men go through certain life changes in
their forties fifties and perhaps a little later where we can speak meaningfully about
a midlife transition.
Now ironically what has happened here is that we are trying to get away from the more traditional
way of linking the menopause to psychological problems to anxiety to depression to the ringing
of the hands to saying what's happening to me and so on and so forth.
So if we do that and look at the menopause more and more as a purely biological event
which is kind of psychologically and socially handled in the best of all circumstances without
many ripples being created we are going to have to reinvent this in the case of the
male if we are going to make a case that indeed men go through something which has been popularized
as the midlife crisis.
So there is this kind of a conceptual asymmetry and the point is what are we trying to accomplish
what does this mean are we really describing something that is part of the natural sequence
of development or are we kind of concocting something in order to put a name on the kinds
of feelings and thoughts that some men may have during this period of time.
This is something that I am going to talk about at greater length in our next lecture.
The issue between the male and the female in this respect raises many interesting questions.
One may say it is not fair that reproduction should cease in the midlife for women and
not for men.
Now that is certainly not fair in the sense of a sort of men and women having to have
the same opportunities but this kind of idea of fairness simply makes no sense in biological
terms in biology what there is there is there is there and there is nothing further to be
said about that.
Fairness comes in in the way that human beings take the biological facts and based on that
or based on other considerations treat each other.
Fairness has to do the way societies treat individuals based on whatever it is that biology
has made them to be who they are.
So in that regard we have to be again careful that we sort of don't confuse things we do
not in the same way kind of become an enemy of biology as it were at the same time we
have to recognize that as sentient human beings who have a culture and who live in a
socialized environment we need to make whatever modifications that we do for the well-being
of all people in the human family be they male or female.
Important consequences that arise during midlife has to have to do with sexual function
and sexual attractiveness.
These are issues that concern both men and women but they concern them in somewhat different
ways and after we have discussed the psychosocial aspects of midlife we are going to return
this question and we will revisit the issue of hormones and we will have an opportunity
to examine in greater detail what exactly is the impact so far as we know of the withdrawal
of estrogen and progesterone.
What is the impact on a woman's sexual drive we are not talking about vaginal lining anymore
but is there an impact on the sexual drive?
Does the menopause make women less eager, less interested, less attracted to the idea
of engaging in sex?
Does sex become less or more pleasurable or is there no difference?
And what is it that happens in the case of the men?
Do they begin to suffer from sexual dysfunction as a result of the gradual decline of androgen
and beyond the impact on sexual function equally important how do we deal with the physical
changes that inevitably are accompanying these physiological changes because in a way midlife
is important perhaps not so much for its own sake but because it is the anti-chamber of
the process of aging in earnest and therefore as we shall see the processes that are going
to stay with us for 20, 30 years which are the sort of more protected story of aging
perhaps can be best dealt with and best understood before they are in progress and in earnest
and so I would say in that sense whatever else one may say about the meaningfulness of
this phase of midlife or what happens to men and women it certainly is a good way of easing
ourselves into a better understanding of the universal process of aging.
