The hormone production levels are dropping. The head is bolding. The sexual vigor is diminishing.
The stress is unending. The children are leaving. The parents are dying. The job horizons are narrowing.
Friends are having their first heart attacks. The past floats by in a fog of hopes not realized.
Opportunities not grasped. Women not bedded. Potentials not fulfilled. And the future is a confrontation with one's own mortality.
I read this quote some 25 years ago in an article on the male midlife crisis.
And over the last two, three decades this has been indeed a subject of great interest about which many books and many articles have been written.
And we also, as we go through the lecture today dealing with the psychosocial aspects of midlife, we will also address this question.
But we are not going to start with the so-called midlife crisis. We are first going to look at the issue of midlife as transition.
And then we will look at the issue of midlife as crisis.
Now, in our previous lecture, when we looked at the biological factors that are involved during the phase of midlife,
we primarily focused on the experience of the woman because of the menopause.
And only secondarily did we address the question of biological factors in the male because they seem to be far less prominent.
Today the weight is going to shift on the male where the psychosocial factors seem to be more prominent
and where women are now seen as less subject to the kinds of turmoil, etc.,
that in the past was inevitably associated with the idea of the menopause and the midlife passage.
But we will of course continue to focus on both sexes. It is simply a matter of balance.
Now, what is happening at various phases of an individual's life as this person goes through the period of roughly 40 to 60?
Always remember these dates are arbitrary and I'm going to say more about this as to when midlife should end,
when we talk about the process of aging in our next segment.
Let's begin with career and let's begin with the male.
The midlife male has typically reached peak career status.
Women who have typically followed what we see as the traditional male pattern have exactly the same story.
At this time the person is already long certified, has become an expert or quite adept at what he does.
The choices are settled. We use the example of an airplane taking off and then going at cruising altitude.
This is cruising altitude. You are at 30,000 feet. Usually there is not much turbulence.
Usually there are not the stresses of taking off or landing.
So things are in pretty much of a steady state course.
Now, if you happen to be in one of those lines of work where you work in an institution which is hierarchically organized,
the chances are you are now at the top or near the top or this is the time when you really ascend to the top.
If you are in one of those professions that are more sort of steady state,
then you are now at the level of competence where you know what you are doing,
assuming that you have kept up on top of things.
An example of the first would be, let's say, a business executive who has risen through the ranks
and now is in part of management, top management or somewhere on the management line,
depending of course on however one's career has evolved.
If you happen to be a physician or an engineer, a physician in private practice,
well, there is no promotion there or you are working as a technical worker.
So you are basically doing the same thing over and over,
but you have reached to a point where you really now are a master, let's say, of your art,
as masterful as you are likely to get in your particular case.
You have gone through the task of apprenticeship and midlife.
Now you become more of a mentor to other people, a very important role,
and also you have by this time pretty much settled the question of financial security.
Now if you happen to be a woman who has not followed the sort of the
what I keep referring as the traditional male line of work,
but rather have because of childbearing responsibilities,
have followed an alternative pattern, whereas you have had to take time off
because of being pregnant, having children, because of family related issues.
Now in midlife, your work pattern is much more stable,
you work more continuously, and other women who have taken time off
to bear and raise children may enter the workforce in their middle years
so that there is more variation still in this respect with regard to how women deal with this issue.
Now this is all of course presupposing that things are going fine
and they are not always going fine, this is sort of the positive view at one end.
At the opposite end, of course, you may still be trying to see what is it that you exactly want to do,
and there are still people who are searching, shifting around,
maintenance may not have worked out well, you may not be in charge,
you may not have gotten mastery, there is no point to belabor the opposite.
The chances are most of us are more on sort of the middle
or towards the more positive side of this story.
What's happening at the family front?
Individuals in the middle years are referred to as the sandwich generation,
this is kind of a nice image, in that on the one hand you have the children
who are now young adults and on the other you have the parents who are in their late adulthood
and you as a middle-aged individual are in the middle.
If things are going well, this is a wonderful time
because the children are on their own, taking care of themselves, they are adults
and you have as a parent redefined your relationship with them.
It is not so much parents and children anymore, but you become more like friends and companions
even though of course that filial link is still very important.
So it's great to see your sons and daughters having done well,
going on with their life, establishing their families
and you begin to kind of relive some of your own memories and accomplishments through their work.
Parents are doing fine and now again your relationship with your parents is changing
in that you are going to become gradually more of their caregivers, their helpers, their friends.
So there is this terrific feeling of three generations who interact with each other and do fine.
Now this is the good news, the bad news is if the kids are not doing very well,
if they continue to be a burden on you, if you still have to fret about them,
then that's a problem.
Simultaneously, if the parents are falling apart and you have to look after them and they are in poor health,
then you really are stuck taking care of two generations of people on both sides
so that it can go either way.
Again, typically it's a combination of the two foremost people.
What's happening at the level of the body in the subsequent lectures we are going to talk about
in more detail about the biological changes of aging
and these biological changes of aging are already in place during midlife.
In fact, they are in place at a time when we don't think about aging at all,
but the effects are still not very compelling.
So if a man or a woman has kept in reasonably good shape,
has paid attention to diet, weight, exercise, a healthful style of living,
the body is fundamentally not that different.
Certainly at 40 it's not any different than it was at 35
and even at 60 it's not that different than it was at 50 or even 45.
Much depends of course on levels of fitness and so on.
In other words, the impact of aging that inevitably sooner or later
is going to make itself felt on what can you do and how well you can do it
is still for most of us not much of a problem.
Of course, there are also people who already have suffered heart attacks
who are beginning to suffer from the kind of chronic conditions that afflict older individuals
so that too has to be put in the calculus.
What is happening at the level of the self in terms of sort of the personality of the individual?
Now, we have here once again the good news is that people typically
have settled down pretty much psychologically.
We don't have at these ages the kinds of turmoil that goes on in the younger years
and in a sense people become psychologically healthier.
There is more openness to the self.
There is less frantic running around and hustling to get going in the business of life
in terms of getting yourself established in your career as well as on the family front.
You are less locked into the sort of the march that for example young adults are
where the demands of career and family are so compelling that there is not really
very much time left to do much more.
I recall for instance interviewing some of these young men and women in the study
that I have referred to earlier of Stanford undergraduates ten years later.
And after I would hear what they had to say about what they do with their career
and their personal lives and I will ask, well, what are you reading?
What kind of music do you listen to?
Where is your intellectual life?
Where is the residue of the liberal education that we so laboriously try to impart to you in college?
Not much is happening and they would say, look, when I come home after having worked all day
and my wife or my husband and I put the kids to bed, the best we can do is just lie down
and look at the headlines.
So the demands that kind of drive the young adult by necessity are no longer the pressures
are no longer present at this time.
So there is more time to turn inwards to look at yourself and this is sometimes referred to
as greater interiority, greater interiority.
One of the factors that also pushes in this direction is that we become more attuned,
more aware of our own mortality.
This is very important.
Even kids know that people are going to die.
We have always known that we are going to die.
But now it becomes more relevant to think of not that people are going to die, I am going to die
because some of my friends are already dead.
And therefore this issue that death is now more of a personal reality very much helps this notion
of turning inward, looking inward and not simply trying to keep up with the rat race.
Interesting development with respect to gender differences.
Once again going back and sort of recapitulating this, we saw that before puberty, gender differences,
physical terms otherwise were not very great, puberty pushed people apart from each other.
This tendency continues so that gender differences in temperament, in the way of looking at the world,
in interacting with each other, continue to be fairly marked in young adulthood.
But with middle age, men and women tend to come together.
Again, talking in fairly sort of traditional almost stereotypical terms,
the greater push, drive, aggressiveness of the male, the kind of the reliance on authority and so on and so forth,
men typically calm down and become less kind of oriented for this sort of behavior.
Women who traditionally may have been more nurturing, more yielding, more taking care of,
in midlife they become more autonomous, more independent, more self assertive.
In other words, to oversimplify this, males become more like females, females become more like males,
which means that they become more like each other.
So husband and wife, again using the sort of the classical marriage example, now are more like each other.
Therefore there is less need for arguing, for conflict, for these differences in the way we think, talk, feel, etc.,
which creates so much of the difficulties between men and women.
Now this means, this is very good news, because this means that marital satisfaction clearly improves,
A, because of what I just described, and second you will recall from the previous lecture
that the children have now been sent out on their way, so that the stresses of bringing up children is no longer weighing on you.
And therefore, this too is another sort of reason why this transition, and we are still talking about midlife as transition,
tends to be a very good time to live in.
A good time in which to sort of calm down and relax and enjoy the fruits of your labor,
both financially in terms of your economics of your life, your career, you are reaping the rewards of what you have seen.
There is a nice book about the sort of the economics of life by Victor Fuchs in which this is the time where you reap,
having sawn in earlier periods, kind of a nice metaphor.
What else is going on?
There is one other factor which is critical, and theorists that deal with this refer to it quite frequently,
and this is the question of time.
Now, you recall we began these lectures with a consideration of time.
What does time mean?
And here we need to look at the fact that the midlife person's sense of time is redefined,
in that until now, in the earlier years, the tendency is to look back, to count the years you have lived,
to say, this is how far I have come.
With midlife, there is a tendency to turn your face to the future.
And now, instead of saying, I have lived for many years, now begin to think about how many more years do I think I have to go.
So this shift, once again, is in part a reflection of one's confrontation with the reality and prospect of death,
not in the abstract, but in a personal sense.
I think there is another interesting time factor here in that the way I see it in midlife, looking ahead,
one gets the sense that there is too little time to do very much, and too much time to do very little.
So you are, in a way, not in the possession of the young adult, where there is a lot of time to do a lot,
and in the later years, where there isn't very much time, and therefore you don't have to do very much.
Here, you are sort of caught in between.
And this is one of the ways in which the midlife person is going to manage his or her life.
What do I do with the remaining time capital?
Too much of it to simply let sit idle, not enough to go to town and try to change the world.
Finally, let's go back again to one of the theorists we considered earlier, Eric Erickson.
And in Erickson's chart, you recall where the phase-specific diagonal defines what is the key issue in that phase of life,
even though Erickson doesn't use the term midlife, let alone midlife crisis.
Roughly, it's clear that this is the period he's talking about.
Here, the key phase-specific task is generativity against stagnation.
To recapitulate, during the transition to adulthood, adolescence, the key issue was identity versus identity confusion.
In young adulthood, the key issue, phase-specific task, was intimacy versus distancing.
This is what allows you to sort of settle down and establish the close-linked relationship.
And now the issue becomes generativity versus stagnation.
Generativity doesn't mean simply having children and reading children.
Generativity refers to this process of being productive, contributing, doing things, taking care of people,
taking care of issues, taking care of business.
And this is the sort of the cup-flowing over-feeling that the successful midlife individual has,
where you are already in sufficiently good shape that you don't have to worry about yourself anymore.
You worry about other people.
You worry about, in your profession, you mentor those who are young, because you need to give them a leg up.
You need to help them to move along, and you pick and choose who you help and who you don't help.
The same thing, your children are grown up, generativity continues, and that is, again, something that has to be moved on.
And when this doesn't work, what is the opposite? The opposite is stagnation.
Stagnation is when you are stuck on yourself.
You still have so many debts to pay that you can't worry about the other people.
The cup doesn't flow over because the cup is not full.
And therefore, this is not the successful outcome.
And therefore, in midlife, you should not be fretting and worrying and hurrying about as if you were a young person.
Those tasks must be behind you.
So this is another way of phrasing what the issues are, which define what goes on at this time of life.
So in this view, midlife is a transition which has, in a typical sort of Ericsonian fashion, both positive sides and negative sides,
positive outcome, negative outcome, but in and of itself, it's not a crisis.
Now, what does crisis mean?
Now, we think of crisis as a time of something dramatic happening, impending doom, kind of generally bad news.
Actually, crisis in the Greek means decision. It's a critical period.
When you are driving on the freeway, you have to pay attention when your exit approaches.
Otherwise, you're going to miss it.
So that period when you are approaching your exit and you have to get off is a critical period where attention is heightened.
You can't fall asleep at the wheel. You can't daydream. You have to know what's going on.
But that doesn't mean that you have to have a crash. It doesn't have to be an accident.
It simply means that you have to be alert enough to take that appropriate action.
So if you look at the issue of crisis in this sense, it is different than the kind of the popular notion of a midlife crisis.
Which necessarily involves turmoil and turbulence and so on.
Now, Levinson was the theorist that focused on this issue of the midlife passage.
And it was partly based on his research that others who wrote the more popular books in fact kind of put this idea on the public agenda.
And lots of individuals clearly grabbed onto this notion.
This is a little bit the other side of the coin from the notion of stages.
And you recall, I said that are there stages or are there not stages that we can use to describe the lifespan?
Ken Ellis said a number of answers. One is to say yes, there are stages.
And it's really we are sort of discovering what's there.
Or we are inventing the idea of a stage to make ourselves feel better.
The same thing is also true for this issue of midlife crisis.
Now, to give the benefit of the doubt before we even discuss it, let us assume that maybe there is something to this idea of a midlife crisis.
But you can see that this also becomes a convenient way in which we feel as it were better by saying there is going to be turbulence ahead.
So if there is turbulence ahead, we say well you see we anticipated this.
And this is very helpful. This is a form of what is called anticipatory coping.
Preparing yourself to deal with a difficult situation ahead of time.
These notions of midlife crisis or problems during the menopause in the old fashioned way are also an excellent way of blaming others for your troubles.
Instead of a man saying I have been a miserable husband to this wife who after 20 years of marriage in midlife is finally fed up and is talking back to me and wants to really change things.
It is tempting to say oh she is causing all this trouble because she is going through the menopause.
Or instead of saying I have been a lousy wife all these years to this man.
Now that the children are out of the way and there is a greater sense of kind of freedom because less obligation, less people kind of dependent on you.
It is easy to say oh he is not being nice to me because he is going through the midlife crisis.
So it becomes kind of a catch all phrase to explain all kinds of troubles that may have nothing to do with the midlife crisis.
With against this cautionary remarks let's see now what is it that Levinson originally had in mind in explaining what is going on.
You recall that in Levinson's scheme the progression is a little bit different than the Ericsson scheme in that in this case you have periods of rapid transition which go on over a span of 4-5 years.
And these are succeeded by longer periods, decades long periods during which development is progressing in a more sort of steady pace.
We referred to earlier to the transition from youth to early adulthood and now let's see what happens in midlife.
And in order to understand what happens in midlife we have to look at what happens during early adulthood in the sort of the decade of the 20s and the 30s.
You as a young individual have entered the adult world and have established sort of an initial life structure.
We are recapitulating young adulthood now because we did not discuss Levinson's theory then this is a nice way of leading to the midlife crisis.
You are entering the world, you are forming a framework, a scaffolding which may not be the sort of the entire structure later on but at least it allows you to sort of see what direction you are going.
Another idea which I think is very interesting Ericsson talks about a dream with a capital D and says that we have this idea in the form of a dream of roughly what we want to become.
Now this dream can be very specific, it may take the form of somebody saying I am going to become a physician, I am going to become a carpenter, I am going to become this or that or it may be more general.
It may take the form of saying I am going to take care of people or I am going to get rich or I am going to do this, I am going to do that.
What the specific pieces in this may not be clear but the overall outline may be clear.
This goes on essentially sort of beginning to make these plans during the 20s and then Levinson claims that around age 30 there is sort of a mini transition as it were where the individual either reaffirms,
revises or delays the final decision as to what course to take.
Now parenthetically you see that this scheme which incidentally was based exclusively on research with a male sample although there is a female sample it has been subsequently studied that work has not yet been fully reported and published.
And therefore almost inevitably it is driven by more career based considerations than by personal based considerations although that is certainly there as well.
Now after 30 you having had decided that this is going to be the course of action and are sort of you know on your way you get to the settling down period which pretty much occupies the decade from 30 to 40 or so.
And here there are two competing impulses. One is to settle down, get your life in order, be stable and make it and in this process you are relying often if you are successful typically on becoming your own man.
Boom, B-O-O-M. You can no longer be a promising young person by this time you have to deliver. You have to prove yourself in your work in the marketplace that you can do the job.
This tendency, this drive to settle down of mastery of becoming your own man and being stable, putting in roots is at the same time challenged by the growing feeling, the nagging feeling that I want to make sure that this is what I want to do.
I want to be free, I want to keep my options open and I don't want to settle down. Now you can have it both ways but these two sort of parallel move together.
So what in fact happens is that again according to Levinson as the person enters the decade of the 40s, the ages 40-45 is very specific about this although not many people agree with it.
You go through this midlife transition which is one gigantic stock taking exercise where you look back and you make an assessment of where you have been and where you are going.
Why do you do this now in the 40s and why does this become not only possible but necessary?
Well think back, go back to what I said earlier about the change in the sense of time, about the issue of the immediacy of mortality. Time is marching on and age 40 appears like a good time where unlike what I said earlier about midlife,
not enough time to do too much, too much time to do too little, here you still have quite a bit of time and therefore the sense is at age 40 that this is my last chance to make whatever major course corrections that I can.
And presumably as a result you go through this self-evaluation which is something that we are doing all the time but this is bigger, this is more like an IRS audit, this is spring cleaning.
And what happens is that even though to use the idea of spring cleaning you look around and things maybe are a little dusty and so on and so forth but as you begin to move the furniture then uneaten sandwiches, all kinds of junk starts coming out
and suddenly you have a huge job on your hands. This is what drives you to distraction.
This is why this midlife passage becomes a turbulent period. Suddenly everything is up for review.
Now an interesting point which again comes back has to do with the fact that the person going through this self-evaluation is not only assessing have I done this well enough?
Has this been good enough? But rather answer the question is this what I wanted? Which is a different issue.
It's an interesting story which I think graphically demonstrates this. It is said for about two friends and it could be male, it could be female, it doesn't matter and it has more to do with sort of marriage but I think makes the point.
One friend tells to the other, I have decided to leave my spouse, the other friend is flabbergasted who says why your spouse is this, this, this and that enumerates all the wonderful qualities of the spouse and the person says look at my shoes, they are made of the finest leather, beautiful color, nice design, stylish
and it has all the nice qualities that you would expect in a fine shoe but only I know where it pinches my foot. If the shoe pinches your foot the quality of the leather and the style etc. etc. don't count for anything.
So the midlife person is trying to find out what is pinching my foot, is it going to fit, is this what I want and as a result one of several things must be done. One is to say well I have looked back and things generally look pretty good, it may not have been exactly what I wanted but this is good enough
and I am going to simply stay on course, keep the family, keep my job, keep things pretty much as they are and continue and more of the same and hope for the best.
Now in this process one is reappraising the past and this is one of the main tasks that we will come to describe or the midlife person says I need to make some course corrections and job front is fine, family front is not or family front is fine but job front is not and therefore there can be one or more
fairly significant changes that take place. Or you say I have been barking at the wrong tree and there is going to be top to bottom revision and this is where the dramatic changes take place, a man leaves wife, children job and goes to Tahiti or does something absolutely out of everybody's mind.
The changes that we are talking about and I am sort of over dramatizing it are not always external, are not always something that everybody can see, they can be also and they often are internal.
So the external change, the internal change and sometimes the external change is the reflection of the internal change and in a way vice versa.
Where do women fit into this? As I said the original work did not involve women but subsequently what has been reported from this tends to show that to the extent that women follow a male pattern of occupational choice and career trajectory they are subject to the same kinds of processes and forces that we are talking about.
So this is not in and of itself a gender issue. But one thing seems to suggest an important difference in that women have more difficulty fashioning the dream, occupationally.
For the obvious reason that they know ahead of time that they are going to be having many more negotiations to do because of the challenges in integrating career and family.
Because the burden falls heavier on women, all of the things we talked about in the previous lecture that had to do with this very issue.
Now to elaborate further the tasks that the midlife individual faces, let's see what Levinson has to say about this.
The first task in this process we just described has to do with re-appraising the past. We already discussed the question of tie.
We already discussed the question of facing your mortality. We need to say some more about an interesting process which is referred to as the illusionment.
This is not this illusionment but the illusionment. This illusionment means disenchantation, being disenchanted with what has happened, being unhappy with what you have done.
The illusionment means that you look back and you redefine what you really wanted. More often typically you scale down your expectations.
You say maybe I was hoping to make a million dollars by age 40 or I was hoping to have found a vaccine against the disease or I was hoping to have written the great American novel or whatever.
And you haven't done it at age 40 and it looks like you're not going to do it in the foreseeable or even distant future.
And you say, hey, I haven't done that but what I have done is good enough.
And what I am aiming, what I am hoping to achieve is good enough.
Away from the big dream details which may have been useful and necessary to energize you, to push you forward but now you have to come to terms with the fact that time is limited, opportunities are limited.
There are lots of things over which I don't have control so I can't simply push through and just arbitrarily say I'm going to get there.
This is a very comforting thought and this kind of the illusionment therefore makes possible to be satisfied with what you have got.
The next is modifying the life structure. This again only by way of summary can take the form of external change or internal change so that's item number two.
Then you move on to the third task and this is one of individuation.
And here the process is quite similar to what I discussed earlier when we were talking about transition.
In fact, you can see that the distinction between midlife and transition and midlife as crisis is not as sharply defined.
And I did not mean to suggest and I want to make this clear that Levinson doesn't talk only about crisis.
He also talks about transition. In fact, that is the theme of his work but it's what has become popularized from that is this crisis idea that is sort of more often in public consciousness.
So Levinson has contributed very much to the idea of a midlife transition, not just the crisis issue.
So here is what is happening in this process is that your relationship with others is changing and you have to redefine and resolve a set of four polarities.
Now these polarities are described as sort of it's a little bit the Erickson idea of polar opposites defining an issue.
And here these four are the young old polarity, creation destruction, masculine, feminine and attachment separateness.
So the four key areas in which you have to relocate yourself.
Let's begin with the first one, that of age, young old.
Now we are clear by now that chronological age while important is not critical in defining who you are.
And in the midlife transition you are essentially telling yourself where do I fit now on this young old spectrum.
I am 40 years old or 42 years old but what does it mean to be 42 years old?
Depending on how you answer this question you may modify the way you have your hair cut, the kinds of clothes you wear, the kind of car you drive and the way you generally behave.
These are trivial examples but essentially there is a sense of I am going to now act like a young or old or somewhere in between but where exactly.
The shift may be subtle or the shift may be dramatic.
In the next dimension you have the dimension of destructiveness and creativeness.
By this time a lot of people have a lot of power.
This is now going back to your career, what you do makes a lot of difference in the lives of people who work for you, who are dependent on you.
So you have to redefine are you going to be basically somebody who is a nurturer, a mentor, a creator or are you going to be basically somebody who asserts power, authority and has a sort of a destructive effect on people.
Maybe not for the sake of nastiness but if you are going to step on other people to get ahead further in life that is one alternative, if not that is another alternative.
Masculine feminine, they simply recapitulate what I said earlier during the transition that there is this idea of the gender differences becoming attenuated, men and women becoming more like each other and that takes care of that issue.
Finally you have the question of attachment, separateness.
What this refers to is a redefinition of what are the important relationships in your life.
Who really matters for you? Are you going to have lots of people with whom you are kind of friends or are you going to have a few people with whom you are close and intimate friends and who are these going to be?
Where does your spouse, your children, your colleagues, your parents, all of these people fit in this new reshuffling of the cards of your emotional loyalties of your bonds.
So you see that as perceived in this way it makes a certain sense that if you are going to deal with all these issues you must necessarily be going through some kind of a crisis at least in the sort of Greek critical sense of the term.
I think that is fundamentally what Levinson is saying and we have to understand it in those terms not in the hyped up kind of more public version of the midlife crisis which should not be put at his doorstep.
Nonetheless there are serious disagreements among other investigators as to whether or not such a thing as a midlife crisis is a general phenomenon.
Other longitudinal studies such as conducted by Costa McCray or the Berkeley Oakland study and we will talk about these in a subsequent lecture when we think of the whole notion of personality change over the lifespan.
There is no evidence in this kind of time based midlife crisis with the majority of people go through some sort of turmoil between the ages of 40 and 45.
You see this is very much a replay of what we said whether or not adolescence is a turbulent period.
And after conventional wisdom and research had told us that adolescence is a turbulent period for you know typically most adolescents and that's the normative stage we have backed away from that now.
Similarly there is now a tendency to back away from this idea that the midlife crisis is a normative phase of development and that the majority of men and presumably women go through this kind of turmoil.
And you should go through this kind of turmoil in order to redefine yourself otherwise you would not have cleared the slate and this is going to then come and hound you later in life because you haven't done this necessary audit.
So lots of people are saying that this is not the case and if there is a crisis and there are certainly people who go through such a crisis that affects only 5% or so of midlife people.
Just as we said earlier only some 25% of adolescents go through this sort of typical adolescent turmoil rebellion phase.
Now in all fairness this is not by any means a settled issue and we have to bear in mind that what may be happening is that just like adolescents who went through turmoil were the very adolescents who also had more troubled turbulent childhoods.
Those who go through midlife crisis may be crisis prone people who also had a crisis laden young adulthood.
So this may be a function of the people rather than the phase of life.
A second possibility that could be born in mind is that there may not be a crisis between ages of 40 and 45 but maybe everybody goes through some kind of a crisis between the ages of 40 and 60.
So it doesn't appear on the screen on the horizon because people collectively are going through this crisis at a particular age but it's happening at different times for different individuals.
And in summary here is another instance where an interesting idea becomes the trigger for thinking about what is happening and I think perhaps the single most important contribution that theories make
is to make us think.
And theories in science, in social science are always open for revision in the face of new information so that it's only proper that we leave this lecture on midlife on the psychosocial aspects of midlife just as we did the lecture on the biology of midlife
as fundamentally a set of open questions that still need to be answered and clarified and the chances are some will be clarified, others won't and some answers will create yet new questions.
