Welcome back to the first of five lectures on the subject of cancer.
So far most of the diseases we've covered have really been from outside invaders whether this
invasion was shock caused by trauma or organisms that live outside our body and somehow get inside
the body and most of them were attributable to environmental factors. Now we're going to turn
our attention to something we like to call the enemy within which is cancer and oddly
enough this is also a self-inflicted wound which can be attributable in about 80% of cases
to external environmental causes and we'll see how this changes the cells in our body
and turns them into our own enemy. Again let me say something that I said in the first lecture
because it's very important. Life on earth evolved because of the susceptibility to mutation
that's inherent in DNA. It's a fragile molecule this is the way we pass on genetic information
and this is very easily damaged. If it were not easily damaged there never would have been evolution.
We'd still be back in the primordial soup but because it's damageable we have been able to evolve
and also it's become a two-edged sword because our cells can evolve in a bad way
meaning cancer. It's that instability which is both the blessing and the curse of our DNA.
I want to talk to you a little bit about the dark side of stem cells. Stem cells are very much
in our news all the time now and both from a scientific point of view and a political
ethical point of view and so far I've invoked everything but mythology to explain the basic
principles of some of the things we've talked about so today I'm going to go to mythology.
Prometheus the Titan stole fire from the gods and he gave it to humanity for its use
and he was punished by Jupiter for his audacity and Jupiter had him chained to a rock on the side
of a mountain where every day a vulture would come down and eat out his liver which sounds like that
would ruin his whole day and then the liver would regenerate and the next day the torture would begin
again. Now I don't know whether the ancients knew that the liver was one of the only human
organs that can regenerate itself because had Jupiter sentenced Prometheus to have his heart
eaten out which is much more dramatic Prometheus would have died because we don't regenerate our
own hearts and now we're on the threshold of stealing another power from the gods the power
to regenerate human organs and perpetuate life to a much greater length of time. There are some
people who probably fear retribution from the gods again for this but I know that we are going to
do this somewhere on earth scientists no matter what the political climate is are going to learn
how to use stem cells to regenerate organs. We're able to heal many injuries and a lot of those
we're never aware of because we're able to mobilize stem cells. These are the cells that come back
into tissues that have been injured or actually been damaged beyond repair and replace those
throughout our life. In the premise of stem cell research of all kinds lies in really one thing
and that is called pluripotentiality. Let me go through a little bit of what this means.
If you look the first slide when we have the union of the sperm and the egg to produce one cell
with a full complement of DNA this divides into a very early form called the morula which contains
identical cells all of which are totipotent. This means that that any single cell in that little
ball can then go on and divide and become virtually any cell in the human body including embryonic
tissue and placentas. Now the big change comes when it divides and differentiates. If you look
here this means that these cells become different they become more specialized but they still retain
something right here in these cells called pluripotency. This means that it's the stem cell
that has the potential to differentiate into any of the three germ layers of the body.
Remember this slide we had epithelium which we call ectoderm, endothelium we call endoderm and
then mesothelium which is the middle layer of cells and you remember the epithelium are things
like skin on the outside and the lining of the intestine on the inside and the mesoderm is muscle
and bone or kidney. Now the pluripotent cell could especially at the embryologic level back here
become any one of any organ cell tissue or system that it needs to become.
It can't go back and produce certain specialized ones like the placenta but that's really not
important so what we're interested in is what happens from here on. These are also cells that
are able to start differentiating meaning that they can start dividing and turning themselves
into cells that are a little bit different than their predecessor and can start to specialize
and with each division that they go down they lose a little bit of their power to become anything
so they go from pluripotentiality to what we call multipotent. They're starting to limit their
choices as they move down the branches of the tree and the multipotent hematopoietic cell for
example the one that forms the blood elements really can form a great many varied elements in the
blood when you think of all the different cells we looked at they're quite different in structure
and function yet that progenitor cell the precursor could become almost anything. There's this ability
to go through self-renewal. The cell cycles can go through many many divisions maintaining the
undifferentiated state. If you look at this slide this is very schematic but if you have this stem
cell usually an embryonic stem cell it undergoes mitosis it it divides and creates equal chromosomes
on each side pinches off and produces two daughter cells. What it does is just so wonderful and clever
that I can hardly stand it. It keeps one of them exactly like the stem cell so this one
maintains the pool of stem cells from which to get new cells all throughout our life
and the other cell goes on to differentiate going down different pathways to become anything
except as I said a placenta or other of the early embryonic tissues and finally into what we call
terminal differentiation. This doesn't mean terminal in the sense of deadly it means it can't go back
it can never divide again and become less differentiated. This is the critical point
when we talk about cancer and how it arises. We tend to use a number of terms that are not
that well defined. The difference between totipotentiality and pluripotentiality is well
defined because it has to do with the ability to make a placenta. Once we go beyond that we
talk about cells becoming multipotent and down the line they become committed and then they become
determined and they just are getting more and more specialized so the cell might join it a certain
point the nervous system group and then it becomes more determined and it becomes maybe one of the
neuronal cells or one of the supporting cells and then it may become a brain cell or a spinal cord
cell which are not interchangeable so it finally gets fully differentiated. This happens to all
the cells when they reach terminal differentiated differentiation and once they're there fully
differentiated cell whether it be skin, muscle, intestinal lining or breast duct cells which
I'll talk a lot about because they're a good example. At that point they have a very finite life
expectancy. They can probably do 30 to 50 more divisions depending on the kind of cell and then
they become senescent and they die. They can't do any more of that and part of the reason is what I
explained earlier on I think in the first lecture about the loss of telomeres the end of their chromosome
becomes unraveled as they divide and eventually this area shreds and the chromosome loses its
integrity. What we're going to see is that cancer cells have a way of rebuilding this
so they don't lose their integrity. We'll keep that in mind as we go along but you need to know
that when the cell is fully functioning it has totally kept all its properties and its ability
for a pancreatic cell to make insulin, a breast cell to make secretions or milk, it loses its
ability to reproduce and there's no reversing that pathway. There's nothing we can do or anybody
else to take that cell and reverse the pathway as far as we know so far. So they keep this daughter
cell in the mix to keep replenishing our stores and that's going to be very important as we move
along here. The different tissues have different rates of replication. We've already seen that
in passing as we move along and the thing about this whole system of differentiation
is it's a double-edged sword. It really is a problem because it limits our lives. None of us
really like that idea. It limits our ability to stay young forever. However, if all cells were
immortal and cancer cells are immortal and we'll see why that happens, then all our cells would
have a much greater potential to become cancer cells. So there's a balance as there always is in
nature. And nature has found this way to control the loss of replication ability in the fully
differentiated cell in order to, you really could say, save us from ourselves. I'm going to use some
definitions, some words in this course that need defining in the beginning. I usually don't do this
but I think it'd be good in this lecture because we're going to be using these terms a lot. The
first two are benign and malignant. Benign comes from the word bene or good or bringer of good
and malignant comes from mal or malign meaning bad or evil, bringer of death, the opposite of benign.
When we talk about cancer, we're talking about malignant but anything else is benign and I'll
explain when we get there how we make that definition. The other word used very loosely as
tumor. You've already heard about it in rhubor, dolar, calor, and tumor and how the the inflammation
tumor is any mass. It is anything that occupies space and when we're talking about tumors in
in this context, we're really not talking about anything but abnormal growths that could be a
cancer, could be malignant, and they could be benign. We tend to use tumor when we're talking
about cancer but it's really a loose definition and we really shouldn't. Tumors are not all
cancerous. Again, we're going to get to the definitions of how we know. Neoplasia is another
similar word that's a little confusing. Neoplasm is a singular growth. Neoplasia is the process
of making a neoplasm. It's literally any new growth. Neo means new and pleasure means growth
and it's of any kind. It does not tell us whether it's benign or malignant. You really need to say
benign neoplasm or malignant neoplasm but again in common medical talk you will hear doctors almost
always meaning that they're meaning a malignant neoplasm when they use the term unless they
specifically say not. And finally the word anaplastic. Anaplastic means no characteristics,
literally without form. And what we mean by this is if we go back and just in a schematic way,
look at this stem cell, we're really looking at something in which we cannot tell even in the
first few divisions what pathway the cell is going to take. So it is without defining form,
we have to go down this tree and see whether it looks like a gland or a muscle or a nerve cell.
Anaplasia means without that defining form and it signifies a very early failure to differentiate
and usually it goes along with a bad type of cancer. We'll set those aside, don't worry about them
because now we're going to come back and use them a lot. I think by the end of this you'll know
exactly where we are and what we're talking about. The first characteristic of cancer
in my definition, now if you go into a textbook you're going to see a slightly different definition
but I really think this definition works. I've been using it for a long time with a lot of
different classes and a lot of different levels of students from medical school to college and it
really works in your understanding of how and what makes a cancer cell. The first definition
is the cell's failure to differentiate. We're talking about the stem cells now. When the cell,
the stem cell moves in to try to replace the normal cell that's worn out and there are stem cell
niches in the body. For example in the skin and hair follicles we know that there are stem cells
living down in this niche near the hair follicle and they can move in to replace and differentiate.
Remember they start here as stem cells but they are pretty much determined at this point to be
epithelial cells and as they move in to replace the epidermis they will become terminally differentiated
in our colon or the intestine. We have stem cells down here which may replace any one of the kinds
of cells in the mucosa and for example in the eye next to the cornea we have stem cells that can
move in and cover the eye in that transparent layer that covers the cornea and covers the lens
rather so that you can see. These cells are waiting there's a storehouse of them that's
supposed to last you your lifetime and as they come into play they differentiate normally.
We used to think when I was in medical school that the fully matured cell for example a breast cell
that secreted fluid or milk would lose its differentiation from something we didn't know
what and revert and become less differentiated, poorly differentiated or anaplastic in becoming
a cancer cell. That was called the histogenic assumption meaning coming from the tissues
histogenic means something born in the tissues and it's totally false. It is still in textbooks.
You still read a text where a pathologist will talk about loss of differentiation that doesn't
happen. It's failure to differentiate and it's a critically important part of this equation. You
really have to know that this is failure to differentiate. If you take a normal breast,
this is a section through the breast, it's made of fat and connective tissue covered in skin
and it has lobules. These are cells that make secretions and they also make milk during pregnancy
and these fluids flow out through the ducts of the breast ending up in about four to six on the
nipple and these ducts are lined with an epithelium that can make secretions of one kind or another
during the non-pregnant state. If we cut one of those ducts across what we will see is what looks
like, now this is an apocrine cyst but the breast is what we call an apocrine gland meaning it loses
some of its cells during its function and this one shows it very nicely although it's not breast
tissue I'm showing you just yet. It has a nice single layer of cells and on close up of that one
you see how they're orderly, they have the same size nuclei, there's a basement membrane containing
them and these are normal breast duct cells that have evolved from those stem cells, they are determined
breast cells that finally differentiate to replace them. When something happens partway
along this pathway that stops the cell from becoming mature that's the path to cancer.
If we look at some real breast cells now we can see that this is a section through a normal duct
now you're not seeing a single layer here because of a tangential cut but the cells all pretty much
look the same it has an intact basement membrane surrounding it and here's another
area of cells in which they've started to replicate in a very serious manner, the edge looks pretty
good these cells are pretty well lined up but look how it's filled the duct with cells this is
abnormal replication not cancer yet but abnormal replication I want to show you some examples
of the differentiation here's a cancer duct where things are starting to look bad they have not
replicated in a way yet to look differentiated and look what's happened we have cells of all
different sizes and shapes some have dark nuclei some have small nuclei there are holes in the middle
where there are no cells and we call this pleomorphism a variety of shapes we then move along into the
more serious nature here we have a cancer of the breast it does form some nice ducts but we have
cancer cells that are out in the tissue it shouldn't be happening and it's well differentiated because
it's trying to make normal looking breast ducts it's just not completely succeeding we look at a
poorly differentiated cancer and this one we really can hardly tell it's breast at all this is
poorly differentiated cancer this is failure of that stem cell to come even partway up the chain
and starts replicating in a crazy manner with no differentiation as to how the shape should form
and then you can get into true anaplasia here this is a skeletal muscle one but it's totally
bizarre if I handed this to a pathologist and said what tissue is this he couldn't even tell me
where it came from unless I told him where the biopsy came from normally I could take tissue from
any place in the body say here and he'll say that's breast brain colon they'll know by the
architecture by the structure by its face but as you come back on the on the levels of differentiation
it gets harder and harder to tell any pathologist worth its salt could tell you this was breast but
it was abnormal they'd start having a problem here and of course you get down into here and then
in other ones like this this is an invasive ductal cell there's just no pattern you can't tell
so criterion number one failure to differentiate and you can see where the stem cells are the
players here these are the ones that are important the next one is called potential to invade and
the potential to invade is important in the next three parts of the definition the potential part
means to me that these are cancers before they've actually invaded into the tissue around them
they have all the mutations that are necessary and we'll go into those in great detail but for now
they have what's necessary for them to invade but they haven't used it yet all cancers start
off in situ in place meaning they haven't broken through the basement membrane they haven't gotten
out into the tissues yet coming back here neither of these pictures show you a breast duct where
there's any cells outside of this basement membrane this lining so both of these are in situ now this
is a normal duct but this one could be what we call ductal carcinoma in situ it could still be
viewed as a cancer we'd have to look more closely to see how for example how pleomorphic it is this
is probably a good example because it's pretty pleomorphic I would have to say this is probably a
cancer cell but it's in situ I'd have to pull back and look at all the surrounding areas to see
whether I see any cancer cells outside so that potential to invade is very important if it
doesn't have the potential to invade it's not cancer and they are still considered malignant
because we know they can we know from experience that somebody who has this can have as their next
step cancer the next one is the potential to metastasize metastasis means growth at another
place the plural is metastasis singular metastasis the potential to metastasize is not the same as
potential to invade and it comes after in time sequence uh invasion you cannot metastasize you
cannot go to another place in the body unless you've already invaded the surrounding tissue
and moved out of your confining anatomy and that defines benign tumors they are unable to get away
from their normal anatomy they cannot invade and they cannot metastasize it makes sense if you think
about it the only way to move to another part of the body is to take a ride in the lymphatics
take a ride in the blood vessels or to creep your way there by direct extension which cancer
cells can do and we'll show you how but until you've invaded out of your surrounding confines
as i showed you there you can't do it so metastasis always follows invasion but it doesn't have to
occur until very late in the disease it can occur very early it's part of the biologic nature the
potential has to be there again the genes that cause this disease are there in every cancer cell
some cancers may take years to metastasize for example thyroid cancers in the neck
can be there 20 years grow slowly invade slowly and they never metastasize there are breast
cancers that are a few millimeters large and they may metastasize very early there's another
thyroid cancer a different kind that metastasizes early grows and strangles the patient around
the windpipe within a few months so there's a huge range of this ability to either metastasize
or not they go hand in hand most textbooks talk about invasion and metastasis as if
they're one event they're not and there are different genes and different mutations that
make them happen i think it's very important to separate them here's an example of invasion in
breast this is a mammogram showing breast cancer cancer comes from the word for crab
and when you look at a cancer on an x-ray and doctors saw this very early on here's the cancer
this is normal breast tissue there's a lot of fat there's some yellow streaking and white streaking
that's kind of shiny that's breast tissue and here is the cancer and you can see it's extending out
into the surrounding tissue and you can see on x-ray how it is pushing its way into the
surrounding tissue like the claws of a crab and that's how it got its name
when we talk about metastasis here are what we call blood-borne metastasis this is a section
of a spine this is the normal bone marrow of the spinal column and these are the inter vertebral
discs but look at all the cancer growing in the bone destroying the bone here's a slide of a section
of brain with cancer growing in the brain and this one is the liver pockmarked with cancer
all throughout here the lungs almost completely replaced with metastatic cancer cancer from
somewhere else and this is the adrenal gland these are not the size by the way because these
are tiny but the adrenal gland completely replaced with cancer not something that's all that uncommon
and then finally we go to the potential for lethality but nine tumors only kill by accident
they can't metastasize most cancers start off in a place where they really can't kill you
like breast cancer it's not a vital organ the breast is not necessary to life so that the
cancer can't kill you there it has to metastasize to brain to lung to the bone marrow to the liver
before it can do its damage the lethality becomes unleashed in the metastatic potential
but nine tumors can kill you but that's by accident that's like you know a few ounces of lead really
isn't a threat to you unless it comes out of the barrel of a gun at a thousand feet per second
then it becomes a threat by accident in a way benign tumors can grow inside the cranium inside
your skull they can't metastasize they can't invade but they can grow and cause pressure
it's just the bad location that makes them kill you there's a mixoma which grows in the heart
totally benign can't spread but it's flopping around in the heart and as it gets big it could
plug a vessel and if it plugged the aorta or the coronary vessels you would die totally a mistake
it just is in the wrong place at the wrong time cancers are lethal by design it is their nature
to go to places that will kill you a few of the other items that we want to talk about they are
immortal because they can replace themselves and replace their telomeres continuously and stay
young there are cells from a woman who was called Helen Lane she really isn't they call herself
Hila cells Helen Lane she was really Henrietta Lacks they took her cells without her permission
from her cervical cancer and back in I think it was the 50s early 50s and her cells are alive today
in tissue culture they've always if you give them the space the nutrition they will stay alive
forever they are autonomous they don't listen to the signals from other cells they listen to their
own signals and they respond to those normal cells don't do this they are unresponsive to
breaking signals so cancer is a genetic disease is a defect in the genes that gives them mutations
or changes that in natural selection go on to make them more powerful and more aggressive
and give them these characteristics which end in lethality it's a micro evolutionary process
with survival of the fittest cell and really survival of the fittest gene in its most basic
form and we'll go on next time to see how these characteristics actually come to life
through the molecular mechanisms in the cell
