Welcome back to the final lecture of this series.
Finally we're going to get to now after all the trauma and invasion and the storm and
rung.
We're going to get to how we heal.
The general concept that we're going to look at is that the inflammatory response, which
we looked at very carefully, constantly needs to replace injured or dead cells and tissues.
And this includes infection and trauma, surgical intervention, virtually every form of injury
or invasion.
And then the healing process, which we need to follow, won't happen and can't happen unless
we get a completion of that acute phase unless the inflammatory response and whatever immune
response there was has finished, done their job and paved the way for healing to begin.
We have a couple more definitions that we need to look at and that is the definitions of regeneration
versus healing and their important distinction.
The more highly evolved the species, the less we have a capability to regenerate things
that have been lost.
So it's the ability of cells and tissues and even organs, in some cases, to grow and
then replace in their entirety the cells, tissues and organs.
Replace them.
For example, we've talked about the limb of an amphibian or the tail of a lizard and
the arm of a starfish.
These can all be lost completely and a fully functioning replacement will take place as
time goes on until the animal looks like new.
In mammals, this is severely curtailed and it doesn't happen very often.
We can regenerate the liver.
We can regenerate the kidney.
And what this is is a really refined process of compensatory growth rather than true regeneration
of the organ, but it works.
There is a speed of liver regeneration after injury that's quite astounding.
If you have to resect a liver, after, for example, a car accident where it's really
mashed, you'll take out all the damaged liver, stop the bleeding, sew things together and
you may have only 20% of the liver left.
When that liver begins to regenerate, it will grow so fast that it will exceed the growth
rate of any malignancy known to man.
And it will refill the space it previously occupied.
It will definitely look abnormal, but it will be roughly the size and shape of the liver
it was before.
And if you look here, this is actually the biggest gland in the body.
This is what the liver looks like under the diaphragm and at the top of the abdomen.
If you left, were left with only this much liver, you would fill this whole place in
probably several months.
Unlike malignancies, this organ knows when to stop, will not metastasize and will not
spread anywhere else, it will not invade.
The hematopoietic system, the epithelium of the skin, the GI tract, all the ones we've
talked about, can maintain a state of constant renewal as long as they have enough stem cells.
And if you remember, they have these niches very near the organ so that these stem cells
went up into the skin, these stem cells went up into the colon, and these stem cells went
up to cover the eye and replace lost tissue.
And eventually, as I mentioned on day one, our whole body is replaced.
You are no longer the audience you were when you arrived and I'm no longer the teacher
that was here when we started lecture one.
Healing is a different response.
Healing is a tissue response to any injury of any kind, including surgical again, bacterial,
traumatic wounds, or the cell death in any organs or inflammatory changes that cause
death.
In most human tissues, the vast majority heal by scar formation and then restructuring
without any regeneration.
It's characterized by two distinct phases.
First the regeneration of whatever cells are going to be in the process and then scar formation.
The scar formation is the hallmark of human healing.
And the different tissues have different mechanisms and capacities as well.
Skin, for example, heals mostly by laying down that molecule you've heard me mention
many times called collagen.
And collagen is so strong that if you took an equivalent strand of collagen and one
of steel of the same size, it would be no contest.
The collagen is much stronger.
The myocardium, the heart muscle cannot regenerate, as you know, and it has mostly collagen scarring
too.
Now this has opened up a whole area of very active research.
We're not anywhere near being able to take a determined myocardial stem cell and make
a new heart, yet they have great hopes that someday we will.
However, what the research is doing now is looking at the possibility of taking some
partially differentiated stem cells that are determined down that line toward myocardium
and injecting them in the area of damage in experimental models and seeing if that stem
cell can be encouraged to grow and replace myocardium.
Different kind of healing from scarring.
Liver inflammation elicits one response, which is fibrosis.
If a patient has hepatitis or chronic cirrhosis, inflammation from drinking, they heal by scarring.
A very bad thing for the liver because it obstructs the blood flow back from the portal
system.
It's very different kind of injury from when we resect the liver and you get actual regeneration.
And then the other one that you probably have heard about is called adhesions, and this
occurs often in the chest and mostly in the abdomen.
For surgery, if you open the abdominal cavity at all and handle anything, there'll be an
insult and a very minor injury to the surface of the intestines, and that often heals by
scarring we call adhesions because they stick together.
They form these scars, which may present no problem in the vast majority of the patients,
but in some, those adhesions can get into a position where they form a barrier and don't
allow things to slide and move in the normal way.
They may cause a twist or a kink and end with an intestinal obstruction.
So this can be a big problem and we have not found a way to prevent adhesions.
We've tried all kinds of chemicals, solutions, and protectants, but we're not able to prevent
them any better than we were 100 years ago.
Now if we look at this next slide of the life cycle, this is one you've seen before, there
are several categories of cells.
We have what we call the labile tissues, which are continuously dividing throughout life,
so they will cycle through, they'll spend a little time in some of these gap phases,
and then quickly come back in to make more cells.
These are the endothelial tissues, the epithelial tissues we've talked about over and over again,
the respiratory tract, the bone marrow, all new growth being derived in those tissues from
the stem cells in the niches within that organ.
The stable tissues, the ones that are quiescent and spend a lot of time resting out of the
cycle, these include ones that can be up-regulated when necessary, and these tend to stay in
G0 until they're needed, then they go back into G1 and start through their growth cycles
again.
And these include liver, kidney, pancreas, smooth muscle, and then as you saw in the
last lecture, vascular endothelial cells as well as the blood-forming elements.
Notice that they're mostly mesothelial cells that fall into this category.
Fibroblasts occur in areas of scar healing, they tend to be very quiet until they're needed.
Now then we have, again, the group of permanently non-dividing cells such as neurons as opposed
to the glial cells we talked about, cardiac muscle, and even skeletal muscle.
You know that the skeletal muscle can hypertrophy, your muscles can get really strong pumping
iron, but you'll still have the same number of the original kinds of cells you had.
We do now know there's a limited ability for neurons to move up through the stem cell change,
but very, very limited.
And remember that all the replacement cells have to come from some form of stem cells
that have maintained their housekeeping in the area of that organ, they're not going
to come from far away, and they're probably well-determined cells.
Let me talk to you now about wound healing, and what I would like to do is use the surgical
wound or the traumatic wound as the prototype, but it applies to really every kind of wound
healing.
We have several kinds, and one we want to talk about is healing by primary intention.
This means we take a relatively fresh wound and we close it together.
And I probably should take a little of side time to tell you that there's something that
really shocks all my first year medical students.
We give them a workshop at the end of their first year just before they go off into the
rural communities to work with physicians, and we try to get them really competent at
suturing wounds.
We do this not on each other, but on animal skins, and we give them a seminar on how to
take care of wounds, and one of the things that always startles them is the fact that
there's no incision, no wound in the whole world that has to be closed.
We always think of the necessity to close wounds, other than closing the chest so you
can make a vacuum for the lungs, or closing the abdomen so the guts aren't spilling out,
which will cause rapid death.
Other than that thin layer that has to maintain the integrity of a body cavity, you don't
have to close the rest of the wound.
You can leave any wound open and allow it to heal in, or close it at a later date.
Students always like to say in our part of the world where there's a lot of outdoor
life, what do you take in the wilderness, and they expect me to tell them which size
needle holders, which size sutures, what kind of gauze, antibiotics, novocane, and I tell
them to bring some soap and some gauze pads.
Because even the worst wound, a grizzly bear bite versus falling off a cliff, when the
wound is open, it can't really get infected.
It can only get a surface infection, which isn't a problem.
Once you've stopped bleeding, all you have to do is wash that wound with soap and water,
with betadine, with peroxide, whatever's handy, leave it open, pack it with some gauze pads,
change them frequently, and wait till you get back to real medical help.
To go about suturing in the wilderness is unnecessary, and often a mistake, because once you close
the surface of that wound, then the bacteria are sealed in there, and they can grow, create
a wound infection, and where will you be 10 days later?
You'll open the wound again, let it drain out, and now you'll be 10 days behind.
So other than for cosmetic reasons, and to return the patient to functionality quickly,
primary closure is not necessary, and it's often risky.
You have to weigh the risks of closing that primary wound.
So let's talk about primary closure.
Now, suppose you have a wound that's nice and clean, you nicked yourself with a pocket
knife or a razor, or a surgeon made an incision in your skin.
You have lots of ways to close that wound.
One of the oldest ways I've heard about it and never seen was to take an ant, a really
annoyed ant, because you're holding him, hold the edges of the skin together in ancient
times, and let the annoyed ant bite the two pieces together, and then cut off the ant's
head.
The jaws will stay in spasm and hold that wound together very nicely, probably leave very
little scar.
We've gone a little better than that now.
We have for years used both absorbable and non-absorbable sutures, natural ones like
cat gut, which doesn't come from a cat, it comes from a sheep, and then braided or woven
or monofilament plastics, and we like to go to the more synthetic ones because they don't
invoke a very big inflammatory response.
Gut cat gut does, because it's seen as a foreign protein from the sheep, and the monofilament
and polyfilaments, the same thing you have in a fishing line, unless it's almost no response
at all.
Stainless steel staples, the titanium staples we use today, also are very non-reactive and
are very good to use, and even the staples that are used internally to sew intestines
together can be left forever, and the body does not recognize them as a foreign body,
the immune system doesn't respond to them, the body actually doesn't know they're there.
Today we actually use superglue, sterile superglue is available, it works instantly, you want
to do this on a cooperative patient who holds still because once you've touched the skin
edges together, that's it, it's stuck, it's glued exactly where you put it, you can't
cut out two stitches and redo it, so it's very nice in children of the age where they
wouldn't like you to inject them, and probably you'll lose their cooperation if you inject
them with novocaine, but also they can hold still enough just long enough to touch those
skin edges together.
Now the steps in the healing process are several.
They really begin in the first 24 hours, and this slide shows a wound healing by primary
or first intention, and this represents a sharp incision.
This distance really should represent about a millimeter or a last, it looks much bigger
than it should in real life, and in the first 24 hours what would happen is exactly what
you would expect knowing where we've come from, those inflammatory cells, the polys
will come into the area from the capillaries, they'll be an appearance of some blood in
the wound from the red cells that escaped, you remember seeing that in the first slides
of the inflammatory response, and we'll get a clot in the wound called a fibrin clot.
It starts with those platelets, and then a whole cascade of clotting factors which I
alluded to when I talked to you about DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation, but
here it's a controlled clot that will stop all the bleeding from the tiny, tiny capillaries
and make things very, very sticky.
This is good for a wound, it's nice for a wound to stick together and not move, and
then the epithelial cells will begin almost immediately on the surface to come up from
the basal cells down here where the stem cells are and try to cover this surface, they'll
begin moving into the wound, and the wound will be closed anatomically either by us pulling
it together and letting ants bite it, or by sewing it, or by putting sterile strips,
little paper tapes, any way we can to close the wound after we've washed this out with
soap and water, people or again peroxide or betadine or anything you want.
We don't like to put too many chemicals in here, if you have a choice you're better just
irrigating it with water, betadine, soap, alcohol, tincture of iodine which is alcohol, all damage
more cells, so they may kill the bacteria, but then you'll get more cells in here which
makes you more susceptible.
Today in surgery we tend to irrigate with sterile saline, and then over the next several
days the polys go away, and if you remember how they go away they die, and the macrophages
eat them up, and then micro vessels begin to appear down in here in the connective tissue,
and they grow in as the angiogenic vessels do in a tumor cell.
In collagen fibers start to go in the margin and the wound starts to close from the bottom
which is the way we like it to close in an open wound, and by the end of the first week
it looks about like this.
We may still have a little scab on the top that we can just see under a magnifying glass
between the sutures.
This is actually the weakest point in time of the whole wound experience, and then finally
fibrosis occurs and the wound continues to gain strength over many, many months, and
it will only achieve about 80% of its original strength.
The skin, the normal collagen that occurred will always be stronger than the wound scar,
and although scarring is an attempt to do it, to get that strength back it never succeeds
quite as well as your own skin does.
Skin by the way is very, very tough.
We use a separate kind of needle to sew through skin that we do anywhere in the body because
it's so hard to get through skin.
Secondary intention is the same process, just takes longer.
Same players, same characters are trying to get into this area, but it's a bigger area.
It needs more time to heal, and it will usually occur with a depressed scar because this tissue
tends to pull things down.
In fact, when suturing skin, we try to actually bring the skin together and evert it just
a tad so that as the scar pulls on it, it comes out flat.
If you sew a skin together flat, it's probably going to be pulled down and make a worse scar.
The secondary intention is safe, and then we can do something called a delayed primary.
We can lay this open for seven days or so, change dressings, and then bring the patient
in and see if it's clean.
All the factors are there for nice, clean wound healing.
We can then go ahead and make it a delayed primary.
Instead of letting it fill in with scar, go ahead and close it.
The factors that influence the way wounds heal are mechanics, whether it's a clean incision
with a surgical scalpel or made by the jagged bottle in a bar.
It's going to make a very different incision and have more debris in the jagged wound or
the traumatic wound.
Motion and tension pulling on a wound creates more scar tissue, and so immobilizing these
wounds is better for it.
The incision rate, of course, will affect how a wound heals and the blood supply.
The nerve supply as well, patients who are diabetic or who have had a nerve cut to an
area have very poor wound healing.
The diabetics have poor wound healing because they have a poor blood supply to that area
and they have a poor nerve supply to the area.
So there are lots of factors that can affect it, but diabetes is really one of the most
important.
We're most careful surgically with diabetic wounds and we like to take care of them either
in the operating room or in trauma in the emergency room with extra care and detail
to preventing infections, the use of antibiotics where we might not in another person.
And here are all the molecular and cellular things that are impaired in diabetes.
We talked about chemotaxis, bringing the cells we need to the area and the inflammatory
response.
For some reason in diabetics the phagocytes don't work as well.
They're unable to eat as many of the germs as they need to.
The whole inflammatory response is down-regulated and that's a negative thing for them.
Wound healing in general because of vascularity is delayed and they have an inadequate micro
circulation.
You can feel the pulses in a diabetics foot.
They may have very strong normal pulses, but it's the capillary circulation that fails
and you can't see that very well.
We only know that by the results and increased infection rates of course break open all the
wounds then we have to open them, treat the patient and start again.
There's lots of different ways to help unusual wounds and some of the things we do are skin
grafts.
When we get big wounds for example in a burn, third degree burn we've talked about where
all the regenerating cells are gone and we need to cover that wound.
One of the things we can do is take a split-thickness skin graft, what we call an STSG.
The split-thickness skin graft means we come into a patient who has some good areas that
we can take skin from.
For example somebody who's burned their shoulder and we want to get some coverage on there.
We can take skin off the thigh and we can cut it either by hand or with a special machine
that's a little more precise and slice the skin to about 15 1 thousandths of an inch.
This will take those top epithelial cells that are alive, not take the basal cells so
that the patient will heal again.
The stem cells are left behind and the patient will heal that area completely in only a few
weeks.
We take the free skin and then place it on the wound.
Now the importance here is that skin never moves.
It has to be sewn down and compressed with a dressing so that it doesn't shear across
the surface because what we want that patient to do is to grow vessels up into the skin
graft and make new skin.
Now you're going to say, well why doesn't the skin just die?
But remember that a thin layer of cells just like those cancer cells can get nutrition from
the surrounding fluid medium.
And skin graft skin, especially in the bottom layers, can get some nutrition just from the
weeping of plasma underneath.
The top cells will often die and slough away, but in about five or six days, depending on
where it is in the body, you can actually lift up the dressing and see the skin starting
to turn pink.
And if you press it and get a white spot, you'll see it fill again, and that's when
you know your graft has been vascularized.
So we do this in places that we don't have a lot of motion.
We don't like to do this over joints.
We put split thickness skin over places that don't take a lot of trauma.
For example, the forehead might be a place you might use it, the abdomen, the chest where
you're not constantly hitting it against something like your elbow.
And these skin grafts always look like skin grafts, cosmetically they do not look like
normal skin.
They're thinner, they scar more, and they have some peculiar properties.
I did a skin graft many years ago with another surgeon who had this patient for many years
in his practice, and she had burn scars of the neck, and she had what we call contractures,
burn scars tend to pull together, and she could not raise her neck easily, and she wanted
that removed.
It was very unsightly.
It's that look you see, it's very pink, looks something like bubblegum.
And we took her to the operating room and removed all the skin from her neck.
It came right down to her clavicles, and we removed the skin from her donor site, which
was her thigh, upper thigh.
We took it where her bathing suit would cover that scar, and got a perfect result.
You rarely get a perfect result.
You usually lose some percent of your skin graft, but this guy was very good, and he
just got a beautiful result.
However, the patient came back in about two months later and said, this is awful.
And she showed us her neck, and she had grown fat in that neck.
It turns out that skin is very specific, and all of you people say, I can never lose
my fat on my thigh, or I always gain weight on my abdomen, are absolutely correct.
The area of the body that tends to deposit fat tends to be very, very specific.
And this poor woman had now a great chubby neck, because that's where she used to gain
her weight, and even though it was unlikely we could ever get such a good result again,
she actually did go back and took the graft from someplace in her body where she didn't
tend to gain her weight, and again got a very nice result.
So as hard as it is to imagine, skin is very, very specific and has to be handled very carefully.
The other kind of graft we use for wound healing, and I'm using this because I think it's a
rather interesting one, is called a full-thickness pedicle graft.
If I take all the skin, full-thickness surface with the stem cells at the bottom, some subcutaneous
fat, and even occasionally muscle, which is what I would love to use to cover something
like an elbow or a knee, it's going to have a lot of trauma, or the sole of the foot, where
you're going to be stepping on the skin.
Split-thickness skin won't do it.
We do a wonderful thing called a pedicle graft.
I've seen this actually used in patients in India where the Indian bandits used to cut
off people's noses as punishment, and this is a very deforming injury.
I mean, it looks like a skeleton, a skull rather than a face, and you can't put full-thickness
skin.
These pedicle grafts were used from the forehead to make a new nose, and here's how they did
it.
First you have an open wound, such as this, of whatever size it happens to be, and the
muscle is showing, and you're not going to get a good skin graft take on this.
What you do is you find an area next to that wound that has good blood supply, and here's
the main artery running through, and here's, depicts the side blood supply to this, and
you place this in proper skin lines for good cosmetics, and then you make a U-shaped incision
all the way down for whatever thickness you want, usually all the way to the muscle, taking
fat and everything with it, and then you rotate this graft laterally in this direction, keeping
the base intact and off tension, and you lay it down across your open wound, like this,
and then sew the graft in place with sutures, protecting the blood supply.
This is going under the skin, and you've kept a full-thickness, vascularized graft, and then
you pull this tissue together, you do some undermining to make it slide, and it's under
a little tension, it may even have a thicker scar, but now you've accomplished a wonderful
thing, you've closed this, and you can actually take graft, as this doctor did a plastic surgeon
from India, and he would remove skin from the forehead, and march it down and create
a whole new nose.
You can do this on your hands, where you need full-thickness skin from one finger, and move
it on to another finger, finger keeping them together, with the pedicle of vascularity
intact.
This is probably the most advanced kind of surgery for big, big wound problems.
Well, that brings us to the end of how we heal, and how we take care of wounds, and
how we take care of our bodies.
I hope you've learned enough to stimulate your inquisitiveness, and take what obviously
was a very quick look at all these subjects, so that you'll be able to go back and find
areas of special interest, and learn more about these subjects.
Thank you for coming.
