By the middle of the 7th century BC, northern Mesopotamia had become the heartland of the
largest state the world had ever seen. Known today as the Neo-Assyrian Empire, its control
stretched throughout Mesopotamia, Syria, the Levant, and even as far north as Anatolia.
In the west, its territory ran as far as Egypt, whilst in the east its rule held sway over
Sousa and parts of the Zagros Mountains. At its peak, it was ruled by a king named Ashubanipal
who would tout his military prowess and conquests in inscriptions scattered throughout his realm.
In the centre of his palace, he built a great library that eventually grew to include some
30,000 clay tablets and that attracted scribes from the four corners of the known world.
In modern times, this library is often seen by scholars as Ashubanipal's crowning achievement
and its remains provide a vivid snapshot into the world that he and his dynasty inhabited.
Yet as grand and ancient as Ashubanipal and his empire might seem to us now,
contained amongst the tablets of his library was the story of another king who had already
been famous throughout Mesopotamia for millennia. In the epic that bore his name, he ruled over
the great metropolis of Uruk, the son of a goddess and a mortal man possessed of strength and stature
beyond all others. His exploits took him the length and breadth of Mesopotamia and saw him
contend with monsters, gods, and his own mortality alike. So great was his quest to thwart death
that it even took him beyond the lands of mortal men to meet the immortal survivor
of a worldwide flood and event that still echoes in modern religions to this day.
Since the very dawn of writing, he'd provided an ideal of kingship that surpassed all others
and achieved a fame beyond almost any of his successors. Ashubanipal would prove no exception.
By the end of that same century, his dynasty would be extinct, his library buried and forgotten.
The great tablets that held this story remain sealed within its ruins for another two millennia,
waiting patiently for the day when they would be rediscovered. From that day,
the exploits of this legendary king would draw the attention of a worldwide audience
and once again one of the world's oldest known stories would be told.
The Epic of Gilgamesh
The Epic of Gilgamesh
Since its rediscovery at the tail end of the 19th century,
the Epic of Gilgamesh has inspired excitement among scholars and the general public alike.
Originally unearthed amongst the ruins of the library of Ashubanipal,
the discovery of its tablets came amidst a period of newfound interest in both archaeology
and early human history. Its deciphering would inspire headlines in newspapers on both sides
of the Atlantic, with this publicity being overwhelmingly centred on the flood story
contained within one of its tablets. In succeeding decades, knowledge of the
Epic itself grew amongst the wider public. Soon it became recognised that in the exploits of
Gilgamesh lay the blueprints of those of many later mythical figures, including those of Heracles
and the heroes of the Homeric poems, the Odyssey and the Iliad.
Much like these later heroes, Gilgamesh's restless spirit would take into what were then
the very edges of the known world, to the cedar forest in what is now modern Lebanon
and Syria, throughout the land of Babylonia and south to the land of Dilman in the Persian Gulf.
Throughout these travels, he was joined by his faithful companion, Enkidu,
who he loved as he would a wife, and whose death at the hands of the eternal gods would
drive his own quest to fort death. Today these central themes of companionship, love,
and the human struggle against mortality continue to resonate, and Gilgamesh himself
has taken on a life outside of the Epic, often appearing as a character far removed from his
earliest roots. Even then, to many he remains inseparable from the Babylonian Epic that bears
his name, which this day holds the status of a foundational work in world literature.
But what is perhaps less known, is that this work is far from Gilgamesh's first appearance
in Mesopotamian myth. In fact, by the time the most famous version of his Epic was composed
in the late 2nd millennium BC, knowledge of his name and exploits was already more than a thousand
years old. Long before Babylon was even a city, there is evidence that Gilgamesh's name was
being sung at the courts of the later Sumerian kings, where a rich body of hymns and poems
were composed to celebrate his feats and virtues. And before even these works were created, we know
that objects were being dedicated in Gilgamesh's honour right back to the precipice of prehistory,
and as heroic figures performing deeds resembling his own appear in some of the earliest artwork
of the 3rd millennium BC. And it is here in the hazy world of the earliest kings of Mesopotamia
that some scholars have even argued that a historical figure may have existed,
whose life and deeds formed a core ideal of kingship around which the literary Epic was crafted.
So who was Gilgamesh? How did the Epic that bears his name come to be? Was there a historical
king of Uruk who bore his name, whose reputation later offers built upon to craft a more familiar
Epic? And outside of Gilgamesh himself, how did the famous flood myth become part of the Epic?
In this video, we'll explore these questions by examining more than 2,000 years of history.
We'll start by familiarising ourselves with the setting of Gilgamesh's exploits,
the Mesopotamian society at the 3rd millennium BC. We'll take a look at what evidence exists for
a historical king bearing his name, along with his earliest appearances in the inscriptions of the
period. From here, we'll track the development of the Epic from its earliest origins among some of
the world's first empires, through to the standardised text of the late 2nd millennium BC.
Along the way, we'll also examine how Mesopotamia itself changed during the millennia of its existence,
and examine what parallels can be drawn between it and the society in which it originated.
Finally, we'll examine the origins of an event with which the Epic is inexorably tied,
the Mesopotamian flood myth, the discovery of which brought the Epic to worldwide attention.
But before we do any of this, let us begin with the story itself.
For those unfamiliar with Gilgamesh and his appearances in Mesopotamian myth,
here's a quick summary of the Epic for which he is known.
In its story, Gilgamesh is the ruler of Uruk, the son of a mortal king named Lugar Banda,
and of the goddess Ninsun. Possessed of superhuman size and strength, Gilgamesh
reigns as a tyrant over the city, exhausting its men and taking its women into his bed.
As punishment for abusing his subjects, the gods craft an opponent who is his equal,
the wild man Enkidu. After initially residing in the steppe, where he grazes alongside wild
animals, Enkidu is discovered by a hunter, then civilised through intercourse with the
temple prostitute, Shamhat. After adopting human dress and manners, he travels to Uruk
in order to confront Gilgamesh, where the two wrestle in the streets until the very houses of
the city shake. Eventually, however, the two cease their battle, and Enkidu instead becomes
Gilgamesh's dearest friend, who he loves as he would a wife and who he frequently refers to
as the axe by his side. After this, a restless Gilgamesh then proposes a journey to the cedar
forest in honour of the sun god Shamash, where he intends to slay its monstrous guardian,
Humbaba. With Shamash's help, the two journey to the forest and overcome Humbaba,
then construct a raft from the cedar trees to return to Uruk. On arriving back in the city,
Gilgamesh then draws the eye of the goddess of love, Ishtar, who rejects her offer of marriage
due to her mistreatment of her former suitors. Angered by Gilgamesh's refusal, Ishtar then
forces her father Anu to unleash the mighty bull of heaven, which devastates Uruk and its people.
Together, Gilgamesh and Enkidu overcome this bull, whose horns Gilgamesh dedicates to his
father, Lugalbanda, whilst Enkidu tears off the bull's right haunch and hurls it in Ishtar's face.
As peace seems to have been restored to Uruk, Enkidu has a dream of a gathering of the gods,
in which the great gods Anu and Enlil decree that for the crimes of slaying both the bull
and Humbaba, Enkidu must die. Struck down by the gods, Enkidu curses the hunter and the
prostitute who civilised him from his deathbed, only to be rebuked by Shamash, who reminds him
of all the good he has experienced in life because of the two.
After Enkidu's death, so great is Gilgamesh's grief that he refuses to leave his side for
six days and seven nights, only permitting his friend's body to be buried after a maggot dropped
from its nose. In his mourning for his lost brother, Gilgamesh tears out his hair and
clothes himself in the skins of wild animals, then erects a grand statue in tribute to Enkidu.
Now fearful of his own death, Gilgamesh sets out to find his ancestor, Utnapishtim, and his wife,
who we are told were granted immortality by the gods. Traveling to the Twin Peaks of Mount Mashu
at the ends of the earth, he finds a tunnel that no mortal has entered, guarded by a scorpion man
and his wife. Ignoring the man's warnings, he proceeds through the darkness of the tunnel,
eventually emerging in a fertile land known as the Garden of the Gods.
After killing a group of lions and dressing himself in their skins, he recounts his tale to
an alewife, who directs him to Utnapishtim's boatman, Urshibani. After Gilgamesh has first
destroyed the enigmatic stone ones that allowed Urshibani to travel across the waters of death
to Utnapishtim, the boatman instructs Gilgamesh to cut down 120 trees and to fashion them into poles.
Crossing the waters, they arrive at a place known as the mouth of the rivers,
where Utnapishtim and his wife live. After observing Utnapishtim and finding him much
the same as himself, Gilgamesh asks him how he came to receive immortality,
and Utnapishtim tells him of the great flood sent by the gods to drown mankind.
As a survivor of this flood, Utnapishtim was granted immortality by the king of the gods,
Enlil, who placed him to live at the mouth of the rivers.
Utnapishtim then offers Gilgamesh his own chance at immortality, if only he can stay awake for
seven days and nights. Despite his best efforts, Gilgamesh soon falls asleep,
waking to discover that seven days have passed, as shown by the bread rations that Utnapishtim's
wife has left by his side. Despite Gilgamesh's failure, Utnapishtim gives him another test,
sending Gilgamesh in search of a special plant from the ocean floor that will rejuvenate anyone
who consumes it. Gilgamesh succeeds in retrieving the plant, only for it to be stolen by a serpent
whilst he bathes. Disheartened by his failure, Gilgamesh returns to Uruk, where the main body
of the epic ends, with him marveling to a shabbani at the great city wall he has built.
Then in a final, somewhat tacked-on tablet, Gilgamesh sends an inexplicably alive Enkidu to
retrieve a toy from the Neverworld, only for him to be captured by the dead. With the help of
the god Shamash, Gilgamesh then raises Enkidu's shade to the land above, which then informs him
of the grim conditions of the underworld, and of Gilgamesh's future role as the judge of the dead.
So we now have a general idea of the epic's content.
But if we are to understand the context of the events that it depicts, along with the timeline of
its wider development, we will also need to familiarise ourselves with its setting,
the Mesopotamian world of the third millennium BC. For it is in this period that not only is the
epic itself set, but that we can also be reasonably sure that any historical Gilgamesh would also
have reigned. And in examining this world, we will gain an understanding not only of its society
and wider geography, but we will also see the underlying motivations of its characters.
Let us begin then. Towards the end of the previous millennium,
this region had seen the emergence of the world's first known cities throughout the
plains of southern and central Mesopotamia. Of these by far the largest was the mega site of Uruk,
which appears to have exerted a strong cultural influence over the other growing centres of the
Alluvial plain, along with major economic influence throughout much of the ancient Middle East.
As with the other settlements of the region, life in Uruk revolved around the hierarchies
of its monumental temple districts, each of which were dedicated to the cult of a major deity.
In addition to their role in the religious life of these settlements, these districts appeared
to have acted as distribution centres for a portion of the city's populace, with their
dedicated work being rewarded with fixed amounts of rations. It is also in the context of this system
that the world's earliest known written script, Protokinaeiform, appears to have emerged.
This early writing consisted of a complex system of signs,
impressed onto clay tablets with a reed stylus, that were used at Uruk and other sites throughout
the Middle East to administrate their complex temple hierarchies. By far the majority of these
tablets were used to record the receipt of goods by the temple, such as grain, dairy products,
and textiles, along with their distribution to its attendant workforce. The remaining tablets
consist of long lists of objects, places, and animals, and there is no evidence at this early
date for writing menus in anything other than an administrative context. This Uruk-inferenced
trade system continued until around the years 3200-3100 BC, when it appears to have faltered.
The exact cause of its collapse is still uncertain, although it is possible that it coincided with
a change in the local climate that saw much of the Middle East become both drier and colder than
in the previous millennium. Whatever its cause, the result was that Mesopotamian influence became
restricted to the alluvial plain. In places such as Syria, the Levant, and the Iranian Poteau,
we see the abandonment of Protokinaeiform writing and a resurgence of local pottery styles.
Mesopotamia itself entered the period known as the Gemdet Nasser, characterised by a change from
the manufacture of more plain styles of pottery to that of painted pottery with a distinctive purple
colouring. Other than this pottery, however, the Gemdet Nasser appears to have gladly continued
the practices of the preceding Uruk period. Protokinaeiform writing also continued to be
developed throughout this time, and we know from lists of city names dating to this period
that the individual settlements of the Mesopotamian plain were already engaged in complex political
and economic relationships with one another. A common religious system may also have been
in place throughout the region, with its focus being the city of Uruk. This is demonstrated by
tablets and clay ceilings that have been interpreted as offerings, presented from other settlements
to its goddess Inanna, also known under her later name Abishtar.
Compared to the Uruk period before it, the Gemdet Nasser appears to have been short-lived,
to the point where there is still some debate as to whether it should be considered a separate
archaeological period at all. By comparison, its successor, the early dynastic period,
would last for much of the third millennium BC, and saw the rise of one of the world's most
iconic early civilisations, the Sumerians. Throughout the early part of this period,
we begin to see increasing growth of individual settlements into major urban centres throughout
both southern and central Mesopotamia. While Uruk remained a key player in the politics of the region,
it now had to compete with other prominent city-states such as Ur, Lagash, Uma and Kish,
each of which controlled varying degrees of territory. Generally speaking, the influence
of each of these cities was limited to its surrounding agricultural land, which would
have stretched in a narrow band along either the river Euphrates or the Tigris for an average of
10 to 15 kilometres in either direction. Between them lay a patchwork mosaic of alluvial deserts,
resource-rich swamps and marshland, and patches of less-inhabited steppe that were often used
for seasonal grazing. Each city also seems to have become recognised as a dwelling place of a
number of gods and goddesses that were joined into a more unified pantheon, and at an unclear
point the centre of Mesopotamian religion transferred from the cult of Inanna to Uruk,
to the cult of Enlil at Nipur. Inside the cities themselves, the temple authorities that dominated
vertical and economic life throughout the Uruk period also remained, though increasingly their
power was counterbalanced by a new group of figures under the titles of Em, Ensi and Lugal.
Commonly referred to as kings by modern archaeologists, how exactly these figures emerged
is still a source of contention, but it seems that from an early date, these figures combined
military power with important political and religious roles within the city.
Alongside the emergence of these figures, this period is also characterised by increased
military activity between these states, as shown by the appearance of widespread city
fortifications throughout the first half of the early dynastic period. Alongside these changes,
many of the basic blueprints of Mesopotamian society established in the preceding Uruk period
continued to be refined upon throughout the third millennium BC.
Agriculture continued to depend on the careful management of water supplied by the Euphrates
and the Tigris, and crop irrigation seems to become ever more important as the climate
in the region slowly dried out. Administration and trade was still performed using cylinder seals,
small round objects carved with inlaid scenes that could be impressed onto wet clay as an identifier.
Later, these objects would also take on an important role in the correspondence between
different city-states and rulers, whose relationships grew more complex and formalised.
Kinéaform writing also evolved to take on similar roles, slowly losing many of its
pictographic qualities in favour of both syllabic and phonetic elements,
along with a more developed system of grammar. The result is that unlike the earlier Proto-Kinéaform
tablets, to which we are largely unable to assign a language, this later script is clearly
recognisable as Sumerian, a language spoken by people of Southern Mesopotamia during this period.
And from around the middle of the early dynastic period, we also see the increasing use of royal
inscriptions throughout the region, the names of kings being inscribed on objects such as stone
vessels, stelae and votive offerings. So now that we have some understanding of the society
in which the epic is set, let us ask our first question. Is there any evidence for a historical
monarch that dates from this period behind the later literary figure of Gilgamesh?
Understandably, this question draws a mixed response from archaeologists and scholars of the
period. To paraphrase Professor Piotr Mikhailovsky, for some the search for a historical Gilgamesh
is a serious enterprise, whilst for others, it is equivalent to the quest to discover the
real King Arthur, the Powered in Roland or the Abominable Snowman. A few scholars such as Max
Malawan, Barry Powell and Stephanie Daly have been willing to entertain the idea that a monarch
carrying this name could have reigned at Uruk somewhere between 2800 and 2600 BC,
with these arguments being based on later literary accounts and a small number of
contemporary inscriptions. On the whole, however, most archaeologists agree that there is no way
to prove the existence of such a king using the evidence that we have at our disposal,
and that as such he is best treated as a purely mythical figure.
And looking at the excavations that have been carried out at Uruk, it is easy to see why many
have drawn that conclusion. In the collection of stories in which he features, Gilgamesh is
intimately associated with the central ritual districts of Uruk, the Ayanna and the Kulab,
both of which have been extensively excavated. If such a figure did exist, then it is in these
districts that we may expect to find some evidence for his existence, especially as a possible dating
to around the 27th century BC, roughly overlapped with the appearance of the earliest known royal
inscriptions in southern Mesopotamia. Unfortunately for us, however, no evidence of any writing or
inscriptions have been found at the city dating from this period. Indeed, there is also little
evidence for monumental building at the center of Uruk during this time. The one exception to this
can be found in the Ayanna district, where the third millennium BC is marked by the development
of a number of enigmatic structures that culminated in its final centuries in a large
cigarette dedicated to the goddess in Ayanna. Outside of these structures, two possible explanations
have been proposed, the lack of evidence for monumental building here in the early dynastic
period. The first is that extensive parts of the complex may well have been destroyed or damaged
by a later invasion that we know took place somewhere between the 24th and the 23rd century BC.
The second and better attested theory is that many old structures in this era could have been
destroyed during its remodeling by a later king named Ur-Namu, whose name can be found
inscribed on the Ziggurat's bricks. Either way, what is clear is that there is no evidence of
Gilgamesh to be found in the central districts of Uruk itself. But there is another monumental
feature at Uruk that is famously associated with Gilgamesh and whose first construction
would be credited to him in the earliest literary texts in which he features, the Great Wall of
Uruk. Constructed in a period when Uruk was nearing its peak size, this vast fortification
stretches for over 9 kilometers and encircles an area of over 500 hectares. Built from fired mud
bricks, the wall itself averages 9 meters thick in most areas and its surrounding complex measures
some 40 meters in width. Embedded inside it are a vast system of buttresses, towers and entrance
ways, along with inlets and outlets for the city's canals. This wall is certainly impressive
and its construction does correlate with a period when the city was known to be both large
and powerful. But unfortunately, only limited excavations of its sections have been carried out
and what work has been done has found no evidence at all to connect its construction to Gilgamesh.
Whilst later kings are known to have placed votive objects inscribed with their names within the
foundations of their major building projects, no such objects have been found beneath the excavated
parts of Uruk's wall, leaving us unable to connect its construction to any historical figure.
The exact dating of the wall is also uncertain, though most archaeologists place its construction
at the beginning of the early dynastic period, which may well be too early for most estimates
of historical Gilgamesh's reign. So if there was a historical Gilgamesh, there is no evidence of
him to be found at his namesake city, nor at any other centre throughout Mesopotamia during the
first half of the early dynastic period. Instead, if we wish to find his earliest attestations,
we have to skip forward by a couple of centuries. It is here, as we enter the later part of the
early dynastic period, that Gilgamesh's name is first found under its Sumerian spelling of
Bilgamesh, nearly a half a millennium for his first known literary appearance.
Here he appears not as a king, but as part of a list of gods unearthed at the site of Shoropak
that dates from roughly the 26th to the 25th century BC. Whilst he receives no special treatment on
this list, his placing already seems to show an association with Arukh, as the entry above his
reads Suladu Kulab, or Road Facing Kulab, referring to one of the city's central districts.
Beyond this god's list, we also find more information regarding Gilgamesh appearing
in a small number of inscriptions dedicated to him that date from around the 24th century BC.
One such inscription is preserved on a ceremonial stone mace head of unknown providence that were
frequently made as votive offerings to a particular god or goddess. To quote its text,
From this inscription, we can conclude a few details to complement the limited information
given in the gods list. For a start, whilst we know that Gilgamesh was clearly regarded as a god
during this period, and even the recipient of votive offerings, we also see him named here as
a king of men, an inclusion that may reflect his dual nature and his later literary appearances.
Secondly, we see the first mention of his divine parentage, specific with that he is the son of
the goddess Ninsu Moon, later known under her familiar name of Ninsun.
Finally, from his earliest attestations, we see that Gilgamesh is already being associated with
idealized epithets of Mesopotamian kingship, with his title of the strong one being frequently
adopted by kings in the late 3rd millennium BC. These two texts raise an interesting possibility.
As Gilgamesh's earliest attestations in this period are as a god rather than a king,
are we to assume that he began his existence as a deity, only later being given a historical
background as a king of Uruk? This is certainly a possibility, but we should also note that the
Macehead inscription does directly refer to him as a king of men. An additional factor that we can
conclude from these early inscriptions is that whilst some of Gilgamesh's later attributes are
already present, there is little evidence of him being associated with many of the deeds we will
see in the later epic. This is also reflected in the small group of literary texts that have
come down to us from the early dynastic period. These texts are largely limited to those that
have been excavated from the city of Abu Salabik in central Mesopotamia along with those found
at both Mari and Ebla in modern Syria. The archaic and often fragmentary nature of these texts makes
them difficult to comprehend and understanding is often reliant on the existence of a later copy
of the same text in a more readable script. Examples of this include a wisdom text,
known as the instructions of Shuropak, later versions of which are addressed from the city's
eponymous king, to his son, Ziosudra, along with a number of hymns and other mythological texts.
By far the most significant of these texts for our purposes, however, is a fragment of a
mythological tale of the love-making between the mortal hero Lugalbanda and the goddess Ninsun,
which some scholars have attempted to relate to the birth of Gilgamesh.
However, according to a seriologist, Andrew R. George, at no point does this name appear in the
tale, and indeed the state of the fragment is such that even the idea of it referring to a birth
remains unproven. As we will soon see, there are also good reasons to doubt that Lugalbanda
was considered Gilgamesh's father at this early date. In addition to this text, two others from
Abu Salabik have also been claimed to mention Gilgamesh himself, although the validity of
these claims remains controversial. Moving beyond what written evidence we have available,
it is also often noted that figures resembling both Gilgamesh and his companion Enkidu frequently
appear in Mesopotamian artwork dating to the early dynastic period. Indeed, we frequently see heroic
figures portrayed on cylinder seals and carvings from this period, often being depicted in forms
of heroic nudity and wrestling with animals such as lions and bulls. This latter motif,
known as the master of animals, is a common one throughout the region and is known to date back
to at least the 7th millennium BC. It is certainly possible that these figures represent events from
the later epic, particularly Gilgamesh's contention with either the bull of heaven or his later
encounter with a group of lions whose skin he clothes himself in during his search for immortality.
Unfortunately for us, however, we have no examples of direct inscriptions naming either Gilgamesh
or Enkidu alongside these works, and it is entirely possible that they depict other
heroic figures from the period, or that they simply represent more generic heroic archetypes.
So from what we've covered here, we can conclude that to the people of early dynastic Mesopotamia,
Gilgamesh was known as a god worthy of dedications, as a king of men, and that his name was associated
with at least one of the epithets given to later rulers. But outside of this, we have no clear
evidence that he was ever a historical king of Uruk, or that he was a fixture in the literature of
this time. At this point, we could easily abandon our search for a historical Gilgamesh and assign
him purely to the realm of mythology. However, in doing so, we would be ignoring a small amount
of indirect evidence, as a number of scholars have pointed to as at least leaving his existence
an open question. And to observe this evidence, we must leave the world of early dynastic Sumer behind
and examine social and political developments within central and southern Mesopotamia,
right at the end of the third millennium BC. Unlike the largely fragmented city-states that
characterised the region for much of the previous millennium, the centuries ahead would see periodic
unifications of the region under a single ruler. Prior to the rise of its first lasting empire,
there had been a number of erstwhile conquerors of Mesopotamia, but none of them appears to have
succeeded in subduing land far beyond the south, or in passing their conquests on to a successor.
It would take until the 24th century BC before a king would establish a lasting empire,
encompassing most of Mesopotamia. And when it happened, its founder would not be a Sumerian,
but an Akkadian.
The Akkadians were a group of peoples from central Mesopotamia, a region that itself came to be
referred to as Akkad. Unlike their Sumerian neighbours, they spoke a Semitic language,
known as Akkadia, but otherwise they shared many cultural similarities and worshipped a similar
pantheon of gods under differing names. As with the Sumerians, their exact origin point is uncertain,
but we do know that they were present in the region from at least the beginning of the third
millennium BC, as shown by the appearance of Akkadian names in the earliest Cuneiform texts.
And in the 24th century BC, it was a man from this region who would build what has been described
as the world's first empire. Known as Sargon, later literary descriptions would cast him as
a cup-bearer, the king of Kish, or even a simple labourer in the palace gardens.
At an unknown point, he appears to have risen to power in central Mesopotamia,
after which he invaded the south and subdued the Sumerian city-sates.
In doing so, he deposed another aspiring conqueror, a king by the name of Lugauzergezi,
who had recently subdued much of Sumer and led him in a neck-stock to the temple at Nipper.
With the two regions now under his control, he established his capital at the city of Akkad,
also known as Agade, which he either founded or greatly expanded.
Finally, he succeeded in doing something that no previous ruler had done,
and passed on this empire intact to his successors.
This Akkadian empire would persist for nearly two centuries, reaching its peak in the 23rd
century BC, under Sargon's grandson, Narum Sin.
If we are to believe inscriptions from his long reign, then Narum Sin succeeded in expanding
the empire to the state of Elam and the peoples of the Zagros Mountains to the east,
and as far west as the states of the eastern Mediterranean.
Exactly how much of this westward conquest was rooted in propaganda is uncertain,
for all we know it may simply have been a successful raiding party to the region.
Either way, this success led Narum Sin to take on unprecedented titles,
including King of the Four Quarters and King of the Universe.
Eventually, he was no longer content to simply rule as a mortal,
and in a famous victory stele dating from his reign,
he is depicted standing above his men as a giant, crowned with the horned helmet of a god.
Narum Sin's reign would bring the Akkadian empire to its greatest extent,
but it also proved to be its high watermark.
Exactly how intact the empire was towards the end of his reign is uncertain,
but after his death, it quickly collapsed, with possible causes being the combined
stress of a major drought known as the 4.2-kilow year event,
and a series of invasions of a group of peoples from the Zagros Mountains to the east.
What follows was an archaeologically obscure period that lasted for most of the 22nd century BC,
during which these invaders, known as the Gutians,
appeared to have exercised a loose hegemony over the other cities of the Alluvial Plain.
Then, at the end of this period, we are told from inscriptional evidence
that the invaders were ejected from Sumer by a confederation of cities led by Utu Hengal,
the King of Uruk. Utu Hengal would not survive his victory for long, however,
and in the ensuing power vacuum, it would be his relative Ur-Namu,
the governor of Ur, who would succeed in establishing the second major unified state of Mesopotamia.
Known as the Third Dynasty of Ur, or the Neo-Sumerian Empire,
this state would resurrect the status of Uruk as a major centre for the worship of the Goddess in Ana,
and embark on an ambitious cigarette building programme throughout southern Mesopotamia.
Initially restricted to the regions of Sumer and Akkad,
this empire would expand eastwards, beginning with the reign of Ur-Namu successor,
Shulgi, coming to dominate the neighbouring region of Elan, and what is now southwest in Iran.
Whilst the resulting state was less far-reaching than the Akkadian Empire,
it appears to have been more internally centralised, consisting of a carefully
administered core in Mesopotamia, which maintained a system of diplomatic contacts
with the periphery beyond. Shulgi and his successors would go on to adopt the divine
kingship of Narap Sin, with Shulgi himself demonstrating a special reverence for Gilgamesh,
who he frequently named in his hymns. Finally, the royal court of Ur also appears to have
established a uniform writing system within its borders, establishing and sponsoring new
scribal schools in the process. It is in these scribal schools that we see a new period of
creativity in Sumerian literature, along with the appearance of the first documents to shed light
on what the peoples of southern Mesopotamia considered their history.
And it is also through the lens of these documents that we see what some have argued
is evidence for Gilgamesh's existence.
By far the most famous of these documents is known to us as the Sumerian Kinglist,
a collection of manuscripts outlining the supposed history of the kings of Sumer,
the earliest version of which dates back to the Ur III period.
Later versions of this document detail the descent of the divine kingship of Sumer from the heavens,
through an unbroken line of rulers, first to the city of Eridu in the south,
then to the city of Kish after a great flood had swept across the land.
After 23 kings had reigned in Kish, the city was defeated by Uruk and the kingship taken to the
Iana district. In this list Gilgamesh is presented as a member of the first dynasty of Uruk,
with his name being followed by the epithet Lord of the Kulab.
Interestingly his father is listed here not as Lugalbanda, but instead as a phantom or a demon,
and his immediate predecessor is given as the god of shepherds and fertility to Muzed.
For some time after its discovery many scholars considered this list to have a degree of usefulness
as a source of information on Mesopotamian history, as least in the abstract.
Over time however a greater awareness of its flaws has developed and it is clear that the
kings list existed less as an accurate chronicle of Mesopotamian rulers and more as a form of
propaganda designed to legitimize the rule of later dynasties. For a start it presents Sumer as
having been ruled over by an unbroken line of kings, of only one city possessing the kingship
at a time. Many of its earlier rulers are also assigned reigns of an extraordinary length.
Gilgamesh himself is credited a reign of some 126 years and this length is dwarfed by that of the
pre-Fudd rulers, one of whom has assigned a rule of some 36,000 years.
Excavations at centres throughout southern Mesopotamia have also found ample evidence of kings who
exerted a wide degree of power throughout the region, yet whose names are not included on the list.
Finally this document also seems to have been periodically revised to take into account disputes
between competing city-states and dynasties. For example in its earliest versions the first
dynasty to receive the kingship is that of the city of Kish and a smaller number of dynasties
are listed between it and Akkad. In later copies however Kish has been demoted to the second
dynasty on the list, with the kingship originally dwelling at the site of Eridu for which there
is no evidence of a dynasty possessing hegemony over the other cities of the region.
Despite all these caveats there are two early rulers on this list for whom some limited
inscriptional evidence has been found, both of whom are named in later literary texts as
contemporaries of Gilgamesh. They consist of the final two rulers of the first dynasty of Kish
and appear to date from a period when the city was indeed large and prosperous.
The first is a king by the name of Mibarakisi, later known as N Mibarakisi,
but whom a small number of inscriptions have been found. In one such inscription found on a
fragment of an alabaster vessel of uncertain providence Mibarakisi is named as the king of Kish,
making him the earliest known Mesopotamian king whose name is verified by contemporary evidence.
Based on the archaic rendering of the symbol for Kish, this inscription is fought to date from
the first half of the early dynastic period and matches well with the hypothetical date
for a historical Gilgamesh. The second ruler on the king list associated with Gilgamesh in later
literary accounts is the figure of Akka or Aga, son of N Mibarakisi and the final ruler of the
first dynasty of Kish. Unlike N Mibarakisi we have no contemporary inscription naming Akka as a king
of Kish. Instead a figure who may be Akka is attested to on a single stone stele that likely
originated from the city of Uma in southern Mesopotamia. This stele, known as the stele of
Ushumgao, also dates from the first part of the early dynastic period and is fought to relate to
a land transaction between the priest Ushumgao and an unknown woman who is possibly his daughter.
Most interestingly for our purpose this stele also features a carving of a man
next to which is the following inscription, Akka of the Great Assembly. Whether or not this figure
is the Akka of the king's list and later literary texts is uncertain. If so then it would indicate
that Kish's hegemony during the first part of the early dynastic period ran at least as far south
as Uma, which is certainly a possibility. Indeed we do have an inscribed gem of unknown provenance
that directly names Aga as a king of Uma, although whether or not he was a king of Kish remains uncertain.
We also know from inscriptions as a historical king who claimed to rule Kish known as Meselim
held a degree of power in neighbouring Lagash and according to later traditions he may well have
mediated a land dispute between it and Uma. It has also been argued by Dr. Gebhardt's
selves that the personal name Akka was fairly rare in the early dynastic period,
which may lessen the chance of it being a coincidence.
In our final piece of indirect evidence Gilgamesh is also named alongside a list of later kings,
likely dating from just after the end of the Ur Free dynasty.
Known as the Tumal inscription this text outlines a series of rulers who are
credited with the building and rebuilding of various temples at the holy city of Nipur.
In this list Gilgamesh is credited with building the Dunon-Mun-Bura, a shrine that is known there
from archaeological evidence, though these excavations found no sign of any associations with this figure.
What is perhaps a significant however, is that in addition to the historical
personage of Enmi Baragisi and the possibly historical Akka, Gilgamesh is mentioned alongside
at least two other known kings of the southern city of Ur, Misani Pada and his son Meski Agnuna.
In addition to appearing on the Sumerian king list, Misani Pada is also known as a king,
from objects bearing his inscriptions at what may be his tomb at the royal cemetery of Ur,
along with an inscribed bead found at the city of Mari far to the northwest.
Whilst less well attested than his father, Meski Agnuna is known from a small number
of bull inscriptions made in his honor by his wife, in which he is named as the Lugau or king of Ur.
However it should also be noted that nowhere in this inscription are either of these kings named
as contemporaries of Gilgamesh, merely that they also dedicated various temple structures in Nipur.
So what can we conclude from these various inscriptions?
Well it seems likely that some of the figures later associated with Gilgamesh were historical
kings, though how much their actual deeds and lives resemble those of the later literary tales
is impossible to say. As such some scholars have argued that their existence at least opens the
possibility of Gilgamesh himself being a historical figure. Despite this we still have no definitive
evidence of the existence of Gilgamesh himself, and in the absence of such evidence we must consign
him for now to the world of myth. But as we end the hunt for a historical Gilgamesh we now begin
to see the literary figure emerge in earnest. For it is during the period of the Ur-free dynasty
that we see the first appearance of the exploits of Gilgamesh as a figure of myth,
along with the character that he is most commonly associated with, Enkidu.
The Neosumerian Gilgamesh corpus exists in a largely fragmentary fashion today.
It consists of five poems written in Sumerian, one of which has been found in two separate versions,
along with a small number of dedicatory hymns. Whilst we can be reasonably confident from their
language that they originated in the Ur-free period, only one has been found in fragmentary form
dating from this time, and most of these texts exist only in copies written by scribes a few
centuries later. Even in these later forms, two of the texts remain only partially complete.
What we have, however, is enough to recognise episodes of the later Babylonian Epic.
In the tale of Gilgamesh and Huwawa, we see a story higher resembling that of the Cedar Forest
incident, though with both a different inciting reason and location.
In this story, the eponymous king proposes an expedition to the Cedar Forests of the Zagros
Mountains in order to achieve lasting fame for himself after his death. After amassing a company
of young men to aid them, Gilgamesh and Enkidu cross seven-fold mountain ranges before finally
finding a tree that matches their requirements. After cutting the tree into logs, they anger the
forest's protector, a monstrous figure known as Huwawa, who knocks both Gilgamesh and Enkidu
unconscious with one of his auras. Eventually, Enkidu awakens and manages to rouse Gilgamesh,
who swears revenge on his assailant. Together, the two trick Huwawa into forming a marriage alliance
with two of Gilgamesh's sisters, and in the process of exchanging marital gifts, they rob him of
his auras, now conceptualised as great Cedar trees. After the Guardian has been rendered helpless,
Gilgamesh considers letting him live, but Enkidu cuts his throat after warning the two
would never see home again if he was allowed to live. With this done, Gilgamesh and his men
cut his auras into logs and return home. There they offer Huwawa's head to the great god Enlil,
who angrily berates them for their actions, before distributing his auras throughout the land.
In the second Gilgamesh tale, we soon we see a precursor to one of Gilgamesh's other famed
adventures, his contention with the ball of heaven. In this story, Gilgamesh is instructed by his mother
Ninsun to carry out his duties and sit in judgement, only for him to be detained by the goddess of
love, Inanna. Here she proposes that Gilgamesh become lord to her lady, but he rejects her
in some versions due to his mother forbidding the union. After a missing section of text,
Inanna is found weeping by her father, the sky god Anu, who she asks to give her the celestial
ball of heaven with which to kill Gilgamesh. Anu refuses as the ball of heaven would find no food
on earth, only for Inanna to emit an infernal scream that forces her father to give in. She
then leads the ball down to Uruk, where it destroys the date palms and consumes the river.
Gilgamesh is informed of the creature's arrival by his menstrual, and after quenching his first
reveal, he vows to dismember the ball. Together he and Enkidu dispatch the ball by finding its
weak point, after which Enkidu hurls its horn at Inanna. Finally Gilgamesh fulfills his promise
and distributes the ball's meat amongst the poor, though he dedicates the horns to Inanna.
In both of these poems, we see clear parallels to later episodes of the epic, though in each case
these accounts are similar, only in their outlines. In addition to this, elements of these stories
are also fought by some scholars to give insight into Mesopotamian society of the time.
For example, Gilgamesh's expedition to the cedar forest is seen by Uruk scholars Margaret Van S
and Reyn Theonif as reflecting the actual needs of monumental building projects
conducted by Mesopotamian kings during this period, as the palm, poplar, and tamarisk wood of the
alluvial plain is either too soft or grows too short to be of much use in monumental construction.
By comparison, cedar wood is an ideal building material, though wood indeed had been found in
the Sagros Mountains to the east, and we know that Mesopotamian kings from this period would go to
great lengths to secure this precious material. In the later epic, this event would also be
relocated westwards to what is now modern Lebanon, a change that coincides with the
increasing importance of western states during the second millennium BC.
Similarly, Gilgamesh's refusal of marriage to the goddess Inanna is also fought to parallel
literary descriptions of the sacred marriage ceremony between Mesopotamian kings and the city's goddess,
though whether these ceremonies actually occurred or not is a topic of some debate.
When we move beyond these two works, however, what is perhaps surprising is that the remaining
Sumerian poems contain no clear parallels at all to the later epic, and indeed one of them contains
no mythical or supernatural elements at all. Where they do appear to have played an important
role, however, is in informing the later themes of the Babylonian epic, particularly that of human
mortality and Gilgamesh's struggle to escape death. In the first of these tales, known as Gilgamesh
and the Neverworld, we see Gilgamesh's increasing association with the Mesopotamian afterlife.
After a prologue describing how the gods divided the universe between them,
a great storm blows down a willow tree on the banks of the Euphrates.
Soon after, the goddess Inanna happens across the tree,
which she takes back to Uruk and plants at the Ianna district. To her dismay, this tree then
becomes infested by evil creatures, and after failing to gain the help of the sun god Utu,
Inanna turns to Gilgamesh for help. Taking up his weapons, Gilgamesh rides the tree of its
inhabitants and carves it into wood for Inanna's furniture. From what remains, he carves two toys,
most likely a ball and a mallet, and the next day he plays with these,
wearing out his subjects in the process. The day after, as Gilgamesh is about to resume his play,
the women of the city complain, and somehow the toys fall into the Neverworld. Gilgamesh
then dispatches his servant Enkidu to retrieve them, only for him to be taken captive after he
fails to show the shades of the dead the proper respect. Horrified at what has happened, Gilgamesh
petitions the gods for help. In the end only Enki, the Sumerian god of water and mischief,
will listen, and with the help of Utu, they raise Enkidu from the Neverworld as a shade.
In a lengthy series of questions, Gilgamesh asks Enkidu of the condition of the dead,
and learns how the first they suffer can be relieved by offerings of fresh water by their descendants.
This examination of death and the afterlife continues in the second of these tales,
known as the Death of Gilgamesh. As the poem begins, we learn that Gilgamesh has been seized
by Namta, the emissary of death, and now lies dying. In his guise as the Lord of Creation,
the god Enki shows Gilgamesh a vision of the gods judging his exploits in the cedar forest,
and a previously unmentioned journey to the end of the world. Here we are told he learned wisdom
from a man named Zisudra, the only survivor of an event known as the Deluge, an exploit for which
the gods granted him immortality. Gilgamesh is then told that immortality has not been decreed for him,
but after his descent to the underworld he will be given a special place as the Judge of the Dead.
As consolation for this fate, he is told he will be reunited there with Enkidu and his family,
and that he will be revered as a deity. After awaking from this dream, Gilgamesh appears to
seek counsel, and after a gap in the text, he is advised that he should not be sad at his fate.
The poem then concludes with the people of Uruk building Gilgamesh's tomb at Enki's instruction.
After diverting the river Euphrates, they build a stone tomb on the dry riverbed,
into which Gilgamesh, his wives and his retinue are sealed. The river is then returned to its
normal course in order to conceal the tomb, and the people of Uruk mourn their king.
According to Andrew R. George, the poem then concludes either by praising Gilgamesh as the
greatest of kings, or by explaining that the dead survive in the memories of the living.
Between these four poems, we can see many of the themes that would appear
in the more developed epic of the second millennium BC. In both Gilgamesh and Huawa,
and Gilgamesh and the Neverworld, we see the king's fear of death, and of the great deeds
that he undertakes in order to grant his name lasting fame. In the confrontations between
Gilgamesh and Huawa, and later the Ball of Heaven, we see the first signs of his great physical prowess,
whilst in Gilgamesh and the Neverworld, we see early signs of his tyranny over the people of Uruk.
In the death of Gilgamesh, we also see his first association with the immortal survivor of the
flood, a significant step for the development of the later epic. In Gilgamesh and the Neverworld,
we also have an important source for the Mesopotamian concept of the Underworld.
Here they believe the dead carried out a shadowy existence, where they either roamed naked or
clothed in birds' feathers, with only dust to sate their first. With the exception of figures
such as Gilgamesh, who received an exalted position near enough to actual life, the only respite from
this existence was fought to be through the offerings of libations given to the dead by the living.
It is for this reason that people in Mesopotamia considered having many descendants to be of
the utmost importance, as those who died without descendants were consigned to the worst form of
existence imaginable. Finally, the descriptions of Gilgamesh being buried alongside his royal
entourage and harem has drawn comparisons to what may have been actual burial practices from the time.
The most famous example of this has been found at what has been dubbed the Royal Cemetery of Ur,
where a mass grave known as the Great Death Pit was unearthed in the 1920s
by a team led by British archaeologist Leonard Woolley. Inside this pit, the remains of up to
seventy-four men and women were found, who appear to have been musicians, attendants, and bodyguards
of the tomb's occupant. Each of these people was killed by being struck over the head with an axe,
after which their bodies were embalmed, dressed, and laid out neatly as if in life.
It is uncertain how willing any of these deaths were, or if the burial was truly royal in nature,
but its existence indicates that mass internments of otherwise healthy followers,
alongside significant figures, were not unknown in ancient Mesopotamian society.
We come now to the final Sumerian Gilgamesh poem. Here we find a story that seems to have no
connection at all to the later epic, and it is completely devoid of mythical or supernatural
elements. Known as Gilgamesh and Acha, it concerns the contention between the cities of Kish and
Uruk for the hegemony of Sumer. In this story, the king of Kish, Acha, sends emissaries to Uruk,
demanding its submission. In response, Gilgamesh seeks the council of the city's elders,
who caution him to submit rather than going to war. Ignoring their advice, Gilgamesh instead
secures agreement from the young men of the city, who laud his prowess and predict his victory.
Soon after this, Acha arrives and lays siege to Uruk. Gilgamesh asks for a volunteer to
challenge Acha to single combat, and his guard Burhirtura volunteers. On leaving the city however,
Burhirtura is immediately captured, beaten, and then brought before Acha. The steward of Uruk
then appears on its walls, and Acha asks the hapless guard if this is Gilgamesh. Burhirtura
answers it is not, and if it were, Acha would soon be vanquished, a reply that earns him yet another
beating. Gilgamesh then appears on the wall, and when Acha asks Burhirtura the same question,
he answers in the affirmative. Acha is then swiftly captured by Gilgamesh, who pays an old
debt to him by freeing him and allowing him to return to Kish. Whilst the events of the Envoy
of Acha are all but disconnected from the later epic, it does give us some sense of how the Sumerians
viewed the idea of kinship, and like the contemporary king list, it provides us with some information
on how these people saw their own history. A number of scholars have also hypothesized that
elements of this story reflect some aspects of Sumerian society that go undocumented elsewhere.
For example, Gilgamesh's consultation with both the elders and the young men of the city
has been taken as evidence of an early form of democracy, where the head of a Sumerian
city-state would consult with distinguished men of the city prior to making major decisions.
Similarly, the appointment of a champion to fight Acha on Gilgamesh's behalf points to the idea
that early warfare in southern Mesopotamia may have often had a more ceremonial element than
the fully-pitched battles that we often envision. These hypotheses are certainly interesting,
though for the moment they remain just that. Another interesting aspect of these Sumerian
poems is the elements that they lack compared to the later epic. Perhaps the most striking of these
is that whilst they mark the first clear appearance of Enkidu, his role is clearly less developed.
Not only does he lack his later wild man attributes, but in the text he is usually
described as a servant to Gilgamesh, rather than an equal partner. In the past, scholars such as
Geoffrey Teague have used this difference in status to argue that the friendship between the two
is an invention entirely of later authors, whilst Andrew R. George has argued that some
elements of the deeper friendship can be seen in Gilgamesh's emotional reaction to Enkidu's death
in Gilgamesh and the Neverworld. The differences in Enkidu's presentation have also led some past
scholars to hypothesise that Enkidu was himself the subject of a separate body of literature
that was later integrated into the Gilgamesh epic. However, no evidence whatsoever has been
found to support this idea, and it is now known that there are other potential sources of Enkidu's
wild attributes. So how did these poems come to be written? Up until now, the only evidence we
have of Gilgamesh are a few scattered inscriptions and some possible depictions in artwork that date
to the early dynastic period. One argument is that these stories may have previously existed
within wider Mesopotamian society as oral traditions. Indeed, there is some evidence that
these works were recited aloud during the Ur-3 period, shown by the inclusion of hymnic elements
in the introduction of the poem Gilgamesh and the Bull of Heaven. If this is true, then these
poems may well have been read as a form of courtly entertainment for the Ur-3 kings,
much as Gilgamesh is entertained by his court musician Lugal Gabagal.
However, if these tales were originally oral compositions, there is little evidence of
this to be found within the texts themselves, which lack many of the features associated
with oral storytelling. Another argument against this possibility is that as we have previously
covered, we do have some early examples of Mesopotamian literature dating back to the
early dynastic period, and amongst those, there is no undisputed evidence of tales related to
Gilgamesh. We also have no evidence for Gilgamesh in literature dating from the immediately preceding
periods, though the picture here is complicated by the fact that the Akkadian capital is still
yet to be located, and that the Gutian period is poorly attested archaeologically. On the whole,
however, it seems more likely that these works were original compositions created by scribes at
the academies of the Ur-3 kings that flesh out previous traditions and deeds that have been
associated with Gilgamesh in prior centuries. Indeed, we know from the hymns of the time that
the second Ur-3 ruler, Shulgi, held Gilgamesh in a particular high regard, and it would not
be surprising if the poems were composed at his instruction to honour a ruler with whom he felt
a special kinship. So strong was this feeling, in fact, that Shulgi would even declare Gilgamesh
his adoptive brother, as shown in the sections of a surviving hymn. Quote,
Shulgi, the righteous shepherd of Samir, praises his brother and friend, the Lord Gilgamesh,
in his might, addresses him in his heroism, mighty one in battle, a devastating flood who
smites the enemy in the heat of the combat, a catapult of the holy wall, skilled in hurling
the sling stone, against the house of Kish you brought forth your weapons, its seven heroes you
captured dead, the king of Kish, Emma Baragizzi, you trampled on his head as if he were a snake,
you brought over the kinship from Kish to Uruk. Another thread that scholar Geoffrey Teague has
noted is the resemblance between many of the physical feats attributed to Shulgi and his hymns,
such as his skill at wrestling and athletics, and those of Gilgamesh in the later epic.
Alternatively, these kingly attributes may reflect those attributed to the Akkadian kings,
particularly the god-like stature claimed by Narum's sin. Ultimately, though, we have no way
of knowing if either of these figures influence Gilgamesh's depictions, and it is just as likely
that his athletic prowess is influenced by common attributes, claimed by Mesopotamian kings throughout
history. So, to come to the end of this video,
so to conclude our discussions of the Sumerian Gilgamesh poems, let us quickly discuss another
question that divided scholars after their initial discovery, whether they belong to a unified Sumerian
epic. It was initially taken for granted that these works were indeed part of a large narrative,
and it was not until the work of Samuel Cramer in the 1940s that the idea was disputed.
Over time, however, scholars have concluded that there is no evidence at all that these
tales were considered part of a unified epic. Not only is there no evidence of these poems
being grouped together during ancient times, but as we have explored earlier, these poems
like many of the central plot points are fully developed themes of the later epic.
There is also no clear evidence of textual passages linking the individual poems together.
The one small piece of evidence to the contrary is the existence of a copy of Gilgamesh in the
Neverworld found at the archaeological site of Mi-Taran. Here a passage exists that appears to
bridge the end of this poem to the beginning of Gilgamesh and Huwawa, with the hero turning
from his grief at Enkidu's death to the living one's mountain of the later poem.
Now, over this copy dates from a later period, and also contains an inherent contradiction,
as Enkidu is consigned to the underworld in the first tale, yet is somehow alive and by
Gilgamesh's side again in the second tale. As such we can conclude that there is no convincing
evidence of the unified epic in this period, and its genesis most likely belongs to the centuries ahead.
The time has come to move on. If we are to find the earliest known appearance of the
unified epic of Gilgamesh, we must move forward by a number of centuries into the early second
millennium BC. This period coincides with major changes in both Mesopotamian culture and politics.
After controlling the region for more than a century, the Earth-free dynasty came to an abrupt
end around the late 21st century BC, with the reasons for this collapse still being unclear.
One argument is that this collapse was due to the increasing migration of a group of peoples
known as the Amorites into Mesopotamia. These people likely originated to the west,
as shown by their Arcadian name Amuru, or Westerners, and seem to have lived a pastoralist lifestyle
that saw them alternate between sedentary living and seasonal nomadism.
People with Amorized Names have been mentioned in documents from at least the middle of the
third millennium BC, but from around the turn of the second millennium BC, we see a vast increase
in the number of Amorized Names appearing in documents. In the centuries ahead,
a number of rulers with Amorized Names would also succeed in establishing their own dynasties
throughout Mesopotamia, where they quickly assimilated both local customs and belief structures.
Whether or not these people played any role in the collapse of the Earth-free state, however,
is a controversial topic amongst archaeologists, and this appearance may simply be a coincidence.
What we do know is that early in the reign of the final Earth-free ruler Ibn-Sin, many of the
other cities within the Empire seized paying taxes to Earth, and the whole system by which
the state maintained itself quickly collapsed. Unlike the collapse of the Arcadian Empire before
it, the end of the Earth-free dynasty appears to have been relatively orderly, with no sign of
disruption throughout southern and central Mesopotamia. The exception to this seems to have
been at Ur itself, where later copies of messages have been uncovered, addressed from Ibn-Sin to
an official named Ishbi-era, urging him to buy grain at whatever price it was available from
the cities of Isin and Kazalu. It has been argued on the basis of these letters that the region
around Earth-free itself was undergoing a famine during this period. However, their authenticity
has been disputed, and it has also been proposed that the need for grain was due to a loss of
expected tax revenue from the wider Empire. Later, Ishbi-era would break away and form
his own state at the city of Isin near Nipur, which he also seized control of soon after.
Ibn-Sin would continue to reign at Ur for another two decades, when an invasion by the
Yulomites and the King of Shimaski, a state in the region of the Zagros Mountains,
seized both him and the city. Ishbi-era would fare better and succeeded in driving out this
invasion in his 27th year of rule. He and his successors would later claim hegemony over Sumer
and Akkad as heirs to the Ur-free dynasty, but in reality their state was much smaller in scale,
with their power being limited to most of southern Mesopotamia. Elsewhere in central and
northern Mesopotamia, new rulers would emerge to forge their own states, each of which would attempt
to dominate the region in the centuries ahead. The political history of Mesopotamia in the
2nd millennium BC is highly complex and a full discussion of its events is beyond the scope
of this video. Let us suffice then with a quick summary. The first four centuries after the
collapse of the Ur-free dynasty, running from the beginning of the 20th century BC,
at the end of the 17th century BC, a collective we know as the Old Babylonian Period.
In its first two centuries, southern Mesopotamia was dominated by two major players, the dynasty
of Issin founded by Ishbi-era and a rival state led by the city of Lhasa, along with a number of
smaller states. In central Mesopotamia, a previously unimportant town by the name of Babylon, grew
into a major city ruled by an Amorite dynasty. Whilst to the east, the city of Eshnuna became
the heart of a powerful state. To the north, the cities of Assur and Ninev became wealthy through
their role as trade intermediaries between the developing city-states of Anatolia and those
of southern Mesopotamia. Whilst to the west lay the Amorite kingdoms of Mari, Yamkad and Katna.
These first two centuries are characterized by a period of almost continual warfare between these
states. In the end, however, it was the newcomer of Babylon that would succeed in uniting much
of Mesopotamia beneath its rule. Around 1766 BC, a coalition of Elam, Babylon, Mari and possibly
Lhasa sacked Eshnuna, ending its bid for hegemony. Two years later, Babylon's king Hammurabi would
turn on his former ally and defeat Elam with the help of Eshnuna's new rulers, only to turn on
this ally again and sack the city once more. Soon afterwards, he would have due both Mari and Lhasa
too, incorporating them into a new state that ran from Mari in the northwest to the shores of the
Persian Gulf in the south. Soon Hammurabi took on the titles of the Akkadian and Urfri kings before
him, dubbing himself king of Sumer and Akkad, king of the Four Quarters. Once again, Sumer and Akkad
were united and in the centuries ahead, this region would be known under a new name, Babylonia.
Throughout this period of feuding city-states, the literature and written language of Mesopotamia
continued to evolve. Perhaps the most important development from the perspective of the Gilgamesh
mythos was a change in the way that the literature was being recorded. Up until the end of the Third
Dynasty of Ur, Sumerian had been the dominant written language of both central and southern
Mesopotamia. From at least the beginning of the Second Millennium BC, however, its use would be
eclipsed by that of Akkadian, which went on to become the diplomatic language of both the Middle
East and much of the Eastern Mediterranean. Soon Sumerian was no longer being spoken,
and slowly it was limited to the role of an academic language used mostly by scribes.
Despite this, works of Sumerian literature continued to be recorded, and this period also
saw a major flowering of Akkadian literature throughout the scribal schools of the region.
Alongside accounts of the exploits of the kings of Uruk, Lugarbanda and Enmakar, now both firmly
established as Gilgamesh's father and grandfather respectively, we see for the first time accounts
such as Atana and the Eagle and of the Akkadian hero Atrahasis. And most importantly for us,
it is during this period that we see the first evidence for what is likely a unified epic of
Gilgamesh. The old Babylonian epic of Gilgamesh exists today mostly in fragments that have been
found at southern centres such as Nipur, Ur and Lisin. From what we can tell, many of these
tablets appear to have been composed during the training of new scribes who were likely copied
them down as part of their schooling. Only two tablets are largely complete, the first outlining
the taming of Enkidu and his confrontation with Gilgamesh, and the second covering the beginning
of the journey to the Cedar Forest. Beyond that, the remaining fragments include portions of Gilgamesh
and Enkidu slaying of the Forest Guardian Humbaba, along with a section of Gilgamesh's later journey
to meet with the survivor of the flood, now for the first time named as Utnapishtim,
a simple translation of the name Zisudra into Akkadian. For obvious reasons, the amount of
information regarding the development of the epic that can be garnered from this material is limited.
It is generally agreed among scholars that the fragments we do have available constitute a
unified epic, though due to several factors this is not 100% certain. For a start, the beginning
and ending of the two major tablets have not survived in the available copies, meaning that
we lack the exact bridging text between the two. It also remains uncertain whether this version of
the epic contained all of its later episodes. For example, the Old Babylonian episode of
the Bull of Heaven has yet to be found, and so it cannot be ruled out that this episode was added
in later. Some missing plot points are however implied by the presence of the later episodes.
For example, we can be reasonably certain that the first tablet would have detailed Gilgamesh's
tourney over the people of Uruk, as otherwise there is no reason for Enkidu to be created in
the second tablet. Similarly, Gilgamesh's description of Enkidu's death in the surviving
fragment of tablet 10 indicates that this episode was likely also part of the epic at this time,
although the exact events that lead to it remain uncertain.
Finally, we see the presence of the more unified themes of the exercise of power
and kingship, along with Gilgamesh's search for immortality and his love for Enkidu,
the loss of whom spurs him on to find a way to thwart death.
So how was this new Akkadian epic composed? Well, it's unlikely that we'll ever be sure.
It could well be the work of a single author, or the culmination of the work of many different
scribes throughout the period. In support of the former theory, it has been argued that the old
Babylonian epic is written in a more simple, poetic style than the later standard epic,
and scholars such as Andruar George have used this to argue that it could well be the work
of a single poet of genius. In support of the latter argument, it must be said that this
poetic style does not exclude the possibility that this version of the epic was the result of
the cumulative work of more than one author, and that its language is merely the result of a later
editor who formalized the text. We also know that scribes would continue to revise the text of the
epic in the centuries ahead, and it is possible that a similar process of revision led to the
creation of the old Babylonian version. So putting aside the question of a single
author for the moment, what sources may have inspired its composition?
The most obvious suggestion is that the old Babylonian epic would have been composed using
the earlier Sumerian poems, with a combination of Akkadian translations and new material being
used to establish a unifying plot and themes, as well as to expand on events only mentioned
briefly in its forerunners. In the process some less relevant material would naturally have been
excised, such as the content of the poem Gilgamesh and Akkad. Support for this idea comes from the
fact that we know the Sumerian poems were still being copied down by scribes during this period,
and it is likely that the author or authors of the unified epic were familiar with them
in some fashion. There are some problems with this theory however. As many Gilgamesh scholars
have pointed out, outside of the overall plot points, the text of the epic bears only a slight
resemblance to those of the poems of corresponding episodes, and any direct translation of Sumerian
into Akkadian could be largely ruled out. One possible explanation for this is that the writers
of the Akkadian epic were only loosely familiar with these earlier poems, or as Geoffrey Teague
has suggested, that they were working from an Akkadian intermediary that only paraphrased their
contents. Andrew R George has gone further than this, suggesting that the epic of this era may
have been based not on the existing poems, but on Akkadian oral traditions within old Babylonian
society. Indeed, from the hymnic refrains seen in later versions of the epic, we can surmise that
the epic may well have been sung within Babylonian society, much as the poems before it. After all,
if the epic were a familiar form of entertainment during this period, it would in turn make sense
for scribes to copy it down as part of their training, or to formally transcribe a record of it.
And whilst it is almost impossible to track oral traditions in a dead language,
this may also explain the sheer volume of new material seen in this version.
The best example of this is the vast expansion in Enkidu's description and backstory.
Whilst it has been claimed that there are already some hints of a deeper friendship
between Gilgamesh and Enkidu in the Sumerian poems, it is in the old Babylonian epic that
we see Enkidu's role transformed. No longer a simple servant,
he has become a wild man, crafted by the gods as Gilgamesh's physical equal.
Describes extremely hairy, he begins his life ignorant of the ways of civilisation,
living and grazing amongst the herd animals of the steppe.
After being civilised through intercourse with the prostitute Shamhat,
he travels to Uruk, where he comes into conflict with Gilgamesh.
After wrestling with him, Enkidu instead becomes the hero's closest companion,
and Gilgamesh frequently describes him as the axe by his side.
Elsewhere Gilgamesh is explicitly described as loving him as he would a wife,
and it is the loss of Enkidu that directly inspires his quest for immortality.
The level of originality of each of these plot points differs,
but in particular Enkidu's newfound status as a wild man,
seems without any clear precursors in Mesopotamian literature.
In the past, a number of scholars have argued that these newfound attributes
are inspired by earlier Sumerian stereotypes of the Amorites,
who they considered an uncivilised people. A commonly cited example of these stereotypes
is found in a passage from a composition known as The Marriage of Matu,
which dates from the 3rd millennium BC. To quote its text,
Dwelling in the mountain, the one who digs up mushrooms at the foot of the mountain,
who does not know how to bend the knee, who eats uncooked meat,
who in his lifetime does not have a house, who on the day of his death will not be buried.
Whilst these stereotypes very much reinforce the Sumerian view of the Amorites as uncivilised,
it should be noted that they display little overlap with Enkidu's description.
For example, the Amorites are mentioned as eating uncooked meat,
whilst Enkidu grazes on the grass of the plains, and the Amorites do not share Enkidu's hairiness,
nor his kinship with wild beasts. It is also clear that by the time the earliest
version of the Epic of Gilgamesh appeared, many of the major ruling dynasties of the
regio could trace their beginnings to Amorite ancestors, and this ancestry would no longer
have been considered in a negative light. There is, however, another document that is
according to Geoffrey Teague may have at least indirectly influenced the Epic's depiction
of Enkidu. Known as a debate between sheep and grain, it also dates from the 3rd millennium BC,
and details another version of the Sumerian creation myth.
Whilst it is unlikely to have served as a direct textual source for Enkidu's
wild man attributes, it does include a description of Primordial Man,
with whom he shares some similarities.
Quote,
Mankind of that time knew not the eating of bread, knew not the wearing of garments.
The people went around with skins on their bodies. They ate grass with their mouths like sheep,
drank water from ditches.
This text then goes on to explain the civilization of mankind by the gods, who mediate to them,
the meds. This elusive concept is mentioned frequently throughout Sumerian literature,
and is roughly thought to mean the norms of civilized society, including sexual intercourse,
agriculture, crafts, priesthood, and kingship. This process shows clear parallels to the
civilizing of Enkidu, who is first elevated from the beasts by intercourse with a human woman,
then taught the ways of humanity by the shepherds of the steppe.
So in the old Babylonian period, we see much formalization of the epic's content,
and indeed its major additions from this time would remain largely the same in later versions.
However, at this stage, much of its content is still missing, and if we wish to see the
epic in its familiar form, we must again move forward, and examine changes in Mesopotamian
politics around the end of the old Babylonian period.
Whilst Hammurabi was able to pass on his unified empire to his son,
Samsuiluna, he himself would not be so lucky.
After an initial period of stability, Samsuiluna faced two rebellions in the south from the rulers
of Lhasa and Uruk, along with an invasion from a new group of peoples from the Zagros mountains to
the east. Known as the Cassites, this group of people would go on to play major roles in Mesopotamian
politics, and are perhaps best known for their association with the use of horse-drawn chariots
in warfare. Samsuiluna was successful in thwarting this invasion and in pacifying the south,
claiming in one of his year names to have destroyed the wars above Uruk and Lhasa as punishment.
But this success wouldn't last. Soon after the defeat of the Southern Rebellion,
Babylon seemed to have largely withdrawn from the area.
Alongside this retreat also came a shifting of the centre of Mesopotamian religious life.
Until now, the central god of the southern and central plains had been Enlil,
whose cult was based in the southern city of Nipur. After the Babylonian withdrawal, however,
his cult moved northwards to Babylon itself, a move that coincided with the slow elevation
of its local god Marduk to the head of the Babylonian Pantheon.
And most importantly for us, this withdrawal had an unintentional side effect.
By forcing many of the scribes of the south to leave their cities, this act unintentionally
preserved many of the period's manuscripts within their abandoned households, including the only
surviving copies of the Sumerian Gilgamesh poems. Exactly why this retreat occurred is uncertain,
and it seems to have been accompanied by major movements of peoples from the south
to cities such as Kish and Babylon. Whatever the cause, the result of this withdrawal was that
much of the region came under the control of a shadowy group of rulers known as the First
Sea Land dynasty, for whom we have little inscriptional evidence. To the north and the east,
both Assyria and Elam appear to have thrown off Babylonian hegemony around this time,
and Samsua Luna's rule became largely limited to central Mesopotamia.
By the end of the 18th century BC, the Empire of Hammurabi was already a distant memory.
The final century of the old Babylonian period is poorly documented.
We know that Samsua Luna's successors remain secure in northern Babylonia,
and indeed this region seems to have prospered during this time.
By the reigns of its final rulers, however, it is clear that Babylon was increasingly in conflict
with a number of tribal groupings, who a syriologist Paul Alain Bulu has associated with the Cassites.
Despite this, when the destruction of the first dynasty of Babylon came,
it was not at the hands of a Mesopotamian power.
Instead, the end came in the form of an attack by the Hittite king Mesilli I,
who sacked Babylon around the beginning of the 16th century.
Formed in the late 18th century BC, the Hittites' heartlands lay to the northwest,
around the city of Hattusa, in central Anatolia.
By the time of the sack of Babylon, their control had expanded to include much of this region,
along with parts of northern Syria previously controlled by Yamcad.
Exactly why Mesilli chose to attack a region so far from the Hittite heartlands is unclear,
and indeed this military venture appears to have been more of a ray to seize Plunder,
rather than any attempt at conquest.
Whatever the cause, according to later Babylonian and Hittite documents,
Mesilli sacked the city around 1595 BC and carried off the cult statue of Marduk.
In the resulting power vacuum, the city s Amorite dynasty would be replaced by a Kassite one,
although much like their predecessors, these rulers soon took on the trappings of Mesopotamian
culture and language.
After this, Babylonia descended into something of a dark age, the rest of the 16th century BC,
and sources for the early Kassite period are scarce.
What we do know is that at some point in the early 15th century BC,
the Kassite king Ulam Biryash succeeded in subjugating the seal and dynasty to the south,
reuniting Babylonia into a single political unit.
By the middle of the 14th century BC, the influence of this unified state was felt as far
north as as Syria, and as far south as the states of the Persian Gulf,
making it one of the great powers of its day.
This growth in power coincided with large-scale sponsorship of public building by the Kassite
rulers, including a vast new capital city at Durkuri-Galzoo, the central ziggurat of which
still stands some 57 meters tall today.
And most importantly for us, the Kassite period is marked by a new period of creativity in
Babylonian literature, along with the development of a literary dialect that would remain standard
throughout the region for nearly a millennium.
In the middle centuries of the Kassite period, we see some small evidence for a version of the
epic that is still in flux. Today this version is known by scholars as the middle Babylonian
epic of Gilgamesh, although really all we have are a scattering of fragments from Nippur and Ur in
the south, from the western cities of Ima, Megiddo and Ugarit, and at the Hittite capital of Hattusa
in central Anatolia. Most of these fragments date from around the 14th century BC and are so
disparate that few comparisons can be made either between them or with the text of the old Babylonian
version. Perhaps their most important contribution is that they include excerpts from episodes of
the epic previously unseen in the old Babylonian version. These include the tale of Gilgamesh's
creation and his tourney over the people of Uruk, the remaining parts of the Cedar Forest
expedition, the defeat of the Boar of Heba, and parts of Enkidu's deathbed speech.
We can also see that the text of the epic continued to evolve during this period,
and that its copying out appears to remain the staple of scribal instruction throughout Babylonia.
Finally it appears during the only ancient period in which versions of the epic appear to have been
written in languages other than Akkadian. This includes a largely unintelligible version of the
epic written in Hurian, the language of a group of people who ruled various states in Syria and
northern Mesopotamia, the most notable of which was the state of Mitanni. In the west this state
would prove a powerful foe for both the Hittites and the new Kingdom of Egypt throughout the 16th
and 15th centuries BC and would temporarily succeed in subjugating Assyria to the east
for its power collapsed in the 14th century BC. To this we can also add a fragmentary
paraphrase of the epic written in Hittite, the exact source of which is difficult to tell.
Interestingly parts of the Boar of Heaven episode are included amongst these fragments,
may indicate that such an episode was present in the Old Babylonian epic, if this version was derived
from it. So moving on from the limited remains of the Middle Babylonian epic, it is during the
later centuries of the Kassite period that we finally see the emergence of the Twelve Tablet
Epic with which most people are familiar today. Known as the Standard or Late Epic is surviving
tablets date from the first millennium BC and were originally found in the libraries of the
neo-Asyrian kings Ashurbanipal and his grandfather Sennacherib. However according to scholars such
as Andrew George and Mark Van Damirup, it is likely that this work was originally composed
during the late second millennium BC, either at the end of the Kassite period or shortly thereafter.
The giveaway for this is the highly ornate nature of its text, a style known as Standard Babylonian
that first appeared in the Kassite period and that would remain the main literary dialect
of the region until the extinction of Akkadian as a major language. Indeed many of the later copies
of these texts were attributed to earlier authors by scribes in the first millennium BC,
who themselves broadly grouped into families that claimed descent from one of these illustrious
ancestors, many of whom bore Kassite names. The epic itself is no exception to this,
and by the neo-Babylonian period it had become recognised as a creation of an especially illustrious
ancestor. To quote a list of texts and authors dating from this period.
Exactly who Sin Lake Iunini was is a contentious question amongst Gilgamesh scholars,
such as the scarcity of information that we have on his life that any number of arguments have been
made both for and against his existence. Even if he did exist, his exact relationship to the text
is uncertain. As we've discussed before, serious arguments have been made that the elegant text
of the old Babylonian epic was composed by a single author who may well have been Sin Lake Iunini.
Alternatively if he lived in the Kassite period then he may simply have been a late editor of
the text, who collated the 12 tablet version that remained standard from that point onwards.
He may even have been some influential editor of a middle Babylonian version of the epic,
that provided the blueprints for the standard epic of the late 2nd millennium BC.
In the absence of any other evidence about his life however, there is no real way for us to
know which, if any of these possibilities is true. About the most we can say is that by the
first millennium BC, the Babylonians already considered him an ancestor figure of both great
antiquity and prestige, as seen by his inclusion in a later version of the Sumerian Kingless,
that presents him as the chief scholar during the times of Gilgamesh himself.
In reality this listing has little bearing on fact, and is likely an attempt by these later
authors to enhance both their own prestige and that of the text by inflating its antiquity.
So what is there to say about the standard epic compared to its predecessors? Well besides
its more ornate literary style, we mostly see a restructuring of existing plot points,
rather than wholesale insertions or changes. As we have outlined throughout this video,
the newer content found within the epic at this time also reflects ideas and events
hinted at in earlier versions of the story, as well as in the Sumerian poems that preceded it.
For all we know, this new material may already have been part of the epic by the old Babylonian
period, but regardless of when it was inserted, we must acknowledge that the drafting of these
new sections would still have required a great amount of creativity and skill, as the writer
or writers of the epic would have had to take what were only briefly defined episodes of
Gilgamesh's life and expand them into a narrative that combined the overarching themes of the epic.
Alongside this, however, we must acknowledge that not all parts of the epic were so successfully
integrated. The worst offender in this regard is the final part of the epic, Tablet 12.
Widely regarded by scholars as a late appendage to the epic, it consists of a direct Akkadian
translation of the second part of the Sumerian poem, Gilgamesh and the Neverworld, beginning
immediately after Gilgamesh's toys fall into the underworld. With the exception of some slight
expansion of the text, this piece displays little to no integration with the earlier epic,
being crudely tacked on without even a bridging sentence in between.
The result is that at the beginning of this section, Enkidu is now miraculously alive again
before his descent into the underworld, and its events proceed largely in a vacuum,
disconnected from the previous epic. Exactly when or why this tablet was added into the narrative
is uncertain. One theory, voiced by Geoffrey Teague, is that this section was included in
order to instruct Gilgamesh on the conditions of the underworld, as he might better understand
the role that he would play after his demise as Judge of the Dead.
Back to the main text of the epic, what is also interesting is how the Mesopotamian society it
depicts remains closer to that of the 3rd and the early 2nd millennium BC than that of the
Kassite period. For example, in the standard epic, Enlil remains king of the gods, despite him
having long been supplanted as the head of the Babylonian pantheon by Marduk. Indeed, by the
Kassite period, Enlil had been so demoted that he barely appears in the late Babylonian creation myth,
the Anuma Elish, in which Marduk takes on the central role as the lord of creation.
As a result, it seems clear that by this point, the larger elements of the epic have become fixed
within Babylonian scribal traditions, with the plot points of its ancient storyline being respected
rather than being altered to reflect more contemporary developments.
Putting all these comparatively minor points aside, the standard epic stands out from its
prior versions by its inclusion for the first time of what has become the epic's most famous element.
We have seen hints of its existence earlier when discussing the Sumerian poem,
The Death of Gilgamesh, and the opening of the Sumerian King List. Indeed, it was the inclusion
of this element that led to renewed interest in the epic following its initial rediscovery,
and that would soon raise its profile to worldwide attention.
It is this event that would influence works far beyond its original epic,
and shape the canon of both other mythologies and of religion still practiced throughout the world today.
The Flood
In 1872, a momentous discovery was made by a 32-year-old man in the employee of the British Museum.
He held no formal degree, no great scholarship or position,
being a mere assistant to the more renowned Assyriologist, Sir Henry Rawinson.
His name was George Smith. He came from a humble background,
being born to working-class parents in a cramped London tenement.
To put it bluntly, people with his background were not wanted in the academic world of the 19th
century, and his parents had been under no illusions as to his chances.
His formal education ended when he was only 14, and instead of attending high school,
he was soon apprenticed as a banknote engraver.
During this apprenticeship, however, the young Smith became obsessed with biblical studies,
along with the emerging field of Assyriology.
Named for its initial focus on excavations into Syrian cities such as Ninev in northern Mesopotamia,
at the time this field was still largely unformalized.
Indeed, many of its earliest excavations have been conducted by amateurs
interested in determining the truth of the biblical account of history.
Kinneathorn itself had only been painstakingly deciphered over the course of the last three
decades, and Henry Rawinson's first volume on the Kinneathorn Inscriptions of Western Asia
had only recently been published when Smith arrived at the museum in 1861.
As David Damrosch notes in his work, The Buried Book,
the disorganized nature of the field offered Smith a rare gap in the armor of the British
establishment, where his lack of formal schooling would be considered less of a barrier to entry.
Somehow or another, the young man managed to insert himself into the disorganized department,
hurrying to the museum during his lunch break on the three days that the museum was open to the
public. At first, he drew no attention, going ignored by the department's two members of permanent
staff. Eventually, however, they realized to their surprise that this young man could read
Kinneathorn better than any of themselves, and soon Rawinson would convince the museum
to hire him on as an assistant curator. By all accounts, the pay was unimpressive,
but it did not dampen Smith's enthusiasm for the job. Soon, he was working long hours,
piecing together Kinneathorn tablets for transcription. In 1866, he published his
first article, and the next year Rawinson had the museum hire him on as his assistant for
the future volumes of Kinneathorn inscriptions. As Smith himself would describe it, this hiring
marked his official entry into public life. But despite this progress, his great ambition of
excavating in Mesopotamia himself went unrealized, and he was unable to convince the university
trustees to finance such an expedition. Indeed, by this point, many of them felt that the museum
already had enough of what they dubbed primitive Babylonian and Assyrian artifacts.
Then in November of 1872, whilst working on volume four of Rawinson's series, Smith was
sorting through a group of tablets that had laid untranscribed in the museum archives for the last
quarter century. They had been discovered at Nineveh in the 1840s by the pioneering archaeologists
Hormads Rassam and Austen Henry Liyad, comprising of a trove of some 22,000 tablets
known as the Library of the Neo-Assyrian King Ashabanapal. As Smith later recollected,
I'll note references to the creation in a tablet numbered K63 in the museum collection,
and allusions in other tablets to similar legends. I therefore set about searching through the
collection. Commencing a steady search among these fragments, I soon found half of a curious
tablet which had evidently contained originally six columns of text. Two of these were still
nearly perfect, two others were imperfect, about half remaining, while the other remaining columns
were entirely lost. On looking down the third column, I caught the statement that the ship rested
on the mountains of Nazir, followed by the account of the send and forth of the dove,
and it's finding no rest in place and returning. I saw it once that I had here discovered a portion,
at least at the Chaldean account of the deluge. According to later accounts by his contemporaries,
so excited by this discovery was Smith that he leapt up and began to strip off his clothing,
although he made no mention of such an event in his own account.
Whether it happened or not, word of his discovery spread quickly.
As we mentioned before, the society of his time was one that was growing increasingly skeptical
about the literal truth of the Bible. It had only been 13 years since the publication of
Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species, and by the time of Smith's discovery the
theory of evolution had been largely accepted by the wider scientific community.
Advances in the understanding of geology were also similarly undercutting many of the foundational
stories of the biblical creation, and textual critics had begun to cast doubt on the Bible's
presentation of history. As such Smith's presentation of his findings to a meeting of
the Biblical Archaeology Society on the 3rd of December, which included amongst its audience
the then Prime Minister William Gladstone, led to a immediate attention from the worldwide press.
Soon after, newspapers on either side of the Atlantic were trumpeting Smith's discovery,
and what they saw as its clear connections with the biblical story of Noah.
To quote the New York Times
Noah's log of the deluge is said to have turned up among some ancient Chaldean inscriptions,
and an account of it which has been given by Mr George Smith of the British Museum
has caused a good deal of excitement, especially one passage in which the gods of the period are
described as feeling very bad and sitting like dogs with their tails between their legs.
This irreverent remark occurs in a narrative of the deluge, which purports to have been given
by one of the survivors to a Chaldean monarch named Isdoubar. The original composition of
the narrative is placed at the latest in the 17th century before the Christian era,
and it might be much earlier. At the same time, however, the paper sounded a cautionary note.
For the present, the Orthodox people are in great delight and are very much
pre-possessed by the corroboration which Cicit affords to Biblical history. It is possible,
however, as has been pointed out, that the Chaldean inscription, if genuine,
may be regarded as a confirmation of the statement that there are various traditions
of the deluge apart from the Biblical one, which are perhaps legendary like the rest.
The discovery of the flood portion of the Gilgamesh epic launched Smith to immediate
preeminence as an Assyriologist, and gave him the opportunity to realise his dream of excavating in
the field. Over the next four years, Smith would conduct free expeditions to Minerv,
publishing his findings in volumes that were as much travel logs as they were reports.
In 1876, he published his translation of the Gilgamesh epic under the title
The Chaldean Account of Genesis, placing its flood myth full on centre.
By the time of his unexpected death, he had eclipsed his contemporaries in fame,
and appeared to be on the precipice of a long and distinguished career.
Unfortunately for him, his young family, and the field of Assyriology,
his third expedition to Minerv would be his last.
On the return journey, he stopped in a small village outside of Aleppo,
where he came down with dysentery. His companions managed to rush him to the city in search of
medical aid, but nothing could be done, and he died there on August 19th, 1876.
He was just 36 years old.
The flood myth contained in the Gilgamesh epic received worldwide attention from the moment of
its discovery, and remains one of the primary sources of interest in the story to this day.
Whilst much of the focus placed upon it is due to its connections with the later biblical flood
story, it should be emphasised that to the Mesopotamians themselves, the flood was a seminal
event in history. Before it came an age when gods and primordial forces stalked the land.
When humanity, animals, and the first cities were created, and when the kingship itself
first descended from the heavens. In these anti-Diluvian times, they believed that kings
reigned for thousands of years, and the population of the world far outweighed that of later Mesopotamian
society. In Tablet 11 of the epic of Gilgamesh, we have only a paraphrase of the flood's events,
but even this lays bare the scale of its destruction.
In this Tablet, the survivor of the flood, Utsnapishtim, relates the story of its events
to Gilgamesh in order to explain his immortality. We learn that in a previous age, the city of
Shoropak, located on the Euphrates to the south of Nippur, was home to the gods Anu, Enlil,
Ninurta, Enugge, and Ea, the Babylonian name for the Sumerian god Enki.
So great had mankind multiplied in those days, that it was said the whole world bellowed like
a ball, and this noise roused the anger of the king of the gods, Enlil. He decreed that humanity
should be exterminated, and that all life should perish beneath the waters of a giant flood.
In doing so, he also made the other gods swear an oath of secrecy, but after the decision was made,
Ea crept out of the council. By pretending to speak to the wall of a reed hut, he warned the mortal
man Utnapishtim of the coming flood. Following Ea's advice, Utnapishtim tore down his house
and built a boat with seven decks that measured 120 cubits on all sides.
After seven days labour, the boat was complete, and Utnapishtim loaded onto it all of his gold
and family, along with his craftsmen, and beasts both wild and tame. That evening as predicted,
the storm god Adad flooded the land with a torrential downpour, lasting for six days and nights.
Terrified by the storm that they have unleashed, the gods cowered like dogs,
whilst Ishtar bemoans the drowning of mankind. Utnapishtim's boat survives, however,
and on the seventh day of the flood, he throws open a portal only to reveal water stretching
as far as the eye can see. Finally, land appears in the form of the peak of Mount Nisir,
on which Utnapishtim's boat runs aground. After seven more days, he sends out first a dove
and a swallow, both of whom return after finding no place to land. Finally, he sends out a raven,
who finds that the waters have receded and does not return.
Utnapishtim then performs a great sacrifice on the mountain, the fragrance of which draws the gods
one by one. Ishtar soon arrives and she bemoans Enlil's folly in calling for humanity's destruction.
Eventually, Enlil himself arrives, angry at humanity's survival, only to be shamed by
both Ishtar and Enki. Finally, Enlil then blesses both Utnapishtim and his wife with immortality
and sets them at the mouth of the rivers to dwell for all time.
Since its initial discovery, comparisons have rightly been drawn between this story and the
account of the flood given in the Book of Genesis, where the role of Utnapishtim is taken by the
patriarch Noah and his family. Indeed, when placed side by side, the two stories are almost
identical, with only minor changes being inserted into the Genesis narrative to fit with the wider
biblical canon. For example, in the Genesis flood story, the many gods of the Mesopotamian Pantheon
are replaced by the single god of the Bible, who now has to perform both the role of summoning the
flood to destroy humanity and of warning the last righteous man and his family to build the ark.
Conversely, the Genesis story retains even small details of the Gilgamesh flood myth,
down to the god of the Bible being pleased by the scent of Noah's sacrifice,
much as were his Mesopotamian predecessors. As such, it is now widely agreed by scholars
that the events of the Genesis flood narrative are taken almost wholesale from Gilgamesh,
and that other Mesopotamian myths such as the Anuma Elish also appear to have influenced
the wider biblical account of creation. And going beyond the biblical account,
other mythologies also show flood stories with clear influences from Gilgamesh.
In Greek mythology, a similar flood myth concerns the adventures of the Greek hero
Dukallion. In this account, Zeus has grown angry at the actions of the bronze race of men,
and decides to eliminate them by flooding most of Greece with an abundance of rain.
On the advice of his father, Prometheus, Dukallion survives this downpour by building a great chest,
into which he places himself and his wife, Pyrrha, along with enough provisions to last out the flood.
After nine days and nights, Dukallion comes to rest on the shores of Mount Parnassus,
where Zeus rewards him with whatever his heart desires. Dukallion then uses this wish to repopulate
Greece, turning the stones he and his wife through into men and women.
So the Gilgamesh flood myth was clearly a major influence on the later mythologies
of the Eastern Mediterranean. But where exactly did it originate?
Going only by the material we have discussed so far in this video,
it may seem like this story is an entirely new addition to the standard epic.
Whilst we know that the survivor of the flood was associated in some way with Gilgamesh,
as far back as one of the Sumerian poems, we have no evidence at all of the flood story
in any earlier version of the epic. In itself, this may simply be an accident of survival,
as only portions of the old and middle Babylonian epic remain.
But if we instead look to the wider literature of Mesopotamia,
it becomes clear that there are at least two older flood myths that appear in both Akkadian
and Sumerian texts. The first and better attested of these two is the Akkadian creation myth,
the Atrahasis, the oldest versions of which date to the old Babylonian period.
Whilst the story itself claims to be concerned with the flooding of the world by the gods,
it actually begins by outlining the human creation myth.
According to its texts, after the Anunnaki gods have divided the world between them,
they force the younger gods, known as Igigi, to labor on their behalf.
After laboring for 3,600 years, the Igigi gods grow tired and rebel against the Anunnaki.
To solve this problem, the Anunnaki then slaughter the god Illawella,
then have Aya and the crater goddess Mammy craft humanity by mixing his blood with clay.
After 600 years pass, humanity multiplies so much that their noise angers the great god Enlil,
and from here an almost exact equivalent of the Gilgamesh flood epic plays out.
Although in this story the hero's name is Atrahasis, who much like Utnapishtim,
also dwells within the city of Shoropak.
The second Mesopotamian flood story is somewhat briefer,
and is tested today only in the form of a single fragmentary tablet written in Sumerian.
Known by the titles of the Eridu Genesis, or simply the Deluge,
this story dates from around 1600 BC, and outlines yet another variant of the Mesopotamian creation myth.
In this story we again see the creation of mankind by the Anunnaki,
which in this tale comprises of the gods An, Enlil, Enki and Ninosag.
After a missing portion of the text, we hear that An and Enlil have decided to destroy humanity,
and they force each god to swear not to interfere.
To get around this, Enki tells the plan of the gods to a wall,
behind which is hidden the hero of the tale, Zeosudra.
After another missing passage, which presumably detailed the construction of a vessel by Zeosudra,
we hear that after the flood has raged for seven days and nights, the waters fall quiet.
Nusmerian sun god Utu then appears, and Zeosudra dutifully makes a sacrifice in his honor.
After a final missing section, we find the hero prostrating himself before Anu and Enlil,
who grant him eternal life, and place him to the south of Mesopotamia in the land of Dilman.
Upon its translation in 1912, it was initially presumed that the Sumerian story of the Deluge
was a predecessor to the flood story of Gilgamesh, much as the Sumerian Gilgamesh poems may have
preceded the Old Babylonian Epic. Over time, however, it has become clear that the account
of the flood given in Gilgamesh is more likely to be a paraphrased version of the Atrahasis,
and according to Stephanie Daly, the Sumerian story itself may well be derived from the Akkadian
account. As proof of this, Jeffrey T. Gay has offered several pieces of evidence. Firstly,
not only are the plot points of the two almost identical, but some lines in the epic are copied
almost word for word from the Atrahasis. For example, in Tablet XI of the epic, the list
of gods present at the meeting to decide humanity's fate is copied over exactly from the opening of
the Atrahasis, even though in the Gilgamesh version some of these gods play no role whatsoever in its
events, and figures that do such as Ishtar are absent. Secondly, the flood of the Atrahasis is
already present in its Old Babylonian version, where it plays a key role in the story. By comparison,
the Gilgamesh flood story appears only later in the Standard Epic, and there plays no clear part
in its central quest. Finally, there also exists something of a smoking gun in line 187 of the
Tablet, where the author accidentally names up Tnapishtim as Atrahasis. So it seems likely that
whilst the version of the flood myth presented in Tablet XI was first introduced into the Epic of
Gilgamesh in the late 2nd millennium BC, developed versions of the myth date back at least as far
as the Old Babylonian period. Before that all we have are scattered references in documents dating
from the end of the 3rd millennium BC, leaving us uncertain as to what significance its legend would
have held during these earlier periods. We are aware of at least three earliest Sumerian creation
myths that may well date to the early dynastic period, known as the Barton Cylinder, the debate
between winter and summer, and the previously mentioned debate between sheep and grain. However,
none of these creation myths mention flood, also indicating that it is not yet taken on its
significance within the beliefs of the region. So now that we have gone back as far as the
available literary works allow us, let us conclude our examination of the Mesopotamian flood myth
by asking a question occupied many early archaeologists during the excavations of Mesopotamian
centres in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Is there any evidence that the Mesopotamian flood
myth was inspired by a real-life flood event that took place either in Mesopotamia itself
or throughout the wider Middle East? Indeed, this question would feature prominently in many of
the early reports of finds from this region during the 1920s and 30s. What also complicates matters
is that since the late 90s a new hypothesis has emerged that attempts to explain the origin of
this myth from outside of Mesopotamia, a claim which has in turn been fed by copious press attention.
So before we move on to examine any potential evidence for a flood within Mesopotamia itself,
let us briefly discuss this hypothesis.
In 1997, what has become known as the Black Sea Deluge Hypothesis was first suggested by
geologists William Ryan and Walter Pitt. According to this hypothesis, which has since
been somewhat revised, around the end of the 6th millennium BC there was a catastrophic inundation
of saltwater from the Mediterranean into what is now the Black Sea. These authors have argued that
this sudden rise in sea level would have had a catastrophic effect on the Neolithic communities
in the surrounding region, and it is the memory of this catastrophe that would have inspired the
later Mesopotamian flood myth. Later, an alternative to this hypothesis was also suggested by AL
Chapaliga that this inundation actually took place somewhere between the 15th and 11th millennium BC,
with the source of flooding instead being the Caspian Sea to the east.
Now bear in mind that I am far from a geologist, and as such I am unqualified to judge whether
either of these events actually occurred. But looking at it from the outside, these hypotheses
seem to be heavily contested, with many geologists debating the extent and timing of each of these
hypothetical inundations. Moreover, the available archaeological evidence shows no great sign of
population movements throughout the period of these inundations that can be directly tied
to such a catastrophic flooding. We do know that from the second half of the 7th millennium BC,
there is evidence of sizable movements of people out of Turkey, both to the west into Greece and
further on into Europe, and to the east going as far as Egypt. However, it is still uncertain
whether these movements could have been caused by such a major inundation event,
and indeed there are other environmental reasons, such as an ongoing climate event
known as the 8.2-kill year event that may explain these movements.
But even if we assume that all of these events did in fact happen, the idea of them having
inspired the Mesopotamian flood myth relies on an unprecedented period of oral storytelling,
viewing the youngest date for a Black Sea inundation being separated from the first mentions of the
flood by nearly three millennia. It also fails to explain why no evidence of such an event was
preserved in other cultures closer to the centre of the event, such as the Old Hittite Kingdom,
which was a contemporary of the Old Babylonian Atrahasis. Finally, there is also no reason to
think that the ancient Mesopotamians would have had to rely on such a distant event to inspire
their own flood narratives, as seasonal flooding would have been more the norm than the exception
on the Alluvial Plain. As we discussed in the early parts of this video, agriculture in Southern
Mesopotamia during the 3rd and 2nd millennia BC would have relied on careful systems of water
management to be successful, and too much river water could easily have damaged cropland.
A particularly devastating flood could even wash away immature plants in the middle of the growing
season, resulting in a poor harvest and starvation. Major floods could even swamp and destroy the
mudbrick homes of those who lived nearby. In cities such as Uruk, this would have posed a
particular danger, as evidence indicates that the ancient course of the Euphrates River flowed
through the centre of the city itself. The result of all of this is that there is far more reason
to think that the ancient Mesopotamians would be more inspired by their own living conditions,
rather than a hypothetical event that took place millennia before.
So putting aside the idea of a Black Sea Hypothesis, is there any evidence from
all localised flood in Mesopotamia itself, the catastrophic effects of which may have provided
the core for the later myths? The answer is complex. Evidence for major flood strata has
indeed been unearthed at a number of ancient cities throughout southern Mesopotamia.
The most substantial of these have been found at free sites, at Kish to the north, at the site of
the later flood myths, Shuropak, and near what would have then been the southern coastline
at the city of Ur. Luckily for us, an account of the discovery of the flood layer at the last
of these was penned by the site's principal excavator, Sir Leonard Woolley.
It took place during the course of the 1928 to 1929 digging season. After excavating his most
famous find, the Royal Cemetery of Ur, Woolley ordered a small test shaft dug into the soil beneath.
After progressing through the occupation layers, he soon reached 8 feet of empty mud.
However under this, he discovered a surprise yet more occupation debris,
dating from the 4th millennium BC. Of this puzzling interruption in sequence,
he quickly formed an interpretation, though he hesitated to share it.
In the end it was his wife, fellow archaeologist Catherine Woolley, who gave voice to his suspicions.
To quote his later writings,
after pointing out the facts, asked for their explanation.
They did not know what to say. My wife came along and looked and was asked the same question,
and she turned away, remarking casually.
In the season prior to Woolley's discovery of the flood stratorettor,
two archaeologists named Stephen Langdon and Louis Waterlin were directing a series
of excavations at the city of Kish, which had begun in the early 1920s.
During the course of their investigations, they came across what they described as a thick layer
of sand deposited by a flood, beneath which they found a series of brick tombs.
Despite discovering this layer earlier than Woolley, they were slower to publish their findings,
and in one of those twists the academics around the world will be familiar with,
Woolley received both the credit and the lion's share of publicity.
Later excavations conducted at the city of Sheropak, similarly uncovered a flood stratum,
a finding that was given particular significance, given its status as the home
of the survivors of each of the Mesopotamian flood meves.
So are these scattered flood strator evidence of a large-scale flood throughout Mesopotamia,
the distant memory of which led to the flood story of the Atrahasis,
of Gilgamesh, and of the story of Dukalion and the biblical flood in turn?
The answer is almost certainly no.
Whilst these findings were received with great enthusiasm at the time,
the idea that they represented a single region-wide flood quickly ran into difficulties.
For a start, no evidence of flood strator on this scale had been found during excavations
at any of the other southern Mesopotamian sites dating from this period.
This comes despite the fact that many of these centres were located close to sites with flood
strator and were indeed fed by the same river system.
And when it comes to the three centres with evidence of flooding,
even a cursory examination of the evidence throws up further problems.
As laid out by David MacDonald in a 1988 article on the subject,
it is immediately obvious that the timing of these layers do not always overlap,
and each one varied in their intensity.
At her, we see evidence for a single large flood event dating from around the middle of
the 4th millennium BC. By comparison at Kirch, we see evidence of three separate floods,
two of them dating to the beginning of the early dynastic period, and a third dating from around
2600 BC. What also complicates this picture is that these assigned dates precede more modern
developments in radiocarbon dating, casting some doubt on their accuracy.
And even if we are to accept the idea that these floods did in some way influence the
later accounts of the flood found in Sumerian and Akkadian literature,
we would still have to explain the many centuries between them and the first known
description of the Deluge. As with the old Babylonian version of the Epic of Gilgamesh,
we could argue that such accounts may have been passed down in oral tradition during this time,
but ultimately there is no way of proving this theory. As such we must conclude that there is
no strong evidence that these floods had anything to do with the later Mesopotamian story,
and at the most all we can say is that these legends may well have been inspired by the
frequent flooding that came as part of life on the alluvial plain.
So what became of the Epic of Gilgamesh after the appearance of the standard version?
Well as we previously discussed, this work seems to remain popular as a tool of scribal
instruction well into the 1st millennium BC. In addition to its appearance as part of the
libraries of the Neo-Assyrian kings, we know of more than 70 copies that have been unearthed
throughout the Middle East. By the 1st millennium BC, it already appears to have been considered a
work possessing great antiquity and wisdom, which may explain how much of its text remained
fossilized compared to other epics of the period. Exactly how popular it was within
wider society however, we cannot say. As noted by Andrew R George, its popularity as a teaching
tool may indicate that the stories of Gilgamesh were still familiar to the average person,
as transcribing a well-known story would have been an ideal starting point for teaching the
cuneiform writing system. Unfortunately we have no clear way of knowing if this is true.
It is entirely possible that by this time knowledge of Gilgamesh had become unlimited
only to courtly scribes, along with rulers interested in his ideal of kingship.
What we can say is that despite its continued importance throughout the early and mid 1st
millennium BC, the slow waning of the Akkadian language from the 6th century BC onwards in
favour of Aramaic also seems to have resulted in a decline in the epics copying. Even then,
parts of its story would continue to influence other works throughout the Middle East and the
Mediterranean. In the archaic Greece of the early 1st millennium BC, the Gilgamesh story
likely had a significant influence on the development of both the Iliad and the Odyssey.
In the latter work, the exploits of Odysseus parallel many of those accomplished by Gilgamesh,
such as his contention with the giant Polyphemus, his visit to the Neverworld,
and his refusal of immortality through his spurning of the nymph Coipso.
On top of these, Gilgamesh is also thought to have influenced the characteristics
of the most famous Greek hero, Heracles. Much like Gilgamesh, this figure displays
supernatural strength and stature, his mortal and yet of divine parentage,
and garbs himself in the skin of a lion. These attributes may similarly have influenced the
description of the biblical judge, Samson, who was possessed of a men's strength until his long
hair was cut. And in addition to the incorporation of the Mesopotamian flood myth into both the
Jewish Torah and the Christian Old Testament, Gilgamesh and Humbaba are also thought to appear
in the apocryphal book of giants, where their names are assigned to a pair of giants unrelated
to the events of the epic. Gilgamesh also seems to have survived as a popular figure
into the Roman period. In the second century, the author Alien includes an account of
Gilgamesh's miraculous birth and usurpation of the throne of Uruk from his grandfather,
a story that has clear parallels to those surrounding the birth of the Akkadian Emperor,
Sargon the Great. Finally, scholar Stephanie Daly has suggested that the later story of
Buluqia in the Arabian Nights bears some similarity to Gilgamesh's quest to meet the
immortal survivor of the flood, though this interpretation has been disputed.
Despite its clear influences on these later works, by the end of the first millennium BC,
the epic itself appeared to have lost much of its importance. According to Geoffrey Teege,
its last known copy dates from either the second or the first century BC, and the last
cuneiform documents to contain any mention of Gilgamesh date from around the second century.
As with most Babylonian literature, the decline and eventual extinction of cuneiform writing
saw the end of the epic's relevance, and from this point onwards, it was lost for more than
2,000 years. Its most well-known copies were lost even earlier, remaining sealed in the
Burnt Library of Ashurbanipal after the fall of Ninef to a combined force of Medes, Babylonians,
and Scythians in the year 612 BC. Ironically, it is this baking process that may well have
served to preserve the tablets, and allowed their fragments to survive until their rediscovery by
Hormwood's Rassam in the early 1850s. Even then, however, Gilgamesh himself remained an obscure
figure, and the publicity surrounding George's initial translation of the epic was almost entirely
focused on the flood narrative contained within Tablet 11. What didn't help matters was that the
highly fragmentary state of the available materials at the time meant that the initial
translations of the epic of Gilgamesh, or Isdubar as he was mistakenly known,
bore little resemblance to the epic that we know today.
Over time, however, more and more fragments of the epic were unearthed,
resulting in a series of increasingly accurate translations in the early 20th century
by scholars such as Peter Jensen, Alexander Heidel, Ephraim Spaser, and Noah Cramer.
After the end of World War II, awareness of the Gilgamesh epic also began to grow
beyond the realms of academia. In the UK, Douglas Jeffrey Bridson's 1953 radio play,
The Quest of Gilgamesh, helped to popularize an adapted version of the epic to the general public.
Whilst in post-war Germany, the ruined cities, huge death toll, and population movements of the
post-war period drew comparisons to the epic by a series of celebrated poets and novelists.
Around this time, authors also began to take note of the homoerotic elements in Gilgamesh
and Enkidu's relationship, and a long literary trend began depicting the two as lovers.
From the 1960s, Gilgamesh would continue to reach a yet larger audience,
and in the 60 years since, he has appeared in almost every artistic medium possible.
Obviously, a full discussion of all of Gilgamesh's appearances in popular culture
is more than this video can hope to achieve. But perhaps the best summary of Gilgamesh's
modern role is given by Theodor Zyorkowski in his work, Gilgamesh Among Us.
Here he wrote that Gilgamesh has achieved something few other mythic figures have
accomplished, by establishing himself simply as a name or character, often independent from the
epic itself. The result is that there are few people in western culture to whom he is entirely
unfamiliar, even if the epic itself is unknown to them. So as we end here today, we can say with
confidence that whether or not an actual Gilgamesh ever existed, his name and exploits have managed
to live on in popular culture, long after those of Mesopotamia's greatest monarchs have been all
but forgotten. And looking back now, millennia after the society that composed his epic has
vanished from the face of the earth, it seems that his quest to overcome death may not have been so futile, after all.
Hello everybody, it's Charles here. Thank you for watching the video all the way through.
This one's certainly been quite a long time coming, so I hope you enjoyed it.
Before we end here today, I just want to say a quick thank you to the archaeologist Dr. Jeff
Emberling for allowing me to use some of his photos of various Sumerian cities in this video.
You can find a link to his research profile in the description below.
If you also want to keep up to date on what's happening on this channel, you can always follow
me on Twitter over at twitter.com slash the underscore histocrat. And if you'd like to
support the channel a little further, you can also head over to patreon.com slash the histocrat.
Thank you and take care folks.
