Report from Santa Fe is made possible in part by grants from the members of the National
Education Association of New Mexico, an organization of professionals who believe that investing
in public education is an investment in our state's economic future, and by a grant from
the Healy Foundation, Taos, New Mexico.
Hello, I'm Loreen Mills, and welcome to Report from Santa Fe.
Our guest today is Kenneth Stanley.
Thank you for joining us.
Thank you, Loreen.
Really happy to be here.
Well, you are an associate professor at the University of Central Florida.
You're a computer scientist, an artificial intelligence researcher, and you're here on
sabbatical with the Santa Fe Institute.
That's right.
So that's how we get to have you.
You are the co-author with Joel Lehman of this fascinating book, Why Greatness Cannot
Be Planned, and the subtitle is?
The Myth of the Objective.
What is the objective?
What do you mean, the myth of the objective?
So when I'm talking about the myth of the objective, I'm talking about the fact that
so many things that we do in our lives and in our culture are guided by what we call
objectives.
Like, it's something that you set that you want to achieve, and you say, this is now
my objective, or this is our objective as a society, or as an institution, or something
like that.
And we believe, and this is like a really deeply entrenched aspect of our culture, that by setting
an objective, it makes it possible to achieve it.
And the message of the book, and the reason we call it the myth of the objective, is that
actually many times, and this is a surprise, having an objective can actually prevent you
from achieving your objective.
So, it is a surprise, and something that we intuit, but the fact that you've come through
it through computer science, and you wonder how many times does a theory in computer science
affect our real life, but you have almost, some have said that this is in a way a scientific
proof of serendipity.
Yeah, I mean, this is a really unusual story.
It's true.
You usually don't end up prescribing social policy based on algorithms in computer science.
And it was a long, you know, circuitous path for us to get from these scientific experiments
to the point where we're actually critiquing certain things about culture and society.
It wasn't our intention from the beginning.
But that's what the whole book is about.
Yeah, it's kind of...
It had been your intention, you wouldn't have been able to do it.
Yeah, I mean, it's like the story behind the book is almost like part of the theme of the
book.
Well, let's tell us that story.
How did you arrive at this through your studies of algorithms and artificial intelligence?
Right, so this is going to sound a little off topic, but actually this is the story
of how we got to it.
We were doing something completely different.
We had no idea we were going to get here.
But we had created a website on the internet, which is called Pick Breeder, where people
can come in and breed pictures.
And I know that probably listeners don't really know what that means to breed a picture,
like you don't mate Picasso with a van Gogh.
But you know, I come from artificial intelligence and in that field, actually, we had been
working on technologies that would allow us to, in effect, give a picture a child.
And just as when you have a child, it might look somewhat like you, but be a little bit
different.
When Pick Breeder images have children, they also look like their parents, but not exactly.
And that allows users to, in effect, breed pictures the way you might breed horses or
dogs or something like that.
So I know that our audience is going to want to go look at this.
So it's www.pickbreeder, P-I-C-B-R-E-E-D-E-R dot org.
So show us some of the images, say a person would go to that site, and then track us down
the amazing work that you had done.
Yeah, so it's really surprising, I think, some of the images that people have discovered.
I'm just going to show a few images that give a sense of what people have discovered.
And you can see that these images actually look like real things.
Like there's a skull there, there's a butterfly, and this is just a small sampling of what
people discovered.
And it's important to point out that people evolved these things from blobs.
That's how things start, just total random blobs.
And they got to these amazing images.
And that's the beginning of the story of how we came to this realization, because we started
to look at how people were making these discoveries.
How people were breeding, say, an image that looks like a car or a skull.
And it turns out, and this is sort of where the insight began, that you might expect that
if you came into this site and you were trying to breed, breed images like you might breed
horses, that you would say, well, I'm trying to breed a butterfly or something.
And then you would sort of pick things that look more and more butterfly-like, and that's
your objective, and then you get it.
And we thought that too, but what we discovered was that, in fact, the only way that any of
these interesting discoveries were being made was when they were not the objective of the
user who bred them.
And this was just a huge revelation for us, completely unexpected.
It blew me over because it contradicted everything that I understood about achievement and how
to get to an objective.
Show us, I think one of the clearest examples is the image of the alien face, which then,
through evolutionary art, as they call this, became the image of a car.
And tell me how many generations it took, but first let's see the image.
So let me show you a picture of this alien face.
This is a story, part of a story about how this initial realization came about.
And this alien face, it's important to note, was not bred by me, it was bred by someone
else.
It had been posted on the site so that I was able to see that it was there, and then I
decided to continue from there, which we call branching.
And here's what happened.
It was several generations, actually I don't know the exact number, maybe 15 generations
or 20 generations, of picking children and continually breeding that then led me to this
really surprising discovery, which is a car.
So what happened, the story is that the alien face was bred into a car.
And what's so important about this is the fact that I had this experience myself, so
I know for a fact I was not trying to evolve a car.
And if you put all that together, I mean just think about how strange this story is.
I chose an alien face, which someone else evolved, it wasn't me, so I wouldn't have
evolved that myself.
And then I evolved a car, which is something that I wasn't trying to evolve.
So someone else had to do something that I never would have done, and then I had to not
be trying to do what I ultimately did for me to make this discovery.
And if you hear that story, it sounds like, wow, that was a big coincidence, you got really
lucky that one time.
But the amazing thing that we discovered is that that actually is always the story.
Almost every interesting discovery in the site has that exact same story.
Somebody evolved something that the other person would never have evolved, and then the second
person kind of took it in a handoff and bred it to a place that they weren't actually trying
to get to.
And that's how you actually find things on Pick Reader.
But one of the most amazing statistics that you told me was that there are some that have
taken 50 generations or 90, 74 generations, but then when you programmed a computer to
do it, to go from the alien to the car, after 30,000 generations, they could not do it.
With that intention of going there, they couldn't.
The computer, try and make it.
This is a really important point, it's really surprising if you think about it.
I mean, what I told you basically is that people find things by not looking for them,
but the converse is also really surprising, which is people do not find things by looking
for them.
Like if you came in there and you wanted to evolve a butterfly, you would fail because
as an objective, it's too hard to actually discover.
And these experiments that you just described are basically confirmation of that fact in
kind of an extreme way by giving it 30,000 generations to try to reproduce an image that
already had been discovered.
So we know it's even possible and every time we tried it, each 30,000 generation attempt
it failed, it never succeeded and it just illustrates that it's sometimes impossible
to reach a destination by trying, even though we know that these destinations can be reached
because they have been.
And I just want to point out again that the image on the cover of your book is one of
the butterflies that was evolved from something completely different without trying to make
a butterfly.
It's just another example and basically every image has that story behind it.
And you know, the reason is kind of important.
So you may ask, well, why is it like that?
You know, why is it that you can only find things by not looking for them?
And the reason is because if you think about it, like if you think about the example of
the car, an alien face led to that car, no one would ever guess that you can get from
an alien face to a car.
If you look closely in hindsight, you can see that...
I think you have a picture of the eyes and the wheels.
Yeah, I can show a connection there that, in fact, the eyes of the alien turned into
the wheels of the car.
And this is something that's only obvious in hindsight.
But looking forward, you would never realize something like that.
And so the point is that the stepping stones, in this case the stepping stone is this alien
face that led to a car.
The stepping stones never resemble the final product, and that's why you would not know
to go through those stepping stones if the final product was your objective.
So the only way you can get to these important stepping stones is by not being single-mindedly
focused on a single objective.
And then you open up all that possibility of eventually reaching these destinations
that were not your objective.
Now I'm going to expand this a little bit because it is as incredible cultural and social and
evolutionary.
So our world is so governed by objectives and talked about goal-oriented, whether it's
test scores, scientific funding, I mean, we could go on and on, bottom line profits, career
tracks, everything.
You have a goal and then you work toward that goal.
And then what you're saying, if the objective paradox is that sometimes you have to give
up that goal to achieve what you, you know, something maybe greater, if your goal is making
a sandwich, it's very clear what the steps are.
But if your goal is to end world hunger or to cure cancer or to make man fly, you shouldn't
be, there's no trajectory that will step by step take you there.
It often hinders you.
Yes.
I mean, and I think, you know, we're making a leap here.
We're going from picture breeding to how really important discoveries happen.
And while this is a strange leap, we should really be concerned when we think about this.
You know, because really the way that discovery happens is no different from pick breeder.
All of us, when we lead, when we discover something, are building on something that was created
by our predecessors.
And those are the stepping stones.
And what this lesson teaches us is that if those stepping stones do not resemble what
we're ultimately trying to achieve, then there's almost no way that we're going to actually
traverse those stepping stones intentionally.
And therefore, we should be worried about a society that's molded in such a way that
we're always trying to constrain everything we do through some kind of objective compass
because the effect is going to be that we prune out the stepping stones, which don't
look like the objective.
And that, in fact, is how we run a lot of our society.
Now, serendipity, let's talk about what great discoveries that have been—I mean, your
book is full of its fascinating read—is full of these ways that—how about Elvis?
Talk to me about Elvis and the microwave and some of your favorite stories.
Yeah, sure.
So the book gives a lot of these examples of—sometimes we call it serendipitous discovery.
And these are really important because they illustrate that this is not just about pick
breeder.
Like Elvis is an example because Elvis was not trying to invent rock and roll.
But he effectively did at least become one of the inventors of rock and roll.
And his colleagues say that he was just playing around and being himself.
And it's almost inconceivable that someone could have an objective of inventing rock
and roll because if you did, then you probably already invented it.
And it just goes to show that there's lots of things like that in life that you're not
going to run across unless you're not trying to create them.
Now, there are more practical things than just rock and roll.
I mean, there's things like the computer.
I like this example.
You know, the computers—the first computers were made out of vacuum tubes.
So vacuum tubes are a stepping stone that leads to computers.
But here's an interesting fact.
The people who invented vacuum tubes were not thinking about computers.
They were used for electrical experiments.
In fact, if your interest had been in computers, why would you be making vacuum tubes?
It has nothing to do, obviously, with computers.
So it's a good thing that their objective was not to make computers or else we wouldn't
have them.
And these kind of examples, you can go on and on.
The microwave one I like.
The microwave one's another good one.
And this is where Percy Spencer—and this is a very serendipitous thing—where he
had a candy bar in his pocket and he was working on radars, which had microwave technology
in them.
And he noticed that the candy bar melted and suddenly realized, you know what, this actually
leads to a microwave oven.
So you get radar technology as a stepping stone to microwave ovens.
Once again, no way to project looking forward that you go from radars to a new kind of an
oven.
But looking in hindsight, you can see where the connection came in.
And this kind of example happens again and again, and in fact, I just would like to point
the viewers to the Wikipedia page on serendipity, where there are tons of examples like this.
And the suspicious thing about it, the thing that I think people should take note of is
that the people who made these discoveries all have a good track record or all educated
or have been successful in the past.
I mean, if this was just a complete accident, then you wouldn't have these very well respected
people making these discoveries.
So it suggests that—and I think we're going to get to this—that this kind of process
of discovery is not pure random.
You can actually try to fasten your life in such a way that you have more opportunities
to encounter this kind of serendipity.
And this is something as a society that we can also try to facilitate.
Well, we're speaking today with Kenneth Stanley about his new book, Why Greatness
Cannot Be Planned.
But as you described this, again, we have an unconscious understanding, and perhaps it's
artists and musicians the most who understand this.
Talk to me about stepping stones and talk to me about how we can live in a way that
we are aware of these evolutionary steps.
What do you call it?
Treasure hunter.
What is it?
Who would be a treasure hunter?
How do we become treasure hunters?
Yeah, so the natural question that follows from the story that I've kind of given so
far is, well, how do we make this happen?
It sounds nice that, well, we can all just do whatever we want.
What's the real formula here that actually someone can key in on?
And the answer is that when you look at a system like Pick Breeder, what we're actually
observing when we came to understand what was happening, why people were making all
these discoveries, is that the system as a whole, the website in this example, is collecting
stepping stones.
Every time someone comes to that website and discovers something and publishes it to the
community, everybody can see it, like the alien face that I saw that I eventually evolved
into a car.
That's a stepping stone.
And the more stepping stones people publish, the more opportunities or departure points
are created for further discovery.
And that's what I mean by a stepping stone collector.
And it's in our interest to try to fashion society, especially the parts of it that are
focused on innovation or discovery, as a stepping stone collector.
And I sometimes also, like you said, call it a treasure hunter, because you can think
of these as treasures that are sort of buried.
We don't know what they are.
It's not an objective, but we know that there's lots of interesting stuff out there.
And we go hunting and trying to uncover them as much as we can.
You're used to the word interesting.
So you have created a noun, I don't know if it exists, called interestingness, right?
And you say that the scent of interestingness can lead us across these chains of stepping
stones into who knows what.
But because we do this, because it's interesting, and when people are choosing those images,
it's just the one that kind of interests them.
They're not thinking about the ratios or the proportion.
And so when you're guided by your own instincts, where will this take you?
Yeah.
So we tend not to trust people's instincts.
I mean, that's one of the morals here, is when we talk about interestingness, that's
the scent you have to follow if you don't have an objective.
You know, you're saying, well, which path should I follow?
And you don't know where any of them lead, because there's no objective.
That doesn't mean that you can't make an intelligent decision.
Often people will follow the path that's most interesting to them.
And what we've kind of done as a culture is decided that that's not a legitimate thing
to do.
In other words, we say that just about anything that you do has to somehow be objectively
validated.
You have to say what your objective is, and then we have to prove that you're actually
moving towards that objective.
Which means that nobody can get away with actually following the scent of interestingness.
If you think about, you know, accountability and metrics, and these things are pervasive
in our society, they're all objectively driven, and they're all pruning out this concept of
interestingness, which ultimately means we don't trust people to use their instincts
or their expertise, and we think it's too risky to let them do that, and so we're pruning
out all of the creative possibilities that those people could potentially uncover.
So here we have the objective paradox, which is to achieve our highest goals.
We must be willing to abandon them.
And then how can we create an environment for ourselves to go against the myth of the
objective?
Because you're saying working toward an objective is not going to do it.
So you have posited a day without objectives.
What would that do?
And you say that not meeting our objectives, which are superimposed on this, or come from
within, is very stressful.
You feel like an underachiever because you didn't win the Nobel Prize today.
And how would society be different just even if we could take some time off from objectives?
For kids, for example.
Yeah.
I mean, and you could think about this in the context of the education system where
people just saturated with things like standardized tests.
And this is no doubt.
Most people have an instinct that this is having a bad effect on children.
And we've done experiments, further experiments, beyond Pick Reader, where we actually formalized
Pick Reader in a computer program.
We called it Novelty Search, which we used to kind of demonstrate and show that it is
actually possible to implement this principle in practice and use it to make discoveries
that are useful.
And one of the things that we found in these experiments is that allowing things to make
mistakes and do things that we think are objectively perhaps bad or subpar actually leads them
eventually to discovering really important skills and abilities.
And so that might be a difference if we could allow people to do that, is that we would
get to places that we couldn't get to in a more efficient and also satisfying way.
Well, you talk about it being a different path to achievement.
And you did have, in the Novelty Search, you had a program where you created the jogger.
And I think you have an illustration of this jogger.
And the jogger's job was to go down through these walls.
And well, tell me.
Tell me what you're...
Yeah, so we made this program, which is a kind of demonstration of this principle, this
non-objective principle.
And you know, Pick Reader has humans in the loop, humans are making decisions.
We wanted to show that we can do this completely inside of a computer, partly because I'm
an AI researcher.
So people in my field want computers to do stuff on their own that's intelligent.
But usually in the field of artificial intelligence, if you were making a program to train a robot
to walk, and here I'll show a picture of what this robot looks like.
This is a robot in different kind of steps of walking.
Usually if you were trying to do something like this, you would reward the robot in some
sense for getting better at walking.
So it's like if it can get farther, it's better.
And then we would elaborate on that strategy, and then we get better and so forth.
What we did is we created this program called Novelty Search, which does not try to improve
with respect to walking.
Rather, it just says you're doing a good job if you're doing something different than
you've done before.
And so it falls on its face, it does all kinds of stupid things.
But if it falls on its face in a different way, that's good.
We say great.
That means that that's a stepping stone that we should explore further to see what might
happen if we elaborate on that idea.
And in so doing, eventually it actually led to walkers, and it actually led to walking
robots that walk better than the ones that were trained by rewarding them for trying
to pursue the objective.
So it kind of demonstrated this point in a real concrete, scientific, empirical way.
So one of the things that you say, it's sometimes better to start from where you are instead
of where you want to go.
Talk to me about the Wright brothers.
So when you think about objectives, what an objective really is, it's about comparing
where you are to where you want to be.
And when you talk about something like novelty, which is not an objective concept, novelty
is basically comparing where you are to where you've been before.
And for some reason, we don't like doing that.
We want to always compare ourselves to the future.
But something like the Wright brothers, we can view, sometimes that's used as a counter
example.
They wanted to build something that can fly, and then they did.
But we can also view it as the Wright brothers were at the right stepping stone at the right
time and realized that right at that moment, the stepping stones had been laid.
So this is where they are right now that have suddenly enabled us to move in a direction
towards.
And they were bicycle manufacturers.
They were making bicycles.
Yeah, right.
So in some sense for them, a bicycle was a stepping stone that kind of made an analogy
with a plane.
And they saw that you can bridge that gap.
So sometimes it makes sense to just sort of appreciate the possibilities of where you
are, as opposed to saying this is this long term vision that we need to achieve and everything
I do will now be compared to that.
We only have a couple of minutes left.
Steve Jobs talks about this a lot.
Because he was in college, he dropped out, he took a calligraphy class, he said, only
looking back, can I see how one thing led to another?
And that's why Apple and his products were as beautiful and as sensible as they were.
Yeah, I mean, Steve Jobs, he could have been a co-author of this book because his life
was really kind of lived in the spirit.
And like this calligraphy class that he took, and he didn't know that this was going to
lead to a revolution in computer fonts, until in hindsight he saw that a connection was
there.
And he has a lot of stories like this.
He dropped out of college and that's what allowed him to take the calligraphy class.
And most people would not think of dropping out of a college as an objectively good decision.
So a lot of people have done great things, have followed this philosophy in some sense.
Well, you have taken your research in the physical world into the metaphysical.
And there's overtones of Zen Buddhism and a lot of paths that say, if there's no destination,
every path is the right path, because it moves you along.
In the last part of your book, I just want to read this beautiful sentence of yours.
It's called, farewell to the...
Farewell to the mirage?
That's the chapter.
The mirage of object.
Right.
This mirage that objectives can get you where you want to go.
And you say, when all is said and done, even when visionaries grow weary of stale visions,
when the ash of unrequited expectation settles on the cloak of the impenetrable future, there
is but one principle that may yet pierce the darkness.
To achieve our highest goals, we must be willing to abandon them.
Yeah.
I mean, that sort of recaps the book.
That's the concluding paragraph.
And it's a difficult pill to swallow.
It sounds strange.
Giving up objectives is like giving up a security blanket.
But I hope that the evidence there is compelling enough to make people think twice about using
objectives for almost everything that we do in our culture, because it is going to lead
to this kind of ash falling on the cloak of the impenetrable future.
Yes.
And your book is full of examples.
I mean, from history that we all know and understand of people who have given up their
stated objective just to find out and discover what was out there.
And look what it's done for our world.
I must tell you, Kenneth, your book, I think this is a stepping stone.
Why greatness cannot be planned.
I really urge people to read it.
You're in challenging territory here.
And I think it's really life-changing.
I want people to read your book.
And I'm so grateful that you, our guest today, is Ken Stanley.
Thank you for taking the time to join us today.
Thank you so much.
I'm really glad to have this opportunity to get this message out.
Yes, yes.
And I'd like to thank you, our audience, for being with us today on Report from Santa Fe.
I'm Loreen Mills.
We'll see you next week.
Most archival programs of Report from Santa Fe are available at the website, reportfromsantafe.com.
If you have questions or comments, please email info at reportfromsantafe.com.
Report from Santa Fe is made possible in part by grants from the members of the National
Education Association of New Mexico, an organization of professionals who believe that investing
in public education is an investment in our state's economic future, and by a grant from
the Healy Foundation, Taos, New Mexico.
