Lecture 4, Later History, Becoming Scientific
Hello. In this lecture we're going to conclude our romp through the history of child study,
the history of how we got to the point where grand theorists developed their ideas about human development.
To review for you once again, I talked about six phases of this history.
The first phase was a phase in which children were not of concern and there was no interest in child study.
The second phase was a phase in which children were seen as born evil needing redemption.
In the third phase, major philosophers Locke and Rousseau developed the idea that humans were born neutral and then that humans were born good.
And in this phase today we're going to talk about observational research and also in the fifth phase about how theoretical science then developed.
And then in the sixth and last phase about contemporary diversity, the way we have the field of human development today.
After the influence of the philosophers that we discussed in the last lecture, we had a burgeoning interest in science and the study of humans and child development in particular from a scientific viewpoint.
You see, science was emerging as a way of gaining knowledge about the world.
Before that, philosophers had dominated.
They had great ideas and it wasn't to say that they weren't empirical.
Philosophers did observe nature and did observe the way things were to develop their philosophies and their theories.
But scientists espoused the view that everything we knew had to be empirical, that how we gained knowledge was through observable objective data.
And these observable objective data were necessary to establish the validity of any philosophical idea or any hypothesis.
When I say objective data, that meant in science that not only could one scientist observe what was happening, but another scientist could also observe that same information.
And one scientist could describe what he or she observed and pass it on to another scientist.
So in this way, there was reliability. People could verify what each other was saying.
This empirical approach to knowledge really took over in many fields and it also influenced the newly burgeoning field of psychology, which was a very young and new science that had developed out of philosophy.
And it also influenced the study of human development as well.
Why didn't it develop earlier? Why wasn't there this systematic study of children earlier?
Well, science was not the main process or method of discovering information.
We also didn't have the luxury of time and a middle class and resources to spend studying children.
And I also think that those previous philosophies and ideas that we talked about of looking at children as being at least neutral, if not having a lot of good qualities, and being distinct from adults, having some developmental course.
Those views were necessary for people to now then take a view that let's study in a systematic way what children are all about.
Let's really learn what's happening to them.
So some scientists began publishing detailed systematic accounts of the development of their own children, of their own children.
Now these forerunners of developmental psychologists are sometimes called the baby biographers.
And the first known published account was in 1787. It was a diary of the observations of Dietrich Tiedemann in Germany.
It's interesting. You think 1787, for thousands of years, possibly millions of years, people have been observing their children.
Well, maybe somebody did write something down and systematically observed them. This is the first account that we have.
But remember in the past, at least in European history, in American history, as I already mentioned, there wasn't this interest in the systematic study and observation.
Dietrich Tiedemann then wrote a detailed diary explaining normal development as he saw it in his own child.
In 1882, Wilhelm Pryor in Germany published what we call now the first textbook on child development.
But it was written in the same manner, detailed descriptive observations of his child and other children.
There were other detailed observations by people of their own children. Again, part of this baby biographer movement or approach.
Alfred Benet, who's famous as being the founder, the father of the intelligence test, was one of the people who wrote a baby biography of his own child.
And Alfred Benet proved to be a very astute observer of child development and many issues in development.
We're going to come back to Benet in a little bit.
The most famous baby biographer was Jean Piaget, well past this time, in modern times, but he followed the same approach.
For part of his theory, he did detailed observations of his own three children over a period of about three years and wrote detailed notes that falls under this category of a baby biography.
He used this as some of his most important information to back up his theoretical accounts.
Charles Darwin first published, of course, everybody knows he was famous, he first published The Origin of Species.
But later, after this publication, in 1877, he published detailed observations of his own son.
Charles Darwin was a superb observer. I've read parts of this observation and it astounds me how modern and up-to-date Darwin was in his observations of his own son.
He discussed the development of emotions, of causal thinking, of the concept of self, and other domains of development that we're still attempting to unravel and understand today.
He said things that could be written in a fairly modern day about these things. He was a good observer.
My guess is, if Darwin hadn't focused on evolution, he could have been famous as one of the first developmental psychologists.
Now, each parent in these baby biographies had access to more detailed observations than anyone else.
If you have your child, your subject with you day in and day out and you know that child very well, you have the ability now to really make detailed and astute observations.
That was the good thing about the baby biographers, but each baby biographer also reflected the biases of his own theory and his own concepts of a child's nature,
just as we have already talked about the different approaches or views of a child's nature.
Darwin's child, surprise, surprise, supported his views of evolution and habitation.
Piaget's children, surprise, surprise, supported his theory of cognitive development.
They fit in perfectly, and that was the case with every one of these baby biographers.
But I think this was the impetus to start more research, more empirical observation of children.
Following this work, empirical scientists functioned like naturalists, and they began to do systematic observations of children and of their development.
Now, for a modern counterpart, think of Jane Goodall and her work with chimpanzees in the wild.
Here were these observers outstocking the wild child on the playground, in the home, in play groups, watching what they did, keeping detailed notes,
and making observations and comments about the description of development, the description in terms of what happened and the sequence that things were developing in.
These scientists described normal development, but they became ever more experimental in their approaches.
They started out being unobtrusive observers and started manipulating and getting more into an experimental approach to it.
But for the most part, in this era, they were describers of development. They were naturalists.
Some of the most influential are, one, is G. Stanley Hall.
G. Stanley Hall, I don't know if you've heard of him or not. He's an interesting character. He's both famous and not famous.
He seemed to be a very bright guy. He got in early on the new field of psychology, and in that way, he was extremely influential in this new field because he was one of the first.
He studied everything. He seemed to have his hand in everything and be interested in everything.
He was the person who primarily founded the American Psychological Association.
He was the person who primarily founded Clark University in Massachusetts. He became its first president.
He studied anything and everything. He wrote hundreds of articles about child development and adolescent development in particular.
And he studied things from the way girls play with different dolls and the details of the kinds of dolls they like and the sequence that they go through,
the way children play, the way they interact in groups. It went on and on.
And yet, even though he had an extremely strong influence on the field of psychology because of starting the institutions like the American Psychological Association,
nobody reads this stuff today. Hundreds of articles, they haven't gone anywhere.
Let me go back to our very first lecture, and I mentioned if we don't have a theory to unify facts and data, we can't do anything with these things.
If we don't stick in our mind, we can't put it together. Theories help explain things and simplify the world and put things together.
And a theory was not what Hall had, not at least in terms of explaining all of his massive observations.
He was a data gatherer, but because nothing held together, because he couldn't put it all together, he didn't have much of an influence from all of his empirical work.
It was a caution to you would be future developmental researchers.
Alfred Benet was another one who was an early observational researcher of children.
Now Alfred Benet is also famous, as most of you know, as the father of intelligence testing. I already mentioned that.
He was famous in particular because of developing this intelligence test.
And in fact, the first intelligence tests that he developed were for a very compassionate reason.
The people there wanted some kind of assessment of kids who would have problems in the school systems.
They were having too many problems, they weren't fitting in, and they thought if we could just get a handle on those that might be at risk, at high risk, and need extra help, we could do something to help them along.
If we knew that beforehand.
And they went to Benet, who was studying child development and seemed to be an expert, and they said, would you develop some kind of assessment tool that can help us to do this?
And he thought, well, the best thing to do is figure out the kinds of skills that a kid needs to make it through the typical school system, those tests, and let's assess those tests before he gets there to see what tendencies he has, predispositions he has if he's ready for it.
Sort of like head start to see if he's ready.
And that's the kind of things he did with his tests.
Then he standardized these tests.
After giving the test to many kids, throwing out questions, adding questions, he came up with some standard tests that showed if you're this age, this is what kids typically can answer, here's what they can answer.
And he had the test divided into different domains or categories, how you do in spatial skills, how you do in vocabulary, how you do in this area or that area.
It only later became known as, quote, a test of intelligence.
But it started out as a test to assess which kids would have problems in school so you could assess the kinds of problems they'd have, which ones would do okay.
It does a very good job at that particular task.
That was what Benet mainly did.
But most people don't know this.
He also did a lot of detailed observations of kids.
And in his work with those, with the kids, he was also an astute observer.
He gathered data from different areas.
He began to theorize and he made a lot of sense of what he found.
Interestingly, Benet gave up all of his developmental work and later became a playwright in Paris.
And at least the reports are that he was fairly successful.
This ends this phase.
I remember in real life it didn't end so artificially.
But the fifth phase in our history of child study was a shift more theoretical science.
What the scientists of child development had been doing was contributing systematic information of data.
They had been describing development, if you will.
And now scientists began to change to not just describing the child, but to explaining the processes.
So the scientists began to develop systematic theories to account for the sequences of development that they saw in children
and the underlying mechanisms or processes that would explain this development.
So the grand theorists began to emerge.
John Watson, John B. Watson at Johns Hopkins University was one of the most influential and famous of these grand theorists.
In the 1920s, he took the earlier work of Pavlov, Ivan Pavlov in Russia, who had done work on conditioning in animals.
And he developed this work in applying it to babies and to humans.
And he developed a theory that was called behaviorism.
And it came to dominate American psychology.
It also dominated all of the theoretical approaches to child development in this country.
Many people ask me if I'm related to John Watson.
And I tell them, yes, my grandfather was John Watson, but not the John Watson.
He was called the father of behaviorism.
And if you look at this approach, it really comes back, it harkens right back to John Locke's approach to development and to human nature
that were born neutral and were molded by the environment.
It looks to the future, John Watson's future, that is, in which he influenced B.F. Skinner, one of the most famous behaviors,
and eventually Albert Bandura, who is one of the theorists that we are going to talk about.
Behaviorist theory stressed the influence of the environment on the child.
The child was a blank slate once again and could be made into anything one wanted.
In fact, John Watson's view of molding children put John Locke to shame.
John Watson had, and I'm paraphrasing, but a quote that went something like this.
He said, if you give me any ten children who are neurologically normal, and if you'll give me absolute control of their world
and their upbringing and their environment, I'll make them anything you want at random.
I'll make one into a thief, the other one into president of the United States, one into a musician,
one into a philanthropist, and one into a drunk.
I can do it all. I can mold them into anything you want if you'll just give me the control of their environment.
That's an extreme view.
It also changed psychology, this approach that he had, because after the behaviorist revolution brought about by Watson,
psychology now became the study of observable behavior rather than the study of intellectual and psychological processes,
which to large extent had been.
And that's because Watson's stressed, if we're going to be scientists, we have to pay attention to what we can observe accurately and objectively.
And that's only behavior.
We'll never know what somebody's thinking, what's going on inside.
We'll look at what comes in from the environment and how that relates to the behaviors or responses that people give.
He always called them responses.
Remember, we had a mechanistic view here that people responded to outside influences.
In fact, I think it was just a hype, but in selling his theory, Watson once said, there isn't such a thing as mind.
It doesn't exist.
I don't think he believed that, but he wanted to stress this is not what we're about.
Now, his work had such a strong influence on psychology that after a while dominated in America and drove all other work out.
One of the other competing theories at the time about that same time period was the work of Arnold Gazelle.
Arnold Gazelle was at Yale University and he developed a stage theory of normative behavior that was based on maturational processes.
Rather than the extreme mechanistic approach of Watson's environmental approach, Gazelle had an extremely organismic approach that was not looking at the environment as being influential,
but was really looking at this unfolding, this automatic unfolding in maturation of kids going through sequences.
He was a very good observer.
He wrote a lot about this and had an influence, but most of his work is not used today.
I personally think that Watson's behaviorism drove out a lot of competing theories, and that's one reason they haven't been so influential today.
But one thing we have left over from Gazelle's work, we have this sense of stages and we have phrases in our vocabulary that came from his work.
We say, all that kid is just going through a stage.
That came from Gazelle's work or the terrible twos.
That's from Gazelle's work.
During this same time period, in Europe, a supreme theorist was developing a theory that was the most extensive and far-reaching theory that had yet been developed, and that was Sigmund Freud.
Now, Freud's theory was revolutionizing thinking about children.
Most of us know something about Freud's theory.
We've been exposed to it.
He's part of our culture.
He's part of our thinking.
He wasn't developing a theory that was primarily to explain, the primary purpose was to explain child development.
He was an analyst.
He was a physician.
He was trying to explain psychopathology and disorders.
But to try to make this grand explanation of everything, he was paying attention to development as well.
His theory has become known as a psychodynamic theory or a psychoanalytic theory.
Psychodynamic because it was dynamic, moving, changing.
There were a lot of things going on.
Psychoanalytic because he was also stressing the therapy side of it, the way therapy was done.
He stressed the importance and strong influence of unconscious processes and conflicts that go on within a person.
And the way we develop our personality.
Now, we're going to come back to Freud's theory later and explain that theory in more detail.
But when Freud's theory made it to America and began influencing American developmental psychologists and other developmental researchers,
it was in direct competition to Watson's behaviorist theory.
And the two were competing and duked it out for some time.
Now, this was expected since behaviorism really stemmed from a mechanistic approach.
It was probably the most extreme of mechanistic approaches.
And the psychodynamic theory stemmed from an organismic approach.
So, behaviorism and psychoanalysis were always fighting.
They were around at the same time in the, primarily in the 30s and the 40s.
In some cases, people tried to reconcile the two.
They would write about how psychodynamic or Freudian principles could be really thought of in terms of a behaviorist approach.
But for the most part, they were at disagreement with each other.
Behaviorism eventually won out in its influence on science and research.
And when behaviorism won out, psychoanalysis or psychodynamic theory didn't have much influence on research,
at least in this country.
And behaviorism did and generated massive reams of research and the approach we took.
Behaviorism was a theory that didn't look at stages so much or at the strong differences in unfolding of children's development.
It looked at processes and it really, really compared learning to development
and basically took the view that they were one of the same things.
The last grand theorist of child development also revolutionized European thinking before influencing American scientists.
And this was John Piaget and his theory of cognitive development.
Piaget's theory was the most all-encompassing and systematic theory of human development that had ever emerged.
In fact, the most comprehensive and on-compensating theory that has ever emerged in the field of human development.
He was primarily interested in child development.
But his end goal was to explain how the child got to be the adult, how we come to be able to think and process as we do.
So for Piaget, he took a sidetrack to study children that lasted his entire life.
But he was interested in human nature and in human development across the whole lifespan.
He just happened to study child development and the origins as the way to explain it.
And in Piaget's theory, we have the absolute embodiment of the organismic approach.
He clearly was strongly influenced by Rousseau's work and by that organismic way of thinking.
And he incorporated that in every way into his theory.
When he was then translated into English and started to have an influence in the United States,
behaviorism was very strong and was basically controlling everything in the field.
But gradually Piaget's work started to influence people.
At first, American psychologists and other people studying development fought it.
Tooth and claw, but eventually it won out.
And so in the 1970s and the 1980s, it completely dominated research and thinking in the field of development and throughout the world.
And it eliminated behaviorism as a dominant form just as behaviorism had eliminated Freudian theory as a dominant form and theory.
Now the last, the sixth and last phase in our history of child study can be called the phase of contemporary diversity.
Previous theories, particularly those of Freud and Piaget, are still with us today implicitly in our thinking.
Even if you have never read Freud in the original or had a course on Freud,
all of you have certain ideas from Freud that are part of our thinking.
And certainly anybody who studies child development and human development has implicitly ideas and an understanding that comes from Piaget.
And likewise, we all have certain behaviorist ideas that are still with us today.
But today we still have theorists.
This is the era of scientific theorizing on development just as it is in other domains.
But no one theory dominates the field of child study or of human development study as it once did.
The study of child development and human development more generally has become so diverse that each domain of development seems to have theories that lead to research in that domain alone,
but do not address issues in other domains.
It is this way, I think, with all of science.
As we gain more information, as more people study it, the sciences break up and diversify,
where at first maybe you had one general physical science that broke up into chemistry and physics and eventually biology.
And then we broke into biochemistry and we have nuclear physics and theoretical physics and different kinds of physics.
And we have molecular biology that's separate from the naturalists.
Well, in psychology the same thing has happened.
It's hard to talk about psychology being one unified domain or one unified field today.
And it's also true for the study of human development, even child development.
So today we have some strong research in theorizing and areas of cognitive development left over from PHA's influence.
In language development.
In children's understanding of other people's thinking.
That is their ability to make attributions and understand how the mind works
and how we make sense of what other people might do and think.
We have a strong area of neurological development because right now the strongest area of research is neuroscience.
And we have a strong area of developmental disorders and psychopathology.
We also have a very strong area now of development across the entire lifespan,
especially looking at development in old age.
However, there haven't been any major theories of the intensity that these six theories that we're discussing in this course have reached
that explain development and adulthood in old age.
But this is probably an area that's ripe for grand theorizing and taking over.
It's hard to predict the future.
But probably some new theories will come about from some of these areas.
What's difficult to say is whether any theory will take over the entire field the way PHA's did or the way Freud's did.
Or whether we're beyond that now in the field.
The six theories that we're going to study in the future lectures were built on these early influences on child study.
Though these theories don't dominate the entire field today, they still have a strong influence, every one of them.
And they influence our conceptions of children and human nature.
Now this is interesting.
Many of the most influential theorists, many from this group that we're going to study for the rest of this course,
came from outside the field of human development.
That seems interesting to me and sort of strange.
Freud really came from medicine.
He was a physician.
Erickson, as you'll learn, really had no formal academic training.
But he was a psychotherapist and came to development from that way.
John Bowlby was a psychotherapist and then came to development from there.
Piaget was a philosopher and a biologist.
Vygotsky was, it's hard to say what the field was.
He was trained as a lawyer.
He was a philosopher and came to it that way.
Why is that?
I think that's interesting because if we want to have great theorists coming along,
it seems like we should train them in the field of child and human development.
But in some ways, you might argue that if you train them in this way,
maybe you stifle them and their creativity.
In some ways, the theorists who came along had creativity and were able to break new ground
because they brought a different approach or came in a fresh approach to things.
Next lecture we begin by studying Sigmund Freud's theory.
Thank you.
