Lecture 6 How We Gain Contact with Reality, the Ego
Hello. In the last lecture we introduced Freud's theory and we talked about his basic functioning that he called the id.
In this lecture we're going to continue with Freud's theory and we're going to cover the basic parts or processes of mental functioning or the personality,
talk about the id again and its relation to the ego and also the superego and how they function together.
And then we'll discuss ego defense mechanisms and give some examples of how the ego functions can sometimes also be maladaptive.
As we discussed in the last lecture, the id is the term that Freud gave to that part of our mental processes that is the source of libidinal energy or psychological energy.
And the id functions through using the libidinal energy to try to meet the basic needs of the individual.
Because the id is wholly unconscious and irrational in its functioning, it doesn't really adapt to the demands of reality.
Now you can see examples of this irrationality and they can be included in wish fulfillment as an attempt to reduce drives and gain pleasure.
If a person is hungry, the id doesn't discriminate between effectively actually eating food and ineffectively sucking or dreaming about food or fantasizing about food.
However, it's these very irrational actions that usually lead to the frustration and the unmet needs that really make the difference in development.
You see, empty sucking or thinking about food just doesn't fill your stomach and these needs then force a person to begin adjusting to reality.
And it's with this need to be more successful at meeting our needs comes the dawning of consciousness, comes a reality orientation.
Now my guess is knowing what we know about humans today, we become more and more conscious after birth and it probably is sort of a biological unfolding.
But Freud was either lucky or very astute in his observations that when to see that babies when they're born are for the most part unconscious.
We know today, I don't think he knew this at the time, we know today when newborns are first born and for the first couple of weeks on average they spend about four hours sleeping for every seven minutes that they spend awake.
And when they're awake, sometimes it's in a sort of a drowsy condition, they are conscious, but there isn't a heck of a lot of real conscious time.
And that's aside from all the unconscious processing that he's already talking about.
So in a Freudian sense you could say that it's the frustration, the lack of adaptability of the id that forces us to really become conscious and to become reality oriented.
And the ego is the term that Freud gave to that part of mental processes that becomes conscious and deals with rational problem solving.
Now do you remember that I said when Freud gave the term for the id in the original German it was the it.
In the original German the word for the ego was ich, the I, and I like the original German better because he talked about the it part of us versus the I part of us.
And the implications that I thought were very clever was that the it implies that we have no self-concept, it's just an it, there's no sense of identity.
But the second part, the I, implies that we have a developing self-concept, we're somebody, we have an identity.
And I think that's what he was trying to capture.
Anyway, the I or the ego is what we call this reality part.
In Freud's conceptualization the emergence of the ego and consciousness then is the direct result of the id and primary process as being so darn maladaptive and inefficient at meeting our basic needs.
So the ego then channels some of the libido, the psychic energy from the id, and uses it to function and develop problem solving processes.
Remember the id has all of the libido, but now we channel off some of that libido, that libidinal energy, and we try to solve problems.
And Freud called then that the way of thinking, the processes of the ego, secondary process thinking as opposed to the primary process thinking of the id.
Secondary only because it came second to the primary process thinking.
Secondary process thinking is reality oriented.
This thinking then involves the reality principle, whereas for the primary process thinking of the id, it involves the pleasure principle, seeking pleasure, avoiding pain.
The reality principle is trying to solve problems, to find an effective way to get what you want, to actually taking the actions.
So as an example, now when a person is hungry, she doesn't just suck or fantasize, but she attempts to get food.
So for a baby that means you cry, but you do an instrumental kind of crying, you try to get the parents attention, you try to do things to get the parents to feed you.
For an older child that might mean, go to the refrigerator for heaven's sakes and make yourself a sandwich.
Don't just sit and think about it and fuss.
That's the ego.
And with this conscious processing, one also learns what actions might lead to harm and punishment.
Because now that you're in touch with reality, you might learn that even though you have a certain need, and therefore you have this drive state, if you do take certain actions, this may get you in big trouble.
Somebody will punish you, or you may get hurt.
So one learns to postpone gratification.
And one of the jobs in the ego is to learn delay of gratification in order to develop appropriate means to attain what you need.
So often the immediate demands of the drives of the id, and the demands of reality, the demands of trying to solve problems come into conflict.
And you see that?
Id really wants it now.
It's irrational.
It wants everything, and it wants it now.
And the ego is trying to work things out so you don't get in trouble and it's effective.
So often, libidinal energy is driving simultaneously both pleasure seeking of the id and problem solving of the ego.
You can see where Freud now is getting at these conflicting motivations and emotions that we have.
So as the ego develops, and as it becomes stronger, it takes on the role of the controlling structure to help the person adapt and to cope.
It becomes the controller.
And in doing this, the ego often suppresses the drives of the id.
The id in return channels its demands and its drives into various forms.
It often camouflages these drives, these demands, so that they can pass by the ego.
Now, we talk like this because Freud talked like this.
I don't think the id, they're making executive decisions about how well if I can't get it out this way, I'll camouflage it this way.
Remember the id is not rational.
It's like a pressure place having needs and demands.
And if these needs and demands can't be met, they take another form.
They're forced to come out some other way.
So let's say as an adult, I really don't like somebody, but I have to control my anger and my emotions.
And so what I end up doing, I can't do what maybe the id would like to do is destroy this person.
So what I end up doing is it comes out maybe in dreams in an unconscious way.
And in my dream, I'm talking to the person.
Maybe I'm competing with the person, but I'm not fighting.
And that's what I mean by a camouflage or another form that it might take.
Because another example, let's say you want to have sex with somebody.
But the demands of reality, the ego says, sorry, you can't do that, not right now.
And so unconsciously, you might not even be aware that you're doing this.
Unconsciously, you start seeing the other person as somebody who needs a lot of help.
And you go over and you help her paint her house and you help her out in ways.
And that's the way it sort of comes out.
So eventually, and according to Freud, through the resolution of the Oedipal conflict,
which we're not going to talk about today, but we'll talk about in the next lecture,
through the resolution of this Oedipal conflict, an individual internalizes parental standards
and with them society standards.
And this forms the third part of our whole mental processing system.
And Freud called this the superego.
He called it the uberich or the supereg, so superego is a pretty good term for it.
So now you have the ego and the superego that comes about as really a way of society
and these standards being taken inside.
The superego, in effect, has two parts, as Freud sought.
The first part is called the ego ideal.
And the ego ideal is the view that we've incorporated of how we should be ideally,
how we should behave and how we should function.
In a sense, it's our ideal model for ourselves.
This part we can hold up as our standard.
So my ego ideal might include that I'm a kind, generous person, that I am always honest,
that I'm competent in my job, I'm a great father, I'm a great husband, or some other aspects of my ego ideal.
And actually we can use this ideal as a way of comparing how we're really functioning and how we're doing
and strive constantly to achieve our ideal.
The second part of the superego is called the conscience.
And the conscience is really a process that we use to really judge how we're doing
in how we're living up to our ego ideal.
So the conscience is a way of saying, ooh, you're really not like your ideal
or you're doing a pretty good job in that way you were.
The conscience then drives a person to reward the person or punish the person
based on how well or how poorly that person's doing and achieving the ego ideal.
Before I believe this, before I believe that in some unconscious ways we do reward and punish ourselves
through this process of the superego working.
For example, if I do a really kind deed, I may feel very proud and have a good feeling for the rest of the day.
Who knows? Later in the day, not even aware of this, I may get a dessert that I normally wouldn't get.
And Freud would argue that in some ways in an unconscious level I'm rewarding myself with these good feelings
and I'm rewarding myself maybe by letting myself do some things, get some rewards.
But let's say I lose control of my anger.
First I lose control of things that I think should be kept in and I do some things that come out.
And in the process I feel extremely guilty and for the rest of the day I just feel lousy.
I can't always put a finger on it.
And in fact I may even get sick or maybe if this continues I might have an accident and get hurt.
So Freud argued that the conscience and our superego, if you will,
can actually punish us even to have things that we're not aware of, to be accident-prone,
to be more prone to illness, as well as feeling guilty and feeling lousy.
So in that way the superego is constantly sort of rewarding and punishing us to try to get us in line
with the way we should be as we've taken it in from the outside, from society.
The superego is partly conscious but it's also partly unconscious,
unlike the ego which is really the part of us that deals with reality and consciousness.
And therefore the superego is also not always rational and not always reality-oriented.
It may come from society but once it gets inside us, if it becomes too strong it really distorts reality
and it can become maladaptive just like the id can.
You see, the superego can cause conflicts with both the id and the ego.
It's definitely trying to block some of the ego's demands, it's trying to block some of the id's demand.
So in Freudian terms, for a person to develop a healthy personality and also to be most adaptive,
the ego has to become the strong member, the strong part of our personality or our processing.
It has to be so developed that it can become a mediator, a strong mediator between the id, the superego,
and the demands of reality.
So in Freudian terms, having a strong ego does not have the negative connotations that we have today.
That is, if you say somebody, well, if you say in Freud's terms somebody has a strong ego,
you don't mean that they're egotistical or they're a braggart,
but you mean that they're very adaptive, that they're in balance, that they have control, that they're very reality-oriented.
See, that connotation has changed. We use that word ego a lot, taken from Freud, but we've changed the meaning.
When you say somebody has a strong ego today, I think you realize we don't always mean something positive.
Freud did.
There are examples of this in real life that you can give.
Let me give you one that's a little extreme, but to point it out.
This happens to me, this probably doesn't happen to you, but I'll use me as an example.
Let's say sometime I'm walking down the street and I see this woman who's a very good-looking woman.
Now in an unconscious kind of way, my id sees her and my id says,
woman, woman, sex, get her, have it now.
And my ego says, no, don't do that.
You'll get arrested. That's crazy. You're going to have major problems.
Don't do that. Look, if you really want her, just hold on, we'll try to get to know her.
Maybe we can find out who she is. Let's go talk to her.
Let's send her flowers.
And the super ego is saying, never, never, you dirty old man.
So there's this constant struggle.
And the poor little ego is in the middle, trying to balance everything from the demands of reality from the id and from the super ego.
Now, I just personified everything.
There's these little people inside me having this battle.
Well, we can't help that. Freud did that.
He had these strange personifications.
He gave everything names.
He talked as if they're duking it out inside you and there's these executives in there making these decisions.
I don't think he believed that.
But it was a handy way of trying to describe it.
And in fact, sometimes we've taken this over as reality.
For example, there's been science fiction movies made, B-grade science fiction movies,
of draining off somebody's id and using their id as a person, as a monster to go and attack them.
That's what comes from this personification.
Nevertheless, does this seem real to you?
Forget the personification. Does this ever happen to you?
I'm hoping it does. I'm hoping I'm not the only one.
That very often, it seems like you really do have these mixed motivations, these conflicts.
Part of you just wants to hang out. Let it all hang out.
Get what you want. Get it now. Why should you have to be concerned?
And part of you is saying, no, I have to take account of what's reasonable.
Keep control.
And part of you is saying, no, you should be perfect.
You shouldn't want those things.
And sometimes there's these mixed feelings.
So very often we may feel that we have conflicting needs and demands and drives that we have that are real.
That we have these real conflicting drives.
I think Freud was a student enough to pick up on some of these conflicts that I think we really have.
But the id, the ego, the superego, they're all part of our personality.
They're all part of our processing.
So don't think of them so much as little separate compartments,
but think of them as just the names he gave for the different kinds of functions and processes that go on inside us, inside of our mind, inside of our processing.
Sometimes actions or strategies are used by the ego to handle these conflicts and these actions and strategies become maladaptive.
Remember, the poor little mediator ego in the middle is trying to work things out.
But there are times when in working things out and keeping things under check,
you might pick methods that work in part but cause more trouble than they're worth.
And then that way may be maladaptive.
And Freud called these various processes ego defense mechanisms.
The processes or methods that ego develops for resolving these internal conflicts.
And one example is commonly found.
A defense mechanism that's maybe the most common is called repression.
In this process, the person simply represses any conscious thoughts or awareness of a conflict or drive.
So for example, a person may have a strong sexual attraction to another person,
but the other person may be a taboo object of affection.
So I may have a strong desire for, not me, you.
You may have a strong desire for a minor or for a married person, a married person not married to yourself.
And that's not appropriate.
And so one way for the ego to handle that is to just repress all of those drives, all of those feelings.
You forget them. You don't have them in your memory. You're not aware of them.
And thus the drives of the id are completely blocked and repressed.
Maybe you had a traumatic experience happen to you and you were really scared.
It was so painful, so hard that you don't remember it. You completely repress it.
Maybe you have some really negative, selfish feelings towards something, but you're not aware of them. You block them.
So repression is kind of a blocking.
There's also a second common defense mechanism called projection.
And in this case, the person controls these drives from the id by attributing the conflict or the drive to someone else rather than to oneself.
So for example, a person may have feelings of hate and aggression towards somebody else,
but these unconscious drives, because they're so negative and can't come out,
the person translates this into believing it's the other person who hates oneself and is aggressive.
Say, I don't dislike this person. I don't hate this person. I'm not acting aggressively.
She's the one that hates me. She doesn't like me. And she's doing all this stuff.
So you turn it. You project it onto somebody else. You project these feelings onto somebody else.
And this is the way it sort of comes out, or gets you in trouble, but the argument is, in the Freudian sense,
this defense mechanism is not too adaptive. It's not really too in touch with reality, even though it has a controlling effect on the conflicts.
Last lecture I gave you this boiler pop model. Let me return to this picture again.
We have this big iron pot filled with libidinal energy, and it's coming out.
It's being channeled out in different ways through our drives, and it's meeting different needs.
And the ego's trying to control some of these drives because they're not appropriate or we can't meet them now.
So think of these defense mechanisms of ways of channeling the energy or the drives.
In one case, with repression, you just put a plug over the valve, over the pipe.
You block it off and you don't let it out. In another case, oh, what happens though when you block things off?
The pressure builds. Something's going to happen. You can't just block things off.
So in another case in projection, let's shut it off this way and blow all your energy onto somebody else.
Let's shut it off this way and say this person's problem over here, not yours.
So there are different ways and mechanisms that you handle these kinds of pressures, this pressure cooker, if you will.
Let me talk about a third kind of defense mechanism.
And this is really one that's quite adaptive that Freud actually liked, and it makes sense.
And it's called sublimation.
Now in sublimation, a person chandles the various dangerous or taboo drives, the unacceptable drives, towards an acceptable goal.
So in some ways it's a lot like projection, but in this case you channel it towards something good.
Now there's some examples of this. Let's say a person again has this overly strong sex drive.
Let's say it's a man who wants women, but in the sublimation process he takes his energy, all of his libidinal energy,
and puts it into painting beautiful pictures of women, pictures that others appreciate and can value in a very aesthetic.
Or let's say this same person who has this same sex drive channels all this energy into doing valuable medical research on sexual dysfunctions.
So I don't want to be a complete crazy Freudian, but maybe Masters and Johnson had strong sex drives that were then sublimated into doing us a lot of good.
Maybe even Freud sublimated his drives to come up with his theory, his valuable theory.
Well, is this true? Is this how things work?
For a lot of people this makes sense. There's an inherent sense in this that very often we take energy from one source, sublimate it and use it and channel it towards productive ends in our life.
And what Freud was trying to say was the source, the initial source of the motivation might not always be altruistic or what it seems on the surface.
It may have come from our still come from the basic drives he's talked about.
But after all, that's how we function in society. That's a good way to learn to function.
One thing you could argue is very often artists of different types might do good work when they're highly emotional, when there are problems, when there are stresses or issues that bring about this kind of emotionality.
And that would fit in with Freud's sublimation view.
So when for Freud, there are many far reaching human endeavors that are motivated by these basic drives and they are either adaptive or maladaptive based on the way these three parts of one's mental processing develop.
Now, when the ego's in charge, the drives can be met in very appropriate ways.
But maladaptions can also happen and we can have some extremely inappropriate ways.
Let me just give you a brief example of one.
Some of the recent research that I'm doing in my own studies is on the antecedents or development of aggression and violence in children and adolescents.
What factors together as patterns lead to aggression and violence?
We didn't use Freudian theory as a basis for this. This is not part of our thinking, but there's one finding we have that could fit in here.
We expected that maybe kids who were really outgoing, risk takers, boisterous, sort of the extrovert types might be the ones that are most likely to be aggressive if it's paired with other things, with other problems in their life.
And we did a longitudinal study in which we looked at a lot of children starting when they were in elementary school age and tracing them now until they're now in middle and late adolescence to find out the different factors in their life that might predict which ones become really aggressive and which ones don't.
We have all kinds of kids from different racial and ethnic groups and such.
And what we've found so far, and this part's predictable, is that the kids that have been exposed to a lot of violence towards themselves in their lives end up being ones that are more aggressive.
So if they've been abused by their parents, if they've been harshly physically punished, they become more aggressive.
If they've been victimized by others, they become more aggressive. If they see more violence, they become more aggressive. That part isn't too surprising.
The interesting part is when you pair this kind of exposure to violence towards them, particularly from the family, when you pair that with being inhibited, these are the kids that are the most aggressive in our study.
When I say inhibited, I mean kids who are bottled up. They show a real high fear and anxiety about school. They don't like new situations. They have a hard time with change.
They have a hard time with new kinds of food. They have a hard time with social context. They don't like to speak up.
I'd say they were shy, but that's too simple. They're closed. They're inhibited, if you will, in behaving, in responding. I would say the best term is they're anxious and they're bottled up.
And when you take this bottled up kind of kid and pair it with this exposure to violence, they become the most aggressive.
And at first we thought, isn't that sort of strange? But in fact, the pattern we find sort of goes along with what we've seen in recent school shooters.
Because in the school shooters, we find kids who are also bottled up and inhibited and often not outgoing and not so much fitting in, exposed also to taunting and victimization to others.
And even there's some evidence that even may go along with what we'd call a terrorist kind of approach.
Well, you don't really need Freud to explain all of this, but it's interesting to me that we have something like a maladaptive defense mechanism.
The kid is holding in and bottling up everything, and it's a pressure cooker. And sometimes it explodes and comes out as aggression.
So there's a case of some recent research that actually fits in with what Freud said about the maladaptive nature that sometimes occurs with defense mechanisms.
Well, in our next lecture, we're going to talk about Freud's famous psychosexual stages and his famous edifice complex and how that relates then to children's development.
Thank you.
