Lecture 8, Erickson's Psychosocial Theory
Hello. In this lecture, we're going to talk about the egocycologists who, following Freud,
revised Freud's theory and Erickson and his social development. We'll talk about Erickson's
personal history and how this influenced his theorizing, and then we'll introduce his stages
and the conceptualization he had as stages, a conceptualization of a series of crises
and how these influenced development. After Freud, many of his followers tried to bring
his psychodynamic theory in line with more recent empirical work by focusing on social
and environmental influences. Social environmental influences were not the primary interest
or the focus for Freud himself. They focused on after reality rather than on the internal
conflicts, ex-drives, and prohibitions from the ego and the superego. Now these theorists
came to be known by two titles, neofroidians and egocycologists. The first term, neofroidians
is self-explanatory. The second term, the fact that they stressed the importance of the developing
ego in controlling internal conflicts and in developing real-life problem-solving skills
and rational behavior and the importance of dealing with issues in the social world, in
the real world. Freudian theory was still the foundation of their work. They accepted
and used Freud's theory, but they modified it and changed the most influential egocycologist
to developmental sequences and issues was Eric H. Erickson began with Freud's theory.
The underlying sexual basis for development, the psychosexual stages, were of interest to
Erickson and he began by explaining them. He also in his career went on to describe how
different styles for men and women were related to anatomical differences and the way each
sex gained gratification and developed a particular style that was tied to anatomy. He also completed
several observations and he did analysis of some famous historical figures based on a
psychodynamic orientation. He was one of the first to write psycho histories of people.
However, despite all of that work, he probably would be a minor figure and not very well enough,
it had not been for the most important tribution and that was what he was famous for for changing
the focus of the stages of development. And he brought about a systematic description of
several changes that occur throughout the lifespan. This was Erickson's.
Now, Erickson was greatly influenced by his own personal history and we can tie the development
of his theory and some of the ideas in his theory to events directly occurred for all
theorists, but for Erickson you can see it very clearly. So let me give you a little background
history. Erickson was born in 1902 in Germany to Danish. He died in 1994 in Massachusetts.
He never knew his father. His understanding was that his father and mother had separated
and divorced her and he learned only in adolescence that his father, his parents, had never been
married. It was not much of a relationship at all. It came as a shock to him because he
didn't have that information for most of the time he was growing up. Erickson's mother
married Erickson's pediatrician and this man was a German Jew or Homburger and Erickson
was Raz Homburger's son. He had the last name. That's the Erick H. Homburger Erickson. He
had that name until he graduated from high school and Theodore Homburger was Jewish and
so Erickson was raised Jewish as his son. He knew that he had another biological father
but this is how he was raised and during this period of time in Europe he experienced much
anti-Semitic prejudice. He also received ostracized. Not only was he asked an ostracized
Jewish, he was so blonde and so Danish looking he didn't quite fit in with his Jewish friends
in his Jewish he has on whether he fit in and who he was. That will be important later on.
After high school Erickson drifted around Europe for quite a few years. He tried out a lot of
jobs. These included being an artist for a while. He thought he'd be a professional artist. He
tried a lot of different things. He seemed to be confused and a wander sort of at loose ends
hanging out. Erickson never received higher than a high school diploma. This is interesting.
It was the public education he received. He personally lived out the identity crisis and
this role confusion later became central to this theory. This was the way his life was until
he was a young adult. In his wanderings, however, he ended up getting a job tutoring an
American family that was living in Vienna and this family was there for the father to study
psychoanalysis with Freud and so he was introduced to Freud's theory. One of the many things he
tried out. He ended up going through psychoanalyses Freud and then he ended up becoming one of
his star students. Even though he had no academic degree, he completed psychoanalytic training.
The field was young. They were taking converts wherever they could and it was a little loose in
terms of fertilization and what you needed to be trained. He went through the training. He was
considered a psychoanalyst. In 1933, he was concerned with the growing threat of Nazism
and he sort of read the writing on the wall and he immigrated to the United States. Interestingly,
he became the first child psychoanalyst involved. There weren't too many of them in the United
States and at least he was one of them that started looking at children. It seems from what
people report. Erickson had a real knack with children. He not only was a good observer, he
seemed to get along with them. He was good at it. Professional career. He worked at Harvard
University, then at Yale, then at the University of California and Berkeley. He finally finished
his career back at Harvard. Even though he didn't even have a back, he still was a professor
and working conditions. His writings have been highly influential on the thinking of many
developmentalists. He wasn't accepted by many of them. It could have been in part because of his
unusual professional development because he lacked this advanced degree. He wasn't considered
an appropriate authority. Although Erickson describes the stages of development and Freud's
sexual connotations, his stages quickly took another focus, a social focus. This was very much
reflective of the ego psychologists, as I mentioned. His first full description of his eight stages was
published in, I think, his most influential book called Childhood and Society. The first edition
came out in the 50s, but the more complete second edition that really has the complete account
and was influential was published three. His view, human development is primarily driven by a
strong need for an individual to deal with certain problems and these problems occur at different
times in the person's life, and they require the person to gain a real mastery of solving
these problems and resolving these issues. I want to point out Erickson's primary focus was on mastery,
on gaining competence in solving problems. Can you see why he'd be called an ego psychologist
and why this was a break from Freud's focus? And most importantly in his theory was the idea
that an individual continually seeks to understand who he or she is and to develop a coherent
identity or a strong sense of self. And this striving to develop this sense of identity
and self was the main point, the main issue for Erickson. And he guesses to where that came from.
If you think back to what I've just said about Erickson's history and his development, he lived this.
And he used this then and incorporated it as part of the way he looked at development.
There's a series of events or issues that one encounters in life, as Erickson saw it.
And these series of events or issues create a series of crises for the individual.
And these crises require the individual then to gain mastery over various problems and to further develop
a sense of identity. At every single stage or crisis or issue, identity comes up again.
You have to then further elaborate who you are and further elaborate what you can do,
what you're competent at. And thus each stage is in fact a kind of identity crisis for the individual.
Now for Erickson, a crisis occurs when the issues or problems that a person faces
create some acute emotional reaction. And it's so acute that you need to deal with it.
You need to resolve the issues, the confusions, the problems you have in order to feel at peace,
in order to feel comfortable once again. I think usually when we think of crisis,
we think of some very acute trauma, like your child is in a car accident and you need to rush
and take the kid to the hospital. Or we think there's a crisis because you end up getting a divorce.
Or your house burns down. For Erickson, a crisis was not seen as one of these acute traumas.
A crisis was a turning point. And to have a crisis, you really needed two things.
You had to have some strong emotionality involved. If you didn't care, if you weren't emotional about it,
it wasn't a crisis. You also had to have this strong need to resolve the issue to figure out what was happening.
The crisis, as Erickson saw them, were brought about in large part because of various emerging skills
that a person developed. So as you get better, as you develop, you have certain things that now come about
that you need to master and deal with, but also in large part because of the opportunities that are now open to a person.
In social relationships and in obligations that a person is exposed to.
So if your parents are putting demands on you, that could bring about a crisis.
As peers put demands, it could bring about a crisis. If you go to school for the first time,
this brings about a whole new opportunity, a whole new level or vista of issues and confusions about who you are
and what you can master. If you switch from going from middle school to high school,
that's a switch that could bring about a crisis. If you switch career choices or jobs,
that could bring about a crisis. If you retire and you now no longer have a job,
that could bring about a crisis because it's the opportunities that bring this about.
He framed each of his stages in terms of what was accomplished or mastered
if an individual successfully resolved a crisis and figured out what to do
and what occurred if the individual was not successful in resolving a particular crisis.
And we're going to come back to this, but let me give an example first.
In his first stage, one was successful if one gained a sense of trust in others and in the world.
But if a child was unsuccessful at this same stage,
the child would be left with a sense of mistrust in others in the world.
In the last stage, he said a person is successful and resolves a crisis
if he develops a sense of ego integrity. We'll mention what that means later.
Or he's unsuccessful if he develops and is left with a sense of despair.
So each stage is sort of successful versus unsuccessful. That's the way the stages are given.
Erickson's sequence of stages is hierarchical and is cumulative
in that the resolution of one crisis and mastery at a given level
create a kind of identity that makes possible a level of problems and issues at the next stage.
In other words, the way he's worked out his stages,
it would be extremely difficult for someone to resolve a crisis at stage three
if she hadn't already resolved the crisis at stage one and two.
It's logically you have to go through one and two to get to three.
Now in Freud's psychosexual stages, it isn't quite so clear why they have to form that order.
Why one would be hierarchical for the next one.
In Erickson, it's quite clear that each of these builds on the previous ones
and so follows in this invariant order.
Erickson's first, he had eight stages.
His first five, psychosocial stages, paralleled Freud's original psychosexual stages.
He based them on what Freud had said.
However, Erickson thought that the development did not end at adolescence
and he described three additional stages that occur from young adulthood to old age
and I think it's these adult stages that provide some of the most revolutionary
and interesting aspects from his theory.
Even his early stages don't really do much for us
in terms of thinking of them in Freud's psychosexual, in terms of Freud's psychosexual stages
on their own in terms of the mastery and identity that Erickson talks about.
They accomplish a lot.
Let me list these stages and give the age periods
and remember we're going to come back to these later as we talk about them
and explain what these terms mean.
The first stage is the stage of trust versus mistrust.
That is, a child develops a sense of trust or is left with a sense of mistrust
and this occurs in Erickson's terms in infancy.
The second stage is the development of a sense of autonomy versus a sense of shame and doubt
and this occurs in the toddler years.
The third stage is the development of a sense of initiative versus a sense of guilt
which occurs in the preschool years.
The fourth stage is a sense of industry versus a sense of inferiority
and this occurs during the elementary school years.
The fifth stage is a sense of identity versus a sense of role confusion
and this occurs in adolescence.
And the sixth stage is a sense of intimacy versus isolation
which occurs in young adulthood.
The seventh stage is a sense of generativity versus stagnation which occurs in adulthood
and the last, the eighth stage is a sense of an ego integrity versus despair which occurs in old age.
Because Erickson focused on the influences of the environment and social relationships
it seemed to follow for him that development would continue after adolescence.
You see, if we focus on biology as the main aspect of development in stages
then it might make sense to think that development really slows down after adolescence.
But if we're focusing on issues that come up, changes in social relationships,
changes in obligations, development continues on throughout the lifespan.
I think this is the way Erickson looked at it.
So after Erickson, people looking at lifespan development,
the perspective that development continues became the rule rather than the exception.
He was in many ways the first lifespan developmental psychologist.
There was one revolutionary aspect of his theory that I think is important.
He thought that even though we have this sequence of crises,
if a crisis were not completely resolved when it first emerged
a person could return to that issue and the surrounding crisis and deal with it later on.
For Freud and others, what went on in childhood in many ways had an irreversible influence on development.
Freud dealt with therapy and helping people to go back and resolve issues that were in childhood.
He thought we could work it through.
But for him, after the Oedipal conflict was resolved, pretty much our personality was set.
I've talked to psychoanalytic therapists who truly believe that we're pretty much set by six years of age.
If you don't get in and intervene and help some kid before then, this is the personality.
Erickson changed that. It's true he had these sequence of stages, but his view was they were always there.
There's no irreversible or permanent failure of development.
In his view, all the crises, all the issues surrounding the development of identity and the mastery of various tasks
and skills are always present in every period of every person's life.
However, the focus on each crisis forms this invariant order and shifts, but they're all there.
Let me give you a metaphor for this.
I recently attended this indoor sporting event in a large Coliseum.
When the lights went out, some spotlights came on.
You've probably had this experience and the spotlights started roaming all across the audience and around.
Think of this, the roaming spotlight metaphor.
As it would play across, it would at times focus on one part of the audience
and highlight that part so you could see those people.
And then it would move and focus on another part.
Think of this as the metaphor for all of these issues and crises in Erickson's theory.
They're always there, but the spotlight changes and it lands on one particular issue or crisis,
and that's what the focus is at one time.
The others are often the background.
It may return the spotlight and hit that crisis again at some other time.
For example, even as adults, we can deal repeatedly with issues of trust versus mistrust.
That was his first stage.
But any time something comes up in our life that brings about a crisis of trust in others,
we can deal with that issue again.
We can deal with the issue of autonomy.
We can deal with the issue of initiative and so forth through all the stages.
In effect, each of the major issues in development is recycled whenever events in one's life elicits it.
Now, that's an interesting way of looking at development.
There's also something I think that's very comforting about that.
It means you can go back and work things out.
If you had problems at one stage, it isn't all over, and that was Erickson's view.
There are two major issues that continually recycle throughout our lives that were part of Erickson's stages.
If you look at all of these stages, you see two things that jump out.
I've talked about development of identity, development of mastery.
But the issues were, first, the development of a sense of connectedness to others.
One of the big issues is how is a person connected?
And you see this in his stage of developing trust.
You also see it later in his stage of developing intimacy with somebody else.
You see it in his stage of generativity in developing a relationship on who you can take care of.
The second big issue is a sense of independence from others.
This is shown in the crisis of developing autonomy.
Can you develop autonomy?
It's shown again in the idea of developing identity, who you are, what is you and what is not you.
And so we're going to run into these two issues again and again under attachment theory.
It's interesting if you think about these two issues because we all in our lives have an issue with being connected to others.
And at the same time we have an issue of being independent from others.
We seem to constantly go back and forth between wanting to be connected, wanting to be secure,
wanting to be tied to others, but also wanting our space and wanting this independence.
And I think maybe for Erickson this is what he experienced in his own life,
and it's what we experience enough times that he put it into his theory.
Now the interesting thing about his theory is he had a whole set of stages that I think is how he showed
that we can have it both ways, that we can put it together.
They seem to be opposing needs that we have, and yet they can complement each other.
They can support each other rather than being opposed.
And we will see that in his theory.
In fact, what you see in his theory again and again is you have to have security in order then to branch out and have independence.
You still have to have that security to begin with.
And in some ways, this is going to come in later, you have to have the independence
and that sense to be able to go back and make relationships with other people
and to make connections to other people and commit to them.
Let me give you an example of this kind of relationship.
This happened to me, so I'll use it as a personal example.
I left my wife and came down here to film this lecture, to take this lecture.
I'm connected to my wife, and here I am doing something independent.
How does this work? Simple, silly example.
Well, in fact, to the extent that I feel connected to her and have trust in that relationship,
I can also break away and come down here and do something independently.
I can have it both ways.
But I still have that relationship that continues and in some way gives support to be able to go out on one's own.
In some ways, I like to get away.
I enjoy having the independence and to be alone.
But if I only had that, I might not be as comfortable.
I might want to go back and find the connection.
I would argue this happens for kids as well as adults.
So you have a kid that goes away to camp, to summer camp, and may experience a lot of homesickness.
This homesickness, then, could be alleviated in part if the child has a very strong sense of security
and connectedness to the parents and can learn to take this with him.
So very often, a child goes off to camp and what do we do?
We give them pictures of the family.
We give them a security blanket of sorts or something they know that's extremely familiar to take along.
And as they take this along, it helps them to have the connectedness even though they're now trying out their newfound independence.
And so this is the kind of connections that you see between being independent and being connected at the same time.
Let me give you another example.
This happened to a friend of mine recently.
He was taking his child to school for the first day of the new school year.
And as he was walking with her, his daughter really was having a tough time about it.
She was very nervous.
She was clutching his hand very tightly.
Can you imagine how kids do this?
She sort of leaned into him like she wanted to be a part of, so she was hanging and hugging very close to his leg,
squeezing and sort of digging into his hand as they walked along.
She didn't say much.
She was really nervous.
And as they walked onto the schoolyard and she was very nervous,
she saw some friends of hers sort of in the distance and they saw her and they yelled to her and said,
Hi, come on over here and join us.
And she let go of her father's hand and ran off to join her friends.
And as she ran off to join her friends, she paused for a minute and looked back at her father and yelled to him,
I don't need you anymore.
Now, the father told me that he had mixed emotions on this.
He was both a little sad, but he also understood where she was coming from,
what she meant as she said that.
She had the security of his relationship, of this connection or trust in him,
that she could say, at least on the surface, I don't need you anymore, I can go off.
I can go off and be on my own.
And you see this again and again in relationships.
Next, in the next lecture, we're going to talk about the stages.
We're going to start with Erickson's first four stages and then in the subsequent lectures,
we're going to complete an analysis and assessment of all of his stages.
But again, look carefully for these issues to come up that we then summarize what they are.
That again and again in his stages, you're going to see issues of mastery and what kids mastered each stage.
You're going to see issues of identity and what kids, how they're performing a sense of identity and how it's changing.
And you're going to see the main issues of being connected to others in conjunction with being independent of others.
Thank you.
