Lecture 10, Identity and Intimacy
Hello. We're continuing our discussion of Erickson's theory.
In the last lecture, we talked about Erickson's stages of development through childhood,
those stages that contribute to the development and formation of first trust.
Those stages contributed insights and changed the focus in ways that Freud's original stages did not do.
But it's with his two stages of adolescence and young adulthood that Erickson really revolutionized his thinking about development.
He took it beyond Freud and he could have done before his two stages of a talk about next time.
So today we get the privilege of talking about teenagers.
We're going to cover Erickson's fifth and sixth stages during adolescence and young adulthood.
The first of his stages, if you recall, laid down a foundation of trust and connectedness,
an economy and independence were then developed.
At stage five in adolescence, a new foundation of independence this time is laid down.
And then upon this, a new level of trust develops.
These two are always interacting and it seems like in my mind they've flip-flopped a little in an interesting way.
What we're going to talk about in terms of the connectedness, of course, is just level in further development.
The development of intimacy in stage six is the beginning of a whole series of developments of, I think, connectedness, commitments that we see throughout.
Let's now start, though, with Erickson, which he calls sense of identity versus role.
Erickson coined the term identity crisis, which has just become part of our language today.
Now, if you were Erickson, every stage a crisis.
And in fact, every stage involved an issue of identity.
It was a constant reshuffling reorganization of how we sensed ourselves and our identity.
But he used the word identity crisis for this stage in particular.
And I think this is the stage where the whole crisis idea and the whole idea of an identity comes to a head more than in any other stage.
It becomes such a fact, use other terms as a midlife crisis, which in fact grew out of the idea that we had an identity crisis and we have these different crises.
So people now think of development, different crises that you go through.
That's become implicit in our thinking.
In fact, some of you may not know this, but when I hang out with college students, they say it somewhat jokingly, a new term, a quarter life crisis.
And they've essentially taken their identity crisis of adolescence and young adulthood and taken midlife crisis.
And they now go through a quarter life crisis when they graduate from college.
So how does this identity crisis come about?
Well, let me see through a sequence as Erickson would have explained it in a way that I think makes sense to most of us.
First, it's probably brought about in large part because of the physical and hormonal changes that come about during puberty.
Adolescence finds himself within his own body.
He's not the same person that he was.
Physically, he's changing in other ways, both mentally and physically, and in terms of new desires and possibility changing person.
And these changes lead to an awkwardness, but also a dawning of the new possibilities of desires, not just sexual, but in many other ways, intellectual possibility.
These changes then are accompanied by confusions that lead to a sense of disequilibrium.
So the person in terms of his physical and social competence, in terms of who he was, all this time he's developed a pretty good view with himself.
If he's successfully gone through these states of self, it's thrown into a tailspin.
He's not who he was anymore.
Some ways has to start over with this development.
And this confusion is exacerbated by the varying rates of development that he sees in his peers, the changes all around him.
So they're varying changes in interests and mastery levels and those around him.
There's much more variation than there was before, exacerbated, that most adolescents switch schools at the same time.
In fact, if we didn't switch schools, maybe we wouldn't see the idea of a crisis here to the extent that we do.
So it's during puberty that almost everybody switches either from elementary school to middle school or from middle school to a high school.
And then each of these shifts in school brings about different policies, a different cultural atmosphere in the school, different rules, different views of the seed and who you are.
Adolescents also now begin to see that maybe the idea of child is going to school as an end.
I would argue when you talk to kids and if you think back of your own life, when you're a child, it's almost impossible to think of the ending of childhood or the ending of being a student.
You know it will happen someday, but it's something so vague and out there.
But now you get teenagers who are thinking to themselves, wow, I only have four years left and then I'm going to graduate.
And then I have to choose a real job or I have to decide where I'm going to go to college and I have to start thinking about a career path.
For a lot of them realize that they may get to leave home, but the case is they're thinking about this.
They see the light at the end of the tunnel and this also causes an emotional reaction and, if you will, a need, a strong need, which is a crisis.
So you have this crisis of identity and this crisis then motivates a person to attempt to find out who he or she really is and to reestablish himself on some new level.
Now one of the ways that this happens, this resolution of the identity, seems to be for a person to evaluate the various connections between skills and values and roles in his life.
So each of us is made up of our beliefs, our values, our skills in different domains, our preferences and our likes, our passions, the friends we have, how we look, the different roles that we're in, our ethnicity on and on.
But we have all of these parts to us. There's no one single part. And in some ways what an adolescent now needs to do is to coordinate all of these different pieces and put them together.
Whereas before this time, kids didn't really think about all the multiple pieces and put them together. Now an adolescent does and, in fact, a person now has the cognitive skill to be able to do this, to coordinate all these pieces.
It's from all of these extract, extract some kind of personality, some kind of identity.
Erickson thought that adolescents needed to find some unity and consistency across all the changes that occurred.
Because we have various facets to our personality. But in reality, there's a lot of researchers and theorists who have pointed out that facets, a well-adjusted person, really recognizes the multiple roles and facets of a personality and has to strive not for unity, but for just another.
Indeed, in some cultures, for example, in Korea, if you act consistently across all roles and contexts, you would be considered to be very immature. And that's true of our culture too, whether you've thought about that or not.
For example, when their role in that situation is to sit there in class and not really make a major disturbance and hopefully not read the newspaper, but in fact I'm going to do, and they will interact with me in a certain way.
But when their mom visits on some open house day at college, they have a different role instead of relationships with their parents. They're not expected to treat them and act towards them the way.
And when they go out with their buddies on the weekend, they're expected to act a different way than they act when they are in class with me or when they're talking to their parents.
And in fact, these different roles source of confusion until you get it all down and realize you have these different roles and these different roles do not bother you anymore.
So for example, you often see kids to visit and expect them to act like the child and give them a big hug and get along and an independent person as they are as a student.
Or you have students, this happened to me recently, who are out at a restaurant and enjoying themselves and whooping it up. And when I walked in, my friends and my wife, they quieted down.
Oh, there's our professor. And I spoiled their evening. They couldn't talk anymore because there was this confusion of two roles at the same place. Of course, they spoiled my evening too.
So the idea of developing a sense of ideal, putting together all of the different roles and all of the different facets of one's personality and seeing how you can be several things at the same time.
A mature person with a mature identity can be an independent person with peers and do all this stuff. There's not a problem there.
When teenagers are trying to work all of this out, it seems as if they're trying out in various options. They try out friends, they try out lifestyles, and they try out roles.
And Erickson pointed this out. It's almost as if they are trying on clothes to see which set of clothes is the best fit, which one set they're going to buy.
And so not surprisingly, adolescents seem to be highly influenced by opinions and also the values of their peers. And they seem to change their styles and their often.
It seems to some of us that are monthly basis. But whether it's that often or not, they do change.
Let me give you an example. Two twin sisters or adolescents seem to be caricatures of this experimenting with different styles. They were so extreme.
But together, as identical twins, they seem to work together. But they switch clothes styles. It seemed like almost weekly point.
They dressed like punk rockers. At another point, they dressed in all in antique clothes in sort of old fashioned Victorian style.
This was to go to school or wherever they were. They went through a period where they decided to pierce various body parts. They went through another period where they joined causes.
They were highly drunk driving and got involved and tried to get their parents and all of their parents' friends involved, including them. They became vegetarians.
Mind you, they did all of these things within a one year period when they were in middle adolescence. Some of these things are good things. Some of you may agree with some of you may not.
But the point is permitting. And that was the point that Erickson made about this stage.
How confident they are, in large part by how others treat them. We mentioned that in the last lecture. Charles Cooley was a per-pointed term, the looking glass self.
A long time ago, in 19, this term. But the looking glass self has a ring to it that I think explains what's happening. How we identify ourselves depends on how we're reflected off other people.
As if somebody were holding up a looking glass and when we talk to them or when we interact with somebody else, we get reflected back what they think of us.
They're either appalled or sickened and excited about how we are. They either like what we say or do or they don't. And we get a feel for how we are depending on how they treat us.
Particularly do that a lot. They also try out a lot of various ideologies. They try out a lot of different value systems.
So they tend to take up causes. They often become politically involved. They tend to take perspectives and causes often that are different from those of their parents.
Because after all, they're striving for an independent identity. So as they're searching and trying out different things, they don't necessarily follow what their parents say they should follow.
This is the frustrating part of it. It doesn't make it easier maybe to know this. But maybe it does to know that this is what adolescents go through.
Because as they strive to be independent and nonconform to parents or the adult, often end up showing an extreme conformity to their peer groups.
So at this time that they're being independent, they very often are not very independent. They're extreme conform-
You know, we sometimes say as adults how conforming they're being. But in fact, they sometimes do. So it's quite often that adolescents will express a real disgust at their own phoniness and their own lack of consistency as they try out different things.
It's almost like they know they're doing this, but they still do it. They're still experimenting.
They're acting with those who they are in love with, boyfriends and girlfriends, are objections of themselves.
If you had the chance to be present and watch adolescent romantic relationships, the deal of time, you're wondering what I'm going to say.
They spend a good deal of time talking about themselves and who they are and who likes them.
It's the old, you've probably heard this old joke before. It says, okay, we've spent enough time talking about me, but what do you think of me?
Okay, adolescents will talk to each other. It's especially when they're a girlfriend that will carry on in this way, allow each of these people.
They become very frustrated by great. As their ideologies clash with an imperfect world, they sometimes have problems.
It should be all the other way. And they are often searching for values and ideologies to feed them to vicious prejudice and an intolerance for diversity.
So they say looking for causes are often viciously. And some people have argued this comes about because they have a problem with accepting that things aren't so absolute one way or the other.
A few more things that come out. Examples that we can say are funny if you're not going through it with your teenager at the time.
My son had a quest for independence and identity, I believe, like other people as well. One time he was leaving for school and I said, have a good day.
And he turned to me and said, don't tell me what to do. It's that kind of extreme touchiness about being independent and working this out.
Another time when he was in high school, he was on the gymnastics team. He was a yoga gymnast, started late in life, did it for a while.
And he wanted us to go some of the gymnastics go. And he said, I want you to go to this one. I said, I'm working. I can't get off. It's hard for me.
He said, I really need you to go to this one. This is really important. He said, can't you be there? And so finally I agreed I would rearrange my schedule to be at his gymnastics meet.
I point that he had this strong need for me to be there. He argued for it. So after I agreed to go there, then he paused and he said, now look, I have to give you instructions.
It's going to come in. And these were as close to a quote as I can get. When you come into this meet, don't look, don't smile at me and don't talk to me.
Don't wave. Go up and sit in the stands and just look at the whole meet. And you're thinking, what kind of a kid do I have?
But think about what this means in terms of this kid going through quote Erickson's identity crisis and trying to figure out who he is.
He's still connected. Think of how badly he, but the worst thing in the world, the crisis, and you don't have the confidence, is to show that you're still tied to your parents, that you're not independent of your parents.
Oh, he said some things that even he realizes today sounds.
Now, according to Erickson, the health huge is that an individual gains an insight into what remains the same about himself, despite all the changes.
What he can take with him from the way he was earlier as a child, what he wants to take with him, what his strengths are, what his values and beliefs are, what his preferences and desires are.
It might mean some shifts. It might mean some changes giving up, but the child at least knows what's the same even as and what he thinks are still important to take with him.
I guess the point I want to make here is a lot of people think, oh, in Erickson's terms, you go through an identity crisis and then people change their beliefs and their values, but they have to make the decision what they're going to keep and what they're not going to keep.
There's a lot of research that despite what some people may believe, and despite the fact that adolescents are very often rebelling or arguing with parents about a lot of little issues,
adolescents, once they get through it, stick with the same religious beliefs, the same political leanings, and the same values as their parents.
Very few of them change in the basic core issues. They may argue about trivial things like hairstyle and how they can stay out.
But even though they may stay with these same values and these same beliefs, if they've gone through this identity crisis in Erickson's terms,
they have at least questioned these beliefs and these have cited for themselves to stay with them rather than just having them handed to them and blindly accepting them.
In Erickson's terms, makes commitments to the future, including a commitment to a career. Erickson, one of the main points about an identity crisis at this time, is to make a commitment to something following a career path.
We recall that the identity crisis seemed to indicate exactly how Erickson went through life and his problem was making a commitment to a career path.
What happens if this development goes awry? Well, according to Erick, if you don't develop a satisfying sense of identity, you're going to suffer role confusion.
You're going to live out the confusions and searching that usually Erickson's.
There was a researcher following Erickson's line named James Marchia, who discussed the different confusions that can happen if a person doesn't develop a strong sense of identity.
We first have role diffusion. Role diffusion seems to be, I think, seems to matter. No commitments are made, as if a person doesn't have a strong read issue and it's just a diffuse view without commitment.
He argued, is that a person may exhibit role foreclosure. Others in the person's life, like his parents or his religion, determine his career, his life course, and in some cultures, even his marriage, before he's had a chance to work out the decisions for himself.
So there have been cases where, has been in the family for generations, and it's the oldest son's there and take over the farm. No questions asked.
And if the son does this without questioning it, without thinking about it, this would be considered role foreclosure.
I'll give you an example of something happened to a colleague. He came to college in his first year, and he ended up as his father was a physician.
His grandfather was a physician and iterations in his family. And it always been assumed he was going to be a physician and follow the family.
In fact, his father had said, I will pay for your college education if you do a good job and become a pre-med. But if you're going to go off into some other field, I won't pay for your college education.
And he had a hard time getting out. He was a pretty good student, but he wasn't so interested in his pre-med courses.
He ended up cheating in a way that he got caught and was on the level of being kicked out of college. And it was such an obvious case.
I think he did it on purpose so that he would be in pre-med. He could have chosen role foreclosure long, but it was decided for him.
In some cultures probably there is no identity crisis because people do not have the choice.
Third thing that can happen is there can become a moratorium. People just simply put off this period of decision making.
This is the case of many college students because education line period today, they simply put off the decision until a later time period.
This is common and maybe not such a bad issue.
Let me go on stage. The sixth stage, according to Erickson, is the development of a sense of intimacy versus isolation.
In young adulthood, after a person has experienced options and has achieved some sense of identity and a commitment to some life course,
then the person has the ability, the foundation, to go on to the next stage.
And just an individual needed a strong, found autonomous and independent.
The argument that Erickson had is now a person needs a strong foundation of a sense of self and identity, if you will,
and independence in order to be able to commit to staying with another person and abide by those commitments.
So intimacy entails placing one's future in happiness, at least in part, in the hands of another person, in an intimate relationship.
And by the way, marriage would be considered the prototype. Spousal relations would be the prototype.
But it can also be very close friends. It can be partners. It can be some intimate relationship besides marriage.
But use marriage if you want is the prototype here. In this case, it requires that a person get to know the other person so well,
much about the self, that the other person actually has the capability to hurt the first person.
You can hurt each other, reciprocally, you can hurt each other because you know too much about a person's weaknesses and what would hurt them.
And it takes a strong sense of who one is and feeling confident about one's identity to be able to voluntarily be vulnerable,
to allow somebody else to at least in large part control your own happiness and be able to hurt you.
This is the idea that had on how we develop a sense of intimacy.
Now, intimacy may have some values, but this is the kind of thing that it takes to develop that kind of commitment to another person.
And Erickson said then, of course, you have to be pretty secure in knowing who you are and feel good about it,
that you can then meld or compromise your identity with somebody else's. What happens when this isn't achieved?
Well, Erickson argued that a person who had not achieved this healthy identity would have a hard time making the commitment to somebody else,
bring herself to open up or to stick with another person.
And this kind of person might come close to commitments, but then shy away from them.
This kind of person might get involved in romantic relationships, but they didn't last.
This person might have a very active social life, but would still have a profound sensillation.
So isolation would be the opposite, staying isolated rather than being connected to someone else.
Now, for Erickson, identity has to come first, because that's the way he did it.
Some people think, question the ordering of these stages. Nancy Chodoro was a psychodynamic theorist who discussed women's issues
and the differences between women development. And she noted the Freudian approach.
She noted that for males, identification comes primarily through separation from the mother.
Think of the Oedipal conflict. And therefore, they develop a style in which intimacy threatens them.
And she argued, on the other hand, for females, identification comes primarily through attachment to the mother.
Again, you can refer to the Oedipal conflict. And therefore, they develop a style in which separation threatens them.
And from this line of reasoning, she argued that for females, intimacy may come first.
And you need a sense of intimacy or connectedness to someone else's identity.
Whereas for Erickson, he followed his own line and the male line, and you needed identity.
You could make a decision and be able to handle the intimacy.
There are arguments both ways. In fact, it's not for which way it should be.
It might be just, this is the difference we find because of the biases in our own culture.
Look at this. It's to think of entity and intimacy as being two intertwined processes that occur during adolescence and young adulthood.
We need to develop both of those, whichever order they come in. Thank you.
Thank you.
