Lecture 11, Erickson's Later Stages, Adult Development
Hello. In the previous lectures, we've already covered six of Erickson's eight stages and discussed them.
Just by way of review, these stages were first the development of a sense of trust,
and then a sense of autonomy and initiative and intimacy, or excuse me, industry,
and then two pivotal stages that together took the person into adulthood from adolescence,
and this is the development of identity and the development of intimacy.
And the two again were a combination of finding independence and establishing a secure base of independence
and then finding connectedness and intimacy again.
As we've already noted, Erickson had a strong influence in changing our thinking about development
by systematically describing these changes and stages.
The changes and stages of adulthood and old age were new.
Before Erickson, nobody had talked about development during adulthood and old age.
After Erickson, it's now the rule to talk about lifespan development.
He was the one who began all of this.
Let's talk about these stages, the seventh and the eighth stage.
Erickson called the seventh stage the development of a sense of generativity versus stagnation.
Now to lay the foundation, people who had successfully resolved the crises of the last two stages,
as we mentioned, intimacy, identity, now would be able to commit to intimate long-term relationships
and also be able to choose a career path and know who they were.
But what else would this ability accomplish or make possible for them?
Well, during adulthood, such a person would now be in a position to be responsible for other people,
particularly those of the next generation.
So the main focus of this stage is called generativity, I think for two reasons.
First, Erickson focuses on people being able to take care of the next generation of people.
The prototype, of course, is a parent role, parent taking care of his or her children.
It's whether one can make complex commitments to others in order to rear them, to nurture them, to educate them.
But in addition, it's generativity because one could also generate results or products that would benefit society.
You can be productive, creative, generative in this regard as well.
Then how one takes care of the children is one's children,
and how one then produces something, generates something that will be a benefit to society
is considered the measure of how generative or how successful a person is in this stage of development.
Think of how the things you can do.
You can, of course, teach your children, but even if you don't have children,
even if you don't take care of your own children, you can still be a very generative person.
A person can teach other children.
A person can take care of the laws, the policies of a society.
A person can affect others, particularly those of the succeeding generations.
A person can protect the environment for the good of others and so forth.
And Erickson mentions these different ways that would make a person generative.
Let me give you one of the quotes on how he said this.
To know that adulthood is generative does not necessarily mean that one must produce children,
but it means to know what one does if one does not.
And it means that one participates otherwise in the establishment, the guidance,
and the enrichment of the living generation and the world that inherits.
The right or the obligation to have fewer children or none can only be a liberated one
if it means a greater personal and communal responsibility for all those born
and the application of parental concerns to the preservation of what enhances the whole cycle of life.
I think that's well put and you get his sense then of what it means to be a generative person.
So if you're a generative person, you feel commitment to others, particularly those that are coming along.
A generative person also is a contributing member of society.
You do what you can to help out in your sector of the world as Erickson puts it.
And you put the welfare and upbringing of children first.
Now, you can think of many examples of this.
I thought of some in the culture that I grow up in.
This may sound boring to you, but a generative person.
Coach is Little League, serves on the PTO, pays taxes to support a school system,
and clean town government does volunteer work, supports what he considers to be worthwhile social institutions.
You can go on and on and there are of course specific examples in different societies.
But Erickson would claim that development to becoming a generative person is extremely difficult
if you haven't then resolved the other two stages, all the stages it came before, but particularly the last two.
You see, this requires a new level of commitment.
And again, just like we discussed with intimacy, it once again involves giving up,
voluntarily giving up part of your independence in a way in order to become connected and committed to other people.
So in a sense, two intimate partners such as a married couple have to give something up to each other,
to be vulnerable to the other person, to compromise, to be committed to each other.
Well, now the couple has to give up something and compromise in a way to be committed to the primary welfare of the children.
And so in Erickson's view, you not only have to have a strong, secure personal identity,
you have to have a strong, secure sense of intimacy with another person if you're going to be a parent and really take a generative role.
Your intimacy, your partnership has to be secure because now you're going to focus so much on other people.
Let me give you another quote.
And I think this is a really nice quote because it shows not only what happens during generativity, but what happened before this time.
If you think about the stages of identity, intimacy, and generativity, he said,
in youth, you find out what you care to do and who you care to be.
Even in changing roles, in young adulthood, you learn whom you care to be with at work and in private life,
not only exchanging intimacies, but sharing intimacy.
In adulthood, however, you learn to know what and whom you can take care of.
So the shift goes from who you care to be, whom you care to be with, who you can take care of.
And that's his shift.
What occurs if a person then doesn't develop this sense of generativity, this commitment to generativity?
Well, according to Erickson, without this kind of commitment, this kind of focus, a person would live mainly for himself.
He would live for his own pleasures or the couple would live for their own pleasures and their own good,
but not for the greater good of the next generation.
Thus a person would stagnate in development.
So he had the other side of generativity as stagnation.
You don't become more mature.
You don't become more connected than you were in adolescence and young adulthood.
And for Erickson, this is selfish living, this stagnation.
And stagnation and selfishness are intertwined for Erickson.
There's a real value judgment on this.
Is this true you could ask yourself?
Remember Erickson did not say you had to have children.
He said you had to be generative in your approach to others.
There's a professor I knew who did not have children.
He and his wife made a conscious decision not to have children.
And he complained at one time in his town that they were raising the taxes once again to support schools.
They had a tax override and he was angry about this.
He said I chose not to bring children into this world.
Others who choose to be so foolish to bring them in ought to be paying for them.
It's not my responsibility to be paying for schools and taking care of other kids' children.
This is the kind of view that would be a non-generative view in Erickson's terms.
Because in Erickson's terms, all of our children belong to all of us.
In a sense, because they're part of the next generation.
Erickson called his eighth and final stage the development of a sense of ego, integrity.
And final stage, the development of a sense of ego, integrity versus a sense of despair.
Now this stage, this last stage is brought on mainly because of the declines of old age.
And with the declines of old age, we have often a loss of financial power and responsibilities.
And these things then push a person into another crisis.
Another shift where a person now has to readjust his or her identity and mastery of these new situations.
At least in western society, most people reach a point where they are no longer active parents.
They retire from their jobs.
They have less control or impact over the accomplishments and decisions in their field of work.
They lose some of the energy or physical or mental stamina needed to keep producing at the rate that they did for most of their adulthood.
All of these things happen.
I want to point out that not all of these events happen because of physical decline.
Most of these events are part of our culture.
But nevertheless, we have a lot of things happen that push us into a tailspin, if you will, in Erickson's terms,
and force us to re-identify, to re-establish this identity.
Just as puberty threw us into an equilibrium, so can these changes of old age.
There's something else that happens according to Erickson.
As we come to the end of our life, we have to come to grips with the certainty of death.
Of course, we always knew about the certainty of death.
But for most people as adults and certainly as children, that's a long way off.
And just as in adolescence, you can see the light at the end of the tunnel that I have to leave home.
I have to make a decision about a career.
Now, for the first time maybe, in Erickson's terms, you really do see the, I hate to say, light at the end of the tunnel,
but you see the end, you see that certainty, you realize it is coming.
And therefore, along with this, is this knowledge that your options, your chances for various courses of action are virtually over.
This is the life I have. There's no other. This is it.
I don't have options now to go back and change things in any significant way.
And so the tasks of this stage are to master and adjust to those changes.
And the opportunities you have to develop a final identity for yourself, which includes what you're like in your old age.
Now, Erickson called it ego-integrity because a successful person in this stage is able to integrate all aspects of her identity,
all aspects that make her who she is, that make up her fully developed ego, if you will.
Remember, he still came from the Freudian tradition.
She'll feel good about herself. She'll feel good about what her life was.
And so integrity is an integration in this sense, but integrity has two meanings here, really.
The first is the integrated life, one that unifies all the previous identities now can come together.
The second meaning of integrity here is honesty.
Integrity or honesty in accepting what one was and what one has been given in life
is the feeling that you had it to do over again, you basically choose to live the same life that you did,
that you're pretty satisfied with all the ups and downs.
You'd be honest in accepting both the successes and the failures and the good and the bad in your life,
but this would be it, and you could feel good about living with that.
A person would then feel that she or he had accomplished something, and it was good as a good life to have.
But there's a third meaning in this term, integrity.
In this last stage, Erickson apparently believed that a person could fully integrate these two seemingly contradictory needs we've talked about,
the needs in life always to be connected to others and also to be independent and autonomous.
And so now, throughout these sequences we've talked about dealing with these two issues,
in the end maybe you could really put it together and see how you can have it both ways, that each reinforces the other.
Let me read you another quote, and this is about this last stage of ego integrity.
He said, Webster's dictionary is kind enough to help us complete this outline in a circular fashion.
Trust, the first of our ego values, is here defined as the assured reliance on another's integrity, the last of our values.
I suspect that Webster had business in mind rather than babies, credit rather than faith, but the formulation stands,
and it seems possible to further paraphrase the relation of adult integrity and infantile trust by saying that healthy children will not fear life
if their elders had the integrity enough not to fear death.
Erickson had a way with words, but he did believe that if you achieve ego integrity, you wouldn't fear death,
and you'd provide even a stronger sense of trust in life for those who are starting out or completing the cycle.
There's some prototypical examples of older people who have achieved this ego integrity.
These are the people whom we think of as having gained this high degree of wisdom.
Whatever that vague term means, wisdom, if you're talking about a wise old person, the wise elders, these are the people that we could look up to.
They're ever generative, they're ever helpful to the younger generations.
Now these are people whom you can think of as that grand old lady or that kindly gentleman or that fun loving grandparent or that person who has a great sense of humor.
And so we have in our minds people who are older, who fit this kind of image.
They're the statesmen, the elders, the great grandparents, the fun people.
What happens if this development goes awry?
Well Erickson thought that there would be a sense of despair that would set in for those who couldn't accept their lives as they had been,
the choices they had made, the outcomes that had occurred in their lives and accept the fact that their lives were coming to an end.
And with this sense of despair might come depression or there might also be a desperation, a desperation to grasp onto as much as you could grab for yourself at the end.
Last gasp to try to change things or make things happen or enjoy what you could at the end.
A person like this in Erickson's view might become a complaining person or somebody who had a very bitter style of interacting with others.
So most of us have encountered kind and optimistic older people and we've also encountered grouchy and depressed older people.
And Erickson took these two types of people who were those who had resolved and worked out ego integrity versus developed a sense of despair in this stage.
Well we've completed the life cycle through Erickson's theory sequence.
And now maybe we should step back and evaluate Erickson's theory in general.
How valid do developmental theorists and research believe these stages are? How valid do you believe these stages are?
The first issue I'd like to bring up is an issue of universality.
Many people believe that Erickson's stages are valid descriptions of a sequence of issues and challenges that a person has to face.
A person who is growing up in a western culture like America.
But many also some of these same people question whether these stages are universal and apply to all cultures.
So a big issue is, is this really describing development of humans, of our species?
Or is in fact Erickson really tied to just one way of developing Europe, America.
Because that's how he developed and how he then was led to this sequence of events.
You see many of the crises, we've mentioned this already, but many of the crises that Erickson describes are really brought about in large part
because of the events that our culture prescribes for us.
Our culture determines when we must learn certain skills and which skills we learn.
It determines when we have to go to school, when we get married, when we must pay taxes, when we have to hold down jobs.
It prescribes when we will retire.
And I know you can say, oh, we don't have mandatory retirement.
But come on, we have had for a long time in our culture.
And whether we have it or not, the fact that social security kicks in at a certain time, that this is sort of the standard, this is expected,
means that you retire at a certain time.
Not all these events are cultural.
The idea that you give up active parenting at a certain age is probably biological.
We have kids at a certain age and they grow up and then we're out of that role.
But you see a lot of the various issues that come up that cause crises for us and cause us to go through a re-evaluation of who we are
come up because of our particular culture.
How could we test this?
Well, we need a lot of cross-cultural research.
And this is what's sort of strange, ironic.
Erickson really believed in cross-cultural research and he himself did some cross-cultural research.
More of it before he really strongly formulated his theory.
But in fact, there isn't a lot of cross-cultural research to test his theory to see if it holds up.
He hasn't really generated a lot of that research that would say, yes, this sequence holds up across cultures despite the differences.
Let me give you another criticism or issue that comes up with Erickson's theory.
Much of his theory is really descriptive.
It describes a sequence, but it's simply that.
It describes what typically occurs in most people's lives.
But what's really lacking from it is a compelling explanation of the underlying processes.
The mechanisms or processes that bring about these developmental changes.
Now, there is a process.
It means it is that if you go through a crisis, if you have things change, you're in a disequilibrium
and you are compelled because of the emotional crisis to resolve it, to figure something out.
But it still seems more descriptive than explanatory.
And this reason also means that there hasn't been a lot of research generated to test its validity, especially cross-culturally.
Erickson's theory, I think, functions best as a good description of a normal sequence of changes in one's life.
It's a metaphor, again, for how we face recycling issues and crises.
And as a description of typical sequence of development, it's pretty good.
It's pretty good, but it's sort of general as metaphors often are.
Despite these problems, it's had a tremendous impact on some areas of research and study.
In the study of personality development, you can't find a book about personality development that won't mention Erickson's theory.
So it is a theory that's had a strong impact on how we view the idea of a development of self, a concept of self,
and how we come to terms with developing the way we are in terms of personality.
And it's been especially helpful in developing our view of how adolescents and young adults develop.
So everybody who is studying adolescent development and all the issues that are going on with adolescents has used Erickson
to try to put a spin on that, to try to understand how that happens.
Think about what we said. It was actually in the last lecture when we talked about adolescents.
Does it ring true for you? We mentioned some of the questions you can ask on whether a theory is a good theory or not.
When we talked about adolescents and young adulthood, does this ring true as a good way of explaining it?
And also, his theory has had a strong impact on our research on adult development and aging.
Certainly, all of the research on aging has gone beyond Erickson, but because he started it,
the idea of looking at some of the main issues that adults face is there because of his theory.
I think there's also another accomplishment of Erickson's theory.
This is one that he stressed early on, and I mentioned, and I just want to mention it again,
and that is this view that all of the issues and crises were always present in one's life.
The focus has shifted, but sometimes we return again to a particular issue or problem.
Do you remember the metaphor I gave you for a roaming spotlight?
And all of the issues being there in our life, but as this spotlight roams around as in a big stadium,
it falls and focuses on a particular issue at a particular time, then yet to move on to some other issue,
and maybe as it moves back, it might move back to the initial issue again.
Well, I think this is what's happening, and Erickson was the one that came up with this,
and I think it was an optimistic view of development because it meant that we are never absolutely set.
So first, one implication is our development is never complete.
It takes a lifetime to integrate all the challenges and issues in Erickson's theory.
It's never complete, but you don't ever have to give up and despair
because there are multiple chances to work out the issues and the challenges that come about.
See, one's life is not ruined because development was less than optimal at one particular period of time.
Now, we talked about in Freudian theory how in analysis you can go back and work through the issues and problems
you had in childhood and now are messing up your life as an adult.
But remember, in Freudian theory, your personality was pretty much set because of those early stages and problems.
In Erickson's terms, you are always working with it.
I think that's actually an optimistic view.
Stages of development are never all or none for Erickson.
And in fact, stages of development being relative is a way that most people look at development today in other areas as well.
Always there's a germ of something being there at the beginning and a gradual development of some skill or process
until one has mastered a particular level.
But never nowadays do people think of something never being present
and then over a short period of time all of a sudden it emerges and is present full blown into the final form.
When I say development is never all or none, I guess to make that correct I should say development is almost never all or none.
But the point is there's always something at the beginning, it's always a process of development and it's never 100% complete.
And that's the way that people look at cognitive skills.
It's the way they look at perspective taking and understanding others.
It's the way they look at our social competencies.
It's the way they look at our control of emotions.
It's the way they look at language development, the way they look at how we use symbols in every other way.
Another point I want to make at the end here is that even though Erickson thought that we need to go through the entire life cycle,
if we're lucky enough to live long that long and get to ego integrity, it really seems to people now that some people who are developing optimally
never experience ego integrity or very low level of it.
You see a lot of people way into old age keep staying in the generative period.
So you have some people who are very old and they're still writing, they're still musicians, they're older parents in some cases.
They're doing something that they're focusing on their production
or in a generative sense on looking after the next generation.
And they don't seem to stop to contemplate the entire life process.
They just keep going until the end.
So for some people, maybe because of retirement, maybe because of these options being taken away from them, they go into an ego integrity stage.
But it seems like for some people, that's not an issue.
You just keep going.
Let me mention one other issue and then we'll end with Erickson.
And that is, he talked as if people go through these stages in the same way.
He did discuss individual differences in terms of the things that the environment could do to you so you either successfully resolve a stage or you don't.
But he talked as if everybody has the same motivation, the same desire to resolve the conflicts.
But you could ask yourself, what if there are individual differences, maybe from biology, maybe from internal mechanisms, that mean that some people really aren't attuned to crises.
They're not so emotional. They don't need to resolve things.
They don't have these crises in their lives and other people do.
And that seems to actually be the case.
I did some research with some colleagues in which we looked at middle-aged adults and then did a retrospective study as best we could doing assessments of what went on in their adolescence and in their young adulthood.
And we had several assessments of the quality of their marriage as adults, whether they'd gone through divorce, whether they'd had issues that they would call midlife crises or not.
And the same way whether they had rebellion and issues of identity crises when they were adolescents.
And we figured if they resolved it as adolescents, they wouldn't have to go through the crisis as an adult.
But in fact, what we found was those that had crises and rebellion as adolescents were more likely to also have these crises and rebellions as adults, even in marriage.
Those that were calm and had a calm adolescence were more likely to have a calm midlife.
So maybe there was a personality, a stable personality difference.
We'll see some of these issues resolved next time when we talk about the theory of attachment. Thank you.
