Lecture 12, Bowlby and Amesworth's Attachment Theory.
Hello.
In this lecture, we're going to introduce the third of our theories, our major theories
in our sequence.
Talk about attachment theory, and then we'll talk about this theory in the next three lectures.
I'd like to begin today by giving you some idea and information about John Bowlby's history
and then Mary Amesworth's history, and then I'd like to conclude discussing the functions
of the attachment system in humans.
Now, a crucial factor for optimal child development is that an infant becomes connected to other
people, especially to the parents.
As you already know, as we've already talked about, both Freud and Erickson addressed this
issue of how parent-child relationships are formed.
Erickson in particular described the development of a sense of trust as a foundation for subsequent
developmental accomplishments.
However, these two theorists didn't focus primarily on the formerly and important relationship.
It was part of their theories in passing.
Important part, nevertheless.
There were two reasons, and Mary D. Salter Amesworth, who developed a theory of parent-child attachment
that focused entirely on why and how this attachment develops in children, and what happens
when a healthy attachment doesn't develop.
So let me repeat.
We're going to talk about how this process develops or how this attachment develops,
why it develops, and what happens when it doesn't develop, what the accomplishments or results are.
Let me start with the history of John Bulby.
John Bulby is considered the primary founder of attachment theory, and this theory has led to numerous
scientific studies, and not only studies, it's led to changes in important policies of childcare.
Because of the research on attachment, we now have changed the way children are treated in hospitals,
especially when they're separated from their parents.
We've changed the way parents and infants in nurseries are treated in the childbirth procedures
and in infant nurseries.
All of these changes came about in some large part because of our views of attachment,
how it functioned, why it worked the way it did.
We'll get back to this, and you'll see some of this.
John Bulby was born in 19, and he died there in 1990.
He's a physician, and again, so far, as a child psychiatrist who worked in the Freudian psychoanalytic tradition.
However, he became really dissatisfied with Freudian theory, especially as he tried to explain how attachment developed.
The psychodynamic theory was really an attic real relationships in a child's life, particularly early on.
It just didn't explain things as the way they should have been explained.
At the same time that he was thinking about trying to explain these early relationships,
he discovered a very new approach or theory that was developing in Europe at the time.
He used ethology then to explain why we need a strong attachment system and how it develops.
It rang true for him, it made a lot of sense to him.
Ethology theory deals with a comparative study of animal behaviors.
Animal behaviors that are adaptive and have evolutionary significance,
but we're going to talk more about ethology theory in the next lecture.
Bowlby published his first theory of attachment in 1957 to give you sort of a timeline of where we are at.
He was really influenced also by the independent theoretical work of Mary Ainsworth.
They started out independently and then began to converge.
It's to the point now where it's very difficult to separate which parts of attachment theory came from Bowlby,
which parts came from Ainsworth, they rated to a large extent.
After World War II, we discovered, people in the field discovered,
that there were many children in orphanages, children who had been devastated by the war,
particularly from the loss of parents.
And there were several child researchers and child therapists
that took a keen interest in these ravaging effects on children being deprived of their parents.
For example, there was another site, Ace Spitz, who studied children often
and studied children who did not have consistent caregivers
and found some interesting things.
He found that there was sort of a sequence that children would go through
in these conditions where, by the way, they had their basic needs met.
They had adequate nourishment.
Somebody was around changing diapers, taking care of them.
But very often, the adult was inadequate, there were too many children,
and they certainly didn't have a single caregiver there that they could get used to.
And these children would then lose interest in other people.
They acted depressed.
He said they were depressed.
And very often, they didn't eat, they often died.
It was shocking to find a kid who had food, necessary food,
who had the basic needs met, that shouldn't have had health problems,
who would just fail to thrive, as he called it.
And just die.
And this really interested people in what happens, what would be the reason for this,
and what would happen to these kids.
It was not just the physical biological needs, something else was there.
And of course, they talked about relationships and the need for relationships.
Now, around the same time, Bowlby and some of his colleagues were doing research
on children in hospitals and also on children who were separated from their parents
because of the loss of the parents.
But in the work on children who were separated because of chronic illness
or even short-term illness and were in hospitals,
he also described and found that they went through a sequence of change.
And this sequence looked a lot like the adult mourning process.
In fact, it looked like the same, whether there was a chronic loss for a child
or even a temporary loss of an adult.
So this same sequence you can actually see when you send your child off to summer camp.
You can see it in homesickness.
You can see it in kids going off to college.
And you can certainly see it in kids as they were hospitalized in times past,
where they were put in a hospital for a long time, had very strict,
or I should say restricted visiting hours, and they were really separated from the parents.
By the way, that was one of the changes.
You don't see that separation from parents now.
Parents can often live in the rooms with the children brought about by some of these findings.
The sequence was that first these kids would protest.
They'd be highly anxious kids.
They would protest at the separations.
They would be very uncomfortable, very upset.
Second, though, there would be a withdrawal when the protest didn't work.
After they sort of wore themselves out,
they would go into what looked like depression and there would be a withdrawal.
And third, it looked on the surface like there was sort of a bouncing back,
but there would be a detachment, a lack of connection to others.
It was like they'd made themselves immune to emotion.
I don't want to deal with you and I don't want to form a relationship because that hurts.
Now, in some ways, that is what goes on often when we have losses as adults as well.
So all of this research pointed to the conclusion that a strong parent-child attachment
was not just important.
It was necessary for the survival and the healthy development of children.
I love it when you have a convergence of views.
When people that are independent come up with things,
this probably makes sense to you,
but it sort of shows you that maybe there's really something to this.
Maybe it's valid what people have found.
Well, Erickson, as we've talked about independently,
we have no indication that he was influenced by Bulby or Bulby was influenced by Erickson,
but Erickson's view of the first stage of development, if you recall,
was that you had to have a strong sense of trust and connection to a parent develop
in order to have a foundation for independence to then proceed further.
And Bulby and Ainsworth found this same thing.
And they laid out, though, the specific mechanisms and processes that would bring this about.
In some ways, what Erickson described as happening before he went on to his subsequent stages,
what he described as happening, Ainsworth and Bulby then explored in a lot more detail
how he talked about the processes and mechanisms to talk about how it happens.
From 1969 to 1980, that's a long time period,
but during this time Bulby published three books called His Trilogy on Attachment.
It was a series of attachment, separation, and loss,
and it was really these three books that have become his most important publications
dealing with and describing his theory and his research.
Hold that history for just a minute and let me shift to Mary Ainsworth.
As I mentioned, Mary Ainsworth first worked independently of Bulby,
and then later in conjunction with him.
They never were working side by side consistently together.
It was constantly a crossing of paths on purpose on their part
and communicating with each other.
In that way, she is really the co-founder of this theory,
and she provided some of the primary research methods that we've used.
Mary Ainsworth was born in 1913 in Ohio.
She died in 1999 in Virginia.
She did her undergraduate and her graduate work at the University of Toronto,
and she received her PhD there in 1939 to give you, again, the time frame.
During World War II, she served in the Canadian Army,
and she rose to that rank of major.
In 1950, Ainsworth joined Bulby for the first time,
and with this accompanying interchange of ideas,
they really started to influence each other's theory,
and then, as I mentioned, for the rest of their lives,
they kept reconnecting, talking to each other,
spurring each other on in a way with data and with theoretical ideas.
After World War II, she moved to Uganda,
and this was a time I have to interject here.
This is the only woman among the major theorists that we're talking about.
I think that Mary Ainsworth, I actually met her and spent some time with her,
and I think this even more after meeting her,
she was a very strong and very accomplished woman,
and I think she had to be at that time,
because to make it as a woman to survive
and to have an impact was a tough thing to do in that field at that time.
Whereas now we have many, many women studying development
and very accomplished ones who are contributing greatly,
but she was a rarity in the field of high theorists,
probably because the opportunities weren't open.
I say that because she moved to Uganda because of her husband's job.
But while she was in Uganda, she made very good use of her time.
She completed some intensive studies and observations of mother-child interactions there.
And while she was there, she discovered three main patterns of attachments
that seemed to form with the moms and the babies,
and we're going to discuss these later and bring them out,
because she used them again and again and they seemed to hold up.
In 1956, she went to Johns Hopkins University because, again, her husband went there.
They would never give her a tenured position, but she was an adjunct there.
And in Baltimore, she carried out an intensive set of investigations of mothers and children,
and she used the classifications, these types of attachments,
that she had learned about and discovered in Uganda
and then now applied them to American families and found out they worked here as well.
And some of her most important work came from that time period.
In 1976, she moved to the University of Virginia and she stayed there until her retirement.
And a lot of her later work focused on attachments beyond infancy
and how early relationships affect later relationships later in adulthood.
Ainsworth's main ideas came while she was working in graduate school with her advisor, William Blatts.
He had a theory of the role of security
and how security is an influential factor in humans.
She used this to develop her most important idea,
and that was the idea of a secure base in infant attachments.
Here is our argument.
She said that having a strong attachment provided the child not with a dependent relationship.
Instead, it provided the child with a sense of security, this secure base.
And it was from this secure base that a child could then explore and take risks
and in fact behave more independently rather than being dependent and helpless.
Now, this, you might notice, is a convergence of views.
We've talked about the idea of connectedness and independence when we talked about Erickson's theory.
But Ainsworth's contribution, more so than Bulby's,
was the idea that security brings about risk-taking and exploration.
Dependence brings about being tied to somebody else, being helpless.
When you make somebody dependent on you, they're helpless.
When you make them securely attached, they can go on their own and they can be independent.
In Ainsworth's terms, you can never be too securely attached.
But you definitely can be too dependent. They're not the same thing.
Now, Ainsworth argued then, well, that this secure base was the primary benefit or value of being attached.
Bulby argued that being attached provided you with the comfort and the protection
to do what you needed to do as a child.
And these two ideas were then combined in the theory.
In 1978, Ainsworth with some of our students published an influential book called Patterns of Attachment.
It lays out most of the important points of our theory and research.
So, the joint theory of these two folks is that humans have evolved a built-in attachment system,
attachment system that's necessary for the survival and adaptation of our species.
This isn't nice. We can't help it.
This is a part of us, a part of our human nature.
Let me see if I can walk you through how they look at the development of this system.
First, humans have had the longest period of immaturity of any species.
Not only in absolute length, but also in the proportion of our lifespan that we spend in immaturity.
It's longer than any other species.
And the interesting thing about this is the length of immaturity in a species lifespan
seems to progress fairly orderly through the phylogenetic order.
So primates, such as chimpanzees, also have a very long period of immaturity.
I can't account for birds. They seem to have gone off on a separate line of evolution and development
because some of those have a long period of immaturity as well.
In any case, we have this long period of immaturity where we're, quote, children,
where we haven't reached sexual maturity, we can't reproduce,
and we're not qualified, if you will, to handle adult tasks in our species.
Why is this? Why is this?
People have looked at this from an adaptation or evolutionary viewpoint.
Well, the argument is that if you want a species to be hardwired,
to have everything already built into the neurology or into the genetic code,
then that would be handy to have a species that worked on instincts
and was ready to go for the particular environment of that species.
So a perfect example would be some species of lizards living in the Arizona desert.
We think of them as being hardy, but in fact what they are is very well adapted
for a specific environment, not for a range of environments.
But humans at the opposite end seem to have taken the path of flexibility.
The idea is, come into the world with as much flexibility as possible,
as much potential as possible, but have very little hardwired,
have very little that's in terms of instincts or a genetic code.
Instead, just have the openness that you can develop in different ways,
neurologically as well as intellectually and socially.
And to do this, to have this flexibility, you also have to have a long period of time
where you're not required as an individual to reproduce, to take care of babies,
to gather food, to protect yourself.
You've got to have a period of time that gives you a grace period
so that you can be influenced by the environment, so that you can learn.
And the learning then will take you in different directions depending on your environment and your culture.
So the idea of flexibility is that you have to have a long period of immaturity.
This might sound to you a little bit like John Locke's view of coming in sort of blank
and being molded by your environment.
But if you have this long period of immaturity, you're also vulnerable
because you can't survive on your own.
So in order to protect this individual during this long period of immaturity,
you have to have some system of protection and that's parenting.
So you now have to have parents to watch out for and take care of the immature individual
while that immature individual is learning and developing the flexibility.
And parenting only occurs in species who have a long period of immaturity.
If you come into the world like a lizard and you're basically a miniature adult
and you start functioning like adult, albeit smaller, you don't need parents to hang around.
If you need parents, then the nature would say,
how are we going to make sure that parents hang in there and do their job?
And so the way nature does that is let's have evolved a system
that the parents want to stay with their offspring, want to stay connected.
And it might help to also have the offspring want to stay with their parents and not wander off.
You see?
So that's the basic logic of keeping the parents and the offspring together
and giving something rewarding to them so they'll stick together during this period of immaturity.
Now attachment can be defined as a strong preference that a person has
to be in close proximity to another specific person and to feel comfortable when close to that person
and to feel highly distressed when separated from that person.
I said a specific person.
Attachment is this strong desire to be close to one other specific person.
You can have multiple attachments to people, but it isn't just to your species.
It's attachment to a particular individual.
Here's the summary.
Flexibility requires time to learn.
Long period of immaturity is needed.
Immaturity requires parents to provide the security.
The parents have to be sticking to the job and the reciprocal attachment system
is the build-in mechanism that makes sure the parents stay on the job and the kids stay with them.
Now, what does this system accomplish for children?
Well, we said we just told you that it accomplishes keeping them together.
But there's another way of looking at it and that is to say there are certain functions.
There's a set of functions that this reciprocal attachment system accomplishes.
So first, and probably most importantly, it guarantees, the attachment guarantees
that the basic needs of the child are met.
For example, the child gets fed, has warmth, has shelter, has protection from harm or predators.
So this is the basic idea, the evolutionary idea we talked about.
The attachment system then has to protect the infant, and this is first and foremost.
In return for what the baby gets, the parents or the parent substitutes.
I always use parents, by the way, but it has to be somebody that's taking care of the child,
whether it's a biological parent or not.
The parent has to get something, too.
The idea is with this reciprocal system, some of the parent's needs are also met.
And some of the needs that people have talked about is the parent gets physical contact
with a person that feels actually pretty good.
And the person has social stimulation.
And the parent meets the needs to nurture somebody else and feeling needed.
So some of them are psychological, some of them are probably physical,
and there are certain needs that meet the parent's wishes as well.
There's a second function of this system, and that is that it provides the child with a sense of security.
This is where A's were came in, or trust, or a quelling of fears.
So it isn't just that the basic needs are met, but it's a secure base.
And then from this secure base, another need is met.
And that is this third need that it facilitates exploration and independent functioning in the child.
We need both. We need to be independent.
We need to explore, but we also need to secure base.
And the idea of attachment theory is these two needs are interconnected.
You can't have one without the other.
They go together. Even though they seem to be opposites,
it seems to be a paradox of the system that by becoming more secure and attached to your mom,
you're also going to explore more and become more independent because of this secure base.
You'll try out new behaviors. Let me give you some examples of this.
Some of them are pretty straightforward and simple.
One is an area called social referencing is the name that people give to it.
And it's this, that a child who is put in an ambiguous situation
and isn't sure about the safety of that situation or what to do or what to think in that situation
will turn to a person that he or she is attached to to get a read on it.
So, let's say you have this little kid playing on the floor here, mom's over here,
and a stranger enters that the little kid has never seen before.
What does the kid do? Think about what you know about what a kid does.
Typically, a kid will freeze, look up at the stranger, stop everything she's doing,
look at the stranger, and then what next? Turn to mom and look at mom's face.
And if mom goes, oh, that's some shock.
The baby will start to cry and crawl the mom and grab her.
If mom goes, ah, smiles, the baby then will seem to be okay.
Look back and follow the stranger but not be upset.
How many times have you seen this? Baby falls down the stairs or, wow, that's too gross.
Falls. Maybe he's been hurt, maybe hasn't.
But doesn't cry and looks at the parent.
And the parent goes, oh, did you hurt yourself? Oh, no, oh, no.
The baby starts to cry and wants to go to the mom.
If the mom says, oh, did you fall down? Ah, let's get up and go.
Baby's okay and doesn't cry. This is called social referencing.
The attachment is that the baby uses the attached figure, in this case the mother,
to read what to do. You see, because the mom is the secure base
and provides this availability to know what to do.
Let me give you another example. A kid is playing with toys and the mom's here
and let's say there's some really appealing toys off around the corner in another room.
Let's say they're a daycare center at their friend's house, whatever.
And the little kid might walk away and go in the other room and play with those toys.
And every once in a while you see this, the kid will come back, look around and look at the mom.
And if mom says, you having fun? The kid goes off and plays some more.
Sometimes you see this. Kids will be off playing or doing something
and they go back to mom and touch her knee and then walk off again.
Come back and just touch her and walk off again.
The idea is that the mom is the secure base that now allows the child to go off.
And children who are well attached will go further away and take more chances
than children who are not well attached.
The kid goes off to camp.
Kids will often have less homesickness and be able to adjust to camp better
if they have a secure attachment to a parent than if they don't have a secure attachment.
Fourth, I'm giving you the fourth function for attachments.
If a person is attached to another person, it focuses that person's attention on the attached person.
If a child is attached to somebody, the child will focus attention on that person
and experience a lot of positive emotional arousal
and seek out eye contact and proximity.
That goes without saying, I think.
But what happens is this focused attention on the attached person
primes the child to learn from the attached person.
So first Pavlov discovered this.
When he was doing his conditioning with his dogs,
he discovered if the dogs were attached to the master,
as you've seen, maybe if you've had dogs,
they would watch everywhere that the master went, the alpha dog went,
and they would pay attention and they could learn new tricks and condition faster
if they had a person that they were positive about or attached to.
This you see in schools all the time,
whether it's preschool, elementary school, even college.
That is, if a student is attached to the teacher,
they pay attention to that teacher.
They focus on that teacher and they'll often learn more.
In fact, they'll often say, the teacher said this, it has to be right.
The teacher is valuable.
And people who focus attention and are emotionally aroused to a moderate,
positive level often learn more.
So attached people provide good teachers for the kids that are attached to them.
The fifth purpose is that attachment provides a model
and experience with relationships that then will change
or influence the development of future relationships.
And we're going to come back to this in a subsequent lecture.
But in any case, let me say now that not only does attachment
then have a strong influence on babies or little kids,
but the way they form a relationship with their parents
influences the way they're going to form a friendship with peers as preschoolers and school age.
And in fact, now the evidence shows it's going to influence
the way they're going to form romantic relationships in adolescence and adulthood.
And it's going to influence the way they become a parent.
So the positives and the negatives are passed from generation to generation.
Early attachments affect later relationships.
And in Bulby's view, in fact, it probably is a major function
that's built into the system to provide a model that will influence subsequent relationships.
Now in the next lecture, we're going to discuss how nature ensures
that the formation of secure attachments occur
and the sequence that we go through in developing these early attachments.
We're going to bring in ethology and that theory.
Thank you.
Thank you.
