These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Theories of Human Development, Part 2.
Chapter 13, How Nature Ensures That Her.
Hello.
In our last lecture, we introduced attachment theory in the next few lectures, and today
I'd like to talk about how nature works to ensure that attachments develop.
We also introduced the theory of ethology.
Theory is all about an explain how ethology theory was used to explain this process of
attachment, and I'd like to particularly focus on the idea of innate relief, and I'll explain
what those are, and then conclude with a romp through the course of development of the onset
of attachment to show how birth and in the first few years.
As I mentioned, John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth were the two people who jointly formulated
attachment theory.
We're mainly going to talk about John Bowlby's work today.
When John Bowlby rejected the Freudian psychodynamic theory as an inadequate theory to explain
how attachment develops, he turned in theory.
Ethology theory first emerged in the mid-20th century in the work of mainly from three European
naturalists, Karl von Frisch, Nico Tinbergen, and Konrad Lorenz, later on Nobel Prize for
their work.
Ethology theory is really a general approach to study.
These folks were biologists, naturalists, but they studied behavior in animals and development
of behaviors in animals that focused particular behavior patterns.
They were interested in the significance of certain behaviors and how these behaviors
then had evolved.
They carried out a lot of detailed systematic observations of different, and they described
how certain complex behaviors work to try to explain why certain behaviors would have
significance.
Certain complex action patterns that are often called instincts seem to accomplish this
adaptation, and these instincts would kick in at grief.
These are the ideas that came out of this ethology.
A critical period is defined as a time in any given species in the course of this development
when that individual is particularly sensitive to certain environmental kid, and something
happens in the environment, some signal is given, the individual will respond and will
thus maybe develop a certain pattern and have a normal development.
Outside of this critical period, either before it or after it, the individual may not respond
the same way.
Certain skills or reorganizations of the neural system are in critical periods.
Critical period primes that individual or to have a neurological change.
There's a prime complex action pattern in a critical period that's seen in the idea
of imprinting.
Imprinting was first explained by Conrad with the name.
In imprinting, a newborn animal responds to the movements of another object or the other
object in close proximity to that animal and forms, obviously has to form some kind of
neurological connections or patterns of firing that now a preference and will keep the animal
proximity of that other object or thing.
If that sounds sort of vague, let me do some specific examples in just a minute.
Let me mention though, it happens in a critical period.
If time passes and the critical period won't occur in animals, the imprinting, the connections
have to be made during this period when it seems like through genetics this animal is
predisposed to respond.
Printing mainly took place in birds.
So when Lorenz studied it, he looked at geese, animals like that.
When a duckling hatches, a first moving object of a certain size of the duck's mother, but
any size from a loaf of bread, and what happens is when the duck hatches, at that point there's
a critical period in the duckling's life, the first moving object is what the duck responds
to and then will follow and seek the proximity of that object.
Normally the first object would be the duck's mother, eggs hatched, there's the mom, she
walks around and the ducks start to follow her or the gozlings, a goose mother.
The neat thing was that you could do to show that it worked with other objects besides
the mother.
This was a way, by the way, that made sure that a child or the young in the species stuck
with the mother.
This imprinting was a way to make sure they were bonded and this attachment emerged and
then continued.
I'll give you an example of the kind of study that Lorenz did.
He then took the eggs, had them hatch without the mother being present, could put something
else there.
You could have an artificially animated bread box and the ducklings or the gozlings would
follow the bread box and the famous study that he did was he took the eggs, put them
by himself when they hatched, he crouched down and walked around and the gozlings followed
him around.
There's some famous pictures, you may have seen one, Lorenz walking around the yard doing
his chores with this whole string of gozlings following him permanently bonded for the rest
of their youth, if you will, their childhood, he was their mother.
Now, ethologists believe that this, in a particular individual or object, that then releasing
these signals so that a person will then respond, an imprint to this.
Guows may be colors or patterns or certain actions.
Whenever you see these signaling patterns, another individual will respond in a certain
way and he called these innate releasing mechanisms, these terms.
So movement in a mother duck is an innate releasing mechanism for the ducklings to follow
the mother.
But some of you may have seen on seagulls, different kinds of gulls, a red spot on the
beak of the adult gulls.
That red spot is an innate releasing mechanism, a signal to babies to peck at it.
That part's built in.
Some way they've evolved and they can't help themselves, when they see that red spot they
want to peck at it.
And that pecking at it is then an innate releasing mechanism that signals the adult
to open its beak.
So the mom or dad will open its beak, now typically they've gone out and picked up a
lot of food for the young.
When the young sees the beak, she pecks at it.
When she pecks at it, the mother or father opens the beak and the baby eats.
So here's another form of an innate releasing mechanism.
And there are several innate releasing mechanisms in primates as well that seem to elicit specific
responses, theorized, that there would also be innate releasing mechanisms in humans,
that would elicit attachment patterns, quite similar to the imprinting of a lower species.
In humans, we don't have imprinting and we don't have critical periods that are so absolutely
set the way you find them in sample.
But he argued we do have something like imprinting that works in a similar way and we do have
something like critical periods.
And most people agree.
It's a little hazier for humans.
We're not so locked into instincts, but there's something.
So there'd be some kind of mechanism that would elicit proximity seeking and then attachment
formation in babies.
They would respond to something the mothering or some way the way she looked.
Now, by the way, I've mentioned this before, but when I use the word mother, I mean a parent
or another caretaker, whoever is playing that parenting and mothering role.
Babies respond to soft, warm, like skin and cloth.
If you say what are the innate releasing mechanisms in the parent that would elicit these kinds
of behaviors in offness, warmness, cloth?
They cling and they grasp automatically.
I don't think they can help themselves, say this is not, they come into the world doing
this and everything they do tends to indicate that they like this, that they prefer it, this
kind of physical contact.
In fact, there's a lot of work with other kinds of primates with some kinds of monkeys
and apes who do the same thing.
Strong preference for what's called contact comfort and be able to cling to it.
Babies also respond to faces.
These are innate releasing mechanisms, signals that the babies, they like to look at the
faces, they particularly like eyes, so that if you put different stimuli up for a baby
to look at, babies will prefer a face over the stimuli.
If you put a face up, they tend to look at the eyes more than anything else.
Once they've developed at a certain level of the visual system that they can control
their looking, they like to make eye contact or from the baby's standpoint, he says, and
they do make eye contact.
What else do they respond to?
Smiling.
So smiling in the mother or in adults is an innate releasing mechanism to the baby.
So again, after about seven to eight weeks of development, after birth, if you smile
at a baby, it elicits an automatic smile back from the baby, and babies tend to like that
and will look for smiling.
And they quickly learn to try.
Babies also respond to the sound range voice.
So they like, if you give them sounds, they may like music, they may like other things,
but what they particularly like in the range that the particularly female voices.
So female voices tend to calm them.
And some people have argued, well, they've been conditioned to this in utero.
Maybe, maybe not, but they come into the world liking this level of sound.
Let me give you a demonstration or at least talk you through a demonstration.
If you want to impress people with how good you are with babies, they have to be about
seven to eight weeks of age.
But sometime in there, if you get down fairly close to the baby's face, and you bob up and
down and move your face and open your eyes really wide, and your mouth really wide, go
ah, ah, ah, ah, babies will smile.
And everybody will say, oh, you really have a good way with babies.
But in fact, you are giving innate religion knows that the baby can't help himself.
He smiles.
Because he sees that big face, he sees the big eyes, he sees some of the movement, that's
what they like.
Now reciprocally, there ought to be some releasing mechanisms in babies that would then turn
on mothers and fathers, because the attachment system is reciprocal.
You remember last time we said that you want the baby to be attached to the mother, you
want the mother to be attached to the baby, so we're all in the same species, you might
expect that these really are parallel releasing mechanisms, and they are.
So what do adults like in babies?
Adults respond to the soft feel of babies.
In particular, adults like it when a baby clings and grasps them.
If you think you are, most of us have this good feeling when a baby sort of molds herself
to you and clings and sort of cuddles, and that feels good to people.
adults also, particularly babies, but all of us like contact with babies.
It turns us on.
And just as they spawn to smiles, when somebody smiles at you, you smile back, and you really
can't help yourself.
In babies, we love it when they smile and we love it when they laugh.
We find that rewarding.
We do.
This is not something that certain people learn like mothers, but in fact older children
respond the same way, teenagers respond that way, males respond that way, females respond
that way, whether you're a parent or not.
Maybe not everyone in the world responds that way, but that's the tendency.
Spursal message, regardless of culture, it doesn't matter where you come from.
When somebody smiles at you, the message is, I like what's happening, keep it up, and we
find that smile rewarding.
Spurs may be like some sounds from babies, but they have one particular sound that they
respond to, and it's a distressing, aversive sound.
When babies cry, that's an innate releasing mechanism to adults.
It's highly aversive, and it's distressing.
It's almost impossible to ignore.
We can try, but it's difficult.
It's meant to be aversive.
It's an innate sound to get us to respond to the baby.
And crying in humans conveys a regardless of culture, and that message is when somebody
cries the message of what's happening, change things.
And when we hear that in a baby, we have a tendency to want to respond.
There's one set of innate releasing mechanisms that Conrad Lorenz argued elicit in particular
nurturing behaviors in the fellow members of a particular species, and he called these
releasing mechanisms, these features, a set of features, babyishness, and all animals that
have an extended period of immaturity and parenting tend to have, bring, who don't look
like the adults of the species, but have certain features that will say, are babyish features.
And of course, we have these babyish features in humans as well.
So what are they?
These features of babyishness, which remember mechanisms to bring people closer together.
I have to say, I don't know where they started.
The baby features are probably just some mechanical quote of the way we develop physically, but
is that we have evolved that when we see these features, we're drawn to them, we're attracted
to them, and they release a certain kind of behavior pattern in us.
So babies typically have very large heads to their total body size.
A large head relative to the whole body is a baby's feature.
They also have extra-large eyes in it.
But before I sound like we're getting into the Little Red Riding Hood story, they don't
have extra-large teeth, for example, or extra-large ears, they have large heads, large eyes.
They also have a very large forehead in proportion to the whole head.
If you look at a baby's eyes, the features of the face are relatively low with a big
head.
They tend to have soft, fatty, rounded, and non-angular features.
So for example, they have a rounded chin.
They have small and rounded nose.
They have large, puffy cheeks with no visible cheekbones.
They have soft, dimpled hands with dimples and roundness.
All of these things are baby's features in humans.
You can find some of these same baby's features in other species.
So in a lot of species, you can find rounded, non-angular muzzles, for example, on a cat
or a dog, large eyes, fat, round bodies.
If you think of a little puppy with a fat, round tummy, an angular sort of short noses,
some of the same features, they only appear these that have complex parenting behaviors.
I keep going back to lizards as my extreme example.
Lizards when they're born do not have baby's features.
They're small, but they look the same as adults.
They're miniature adults.
They have no baby's features because they have no parenting and they're other species
like that.
So whenever one perceives baby's features in another person, the person feels this release
of feelings of nurturance towards that other person.
So the innate releasing mechanism is this set of features and what it releases, the behavior
it releases is this feeling of wanting to protect, nurture and take care.
We can't help ourselves.
We want to take care of people.
We want to nurture people.
We want to protect who have baby's features, mainly babies who can't help it.
And it works across species at times.
So you have humans who see a little puppy or a little kitten and what do they do?
They go, oh, she's so cute.
Oh, they want to pet it and cuddle it and take care of it.
Same with a cat, same with a gorilla baby.
We usually don't hold them, but we see that reaction.
Of course it happens with human babies too.
You see a baby and the baby has a lot of these baby's features you go, at least in your mind,
you go, oh, you're response.
And this happens, again, in adolescence, in childless couples, in males and females as
well as parents.
And so Bowlby argued it's an automatic response.
We can't help ourselves.
There's even some anecdotal evidence that it happens the opposite way across species.
For example, dogs will sometimes be more tolerant of babies than they are of other adults, humans.
They'll sometimes have stories of dogs protecting babies or young children.
Because recently of a little girl who filled an area of a zoo other went over and protected
her.
It even works, we've actually used it in this way, in dolls.
If you think of how dolls work for little girls, is dolls are made with extremely large
heads relative to the body of a dog, large eyes.
Rounded features, the kinds of things that will elicit and this reaction, even for it
works with makeup.
So for women, the baby's features of their face, you maybe didn't realize you were doing
this.
You put makeup on your eyes to make the eyes look bigger and stand out relative to the
size of your face.
You put lipstick on in a way that makes your lips look rounder and puffier, makes women
look like a baby and maybe not all of it's intended to, but there's a lot of makeup that
makes women look more babyish, whether they realize that or not.
Why would that be?
Well, some people are seeing an innocence, a need to be protected, a need for nurturance.
And in fact, in women, if you think about it, in some, on average, more babyish features
than men in the sense that they have less angular and more rounded features.
Maybe one reason they get treated in some small part.
Social psychologists, Leslie Zebrawitz, who has even shown that these baby's features
continue in our species.
Maybe they're meant bonds of mother to child, but they respond, we result to adult.
So there have been many studies that Leslie Zebrawitz to show that we respond to people
who have baby faces or immature faces as adults in a different way than we respond to people
who have mature faces, tendency.
We see people who have baby faces as being more innocent, more kind, more honest.
Those are good features, but we also see them as being less competent, less responsible
than mature faced individuals.
And these perceptions and biases are independent of the attractiveness of others.
You can have two people that you rate them on attractiveness or sex appeal and they could
be equal, but you see is more baby faced than another.
And in fact, the research has shown it influences slightly how we choose people for different
positions of responsibility, how we choose jurors, how we decide guilt or innocence in
court cases, how we choose partners for various activities.
For example, in court cases, even in a criminal case, if someone is a defendant and has a
baby faced, that person is more likely to be found guilty of crimes of negligence.
When they didn't do what they were supposed to, it's likely to be found guilty of crimes
of premeditated, careful planning.
It doesn't mean that this is the only thing that controls our behavior.
It's just one slight tendency or push in that direction.
So you can see that baby facedness seems to be a spawn to others.
Cultures by the way, from people viewing individuals in another culture or another ethnic group,
it seems to be there early on in babies and it seems to last throughout life.
And Bowlby argued this is one of the main features then that we use to bring us together
so they want to be together and they have this closeness.
Let me now tell you about the normal course of development.
I've given you this own process that happens.
There's some significant changes in the first few months and they coincide with the onset
of certain six releasing mechanisms that we've discussed.
And they also show the reason that it's happening for both the parent, the parent's becoming
attached to the baby, at the same time the baby's becoming attached to the parent.
In the first three weeks after birth, after a full term birth, the baby admits some of
these releasing mechanisms or behavior, a grasp, they cling, they cuddle, they have
some of the baby.
Nevertheless, moms and parents usually report feeling exhausted and frustrated with their
parenting.
And one thing that seems to be missing in these first few weeks is the babies aren't smiling.
They're not making eye contact and they don't have the full-blown baby's features, the real
pudginess and fatness often.
In about four to six weeks though after birth, the baby's routine stabilizes, they're more
predictable in what they're going to do and the confidence of the mother increases when
you talk to mothers and they talk about what's happening in there.
But about seven to eight major shifts in that a lot of the cortex now kicks in.
It's a myelinization of neurons that now a lot of the cortex can now, that was not possible
before about seven weeks.
They call it the seven-week shift.
It seems to be a maturational process.
It doesn't have much to do with the way a baby's treated or brought up.
When this cortex kicks in, there are association areas that then allow volunteers and after
about seven weeks, babies change.
They start sleeping for longer periods of time.
But the important changes for our discussion today is they start making clear eye contact.
They'll track the eye of the mom or somebody else and they start smiling.
Smile at a baby now and the baby looks at you and smiles back.
And surprise, surprise, weeks, mothers report, this baby is a real person.
I love this baby.
So that depends from the baby.
The mothers now get excited as better.
They say, my baby's a real person, my baby, not a fun.
At about three to four months, turn-taking starts to kick in.
It's a gradual process.
That is, babies start listening and they play simple games like peek-a-boo.
And at this time, the mother often reports, starts reporting, I need this baby.
I can't live without this baby.
Well, she's primed by culture to think that way.
It's a gut feeling.
Five to six months, it's clear that babies now have specific preferences for only one
or a very few other individuals.
You could say, they really have a tact for you and they don't prefer you.
And at five to six months, you see that.
And of course, mothers tend to already say, I can't live without this baby.
Starting at about seven months and between seven and about 12 months, look at babies.
First, most here, that is when the person that they are attached to leaves and is not
present.
They show extreme destroy.
They cower and they look for the attached person.
They don't like it when the person is separated.
And the second thing they do is they show stranger fear.
So when a stranger comes into the room or comes near the bay freezes, you're very carefully.
Often hides behind times cries.
These two behaviors, extreme discrimination and preference for a attached person.
And mothers, even though they'll tell you, oh, I don't know why he's acting like that.
I'm sorry, privately admit they love it because it says, my baby likes me and likes you.
And that turns mothers as well.
We're now going to finish this discussion, but next time we will continue with a discussion
of the development attachments and how insecure and secure attachments develop and what they
mean.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
