Lecture 14 Development of Secure and Insecure Attachments
Hello.
In our last lecture we talked about the early development of attachment and some of the processes
that lead to attachment.
We particularly talked about the work and theorizing of John Bulby.
In this lecture I want to discuss the development of secure and insecure attachments and talk
about attachments when they do not work in an optimal fashion.
And I'd like to talk about Ainsworth's classification of types of attachment and also discuss the
results that occur when children have insecure attachments.
Now as we discussed in the last lecture humans are predisposed to form strong parent infant
attachments.
But according to Mary Ainsworth secure attachments can also become insecure or that is some attachments
may not work properly.
And Mary Ainsworth thought that the primary reason for insecure attachments developing
was because of the inconsistent care and interactions that parents showed to their children.
You see John Bulby was the one that introduced ethology theory and had a view of attachments
forming in sort of a lockstep automatic way.
Ainsworth had more of a view of the strong influence of individual differences from parents.
We're going to talk about that today.
Let me begin by talking about some research that leads up to this view of positive and
negative attachment kinds of attachments forming.
There was some early work by two researchers Shaffer and Emerson in which they simply did
observations of attachments forming.
They went into homes and observed kids interacting with their parents.
They looked at what happened when you had stranger fear when strangers entered.
They looked at what happened during separation when the mother or the father would leave.
And they wanted to find out how these attachments would occur more about this kind of process.
What they discovered was first although a lot of kids developed one single strong attachment
to one person usually the mother.
Very often kids develop multiple attachments even from the beginning.
So very often it's the case that a child forms a strong attachment to both the mother and
the father at the same time or maybe to the mother and an older sibling or maybe to the
mother and the uncle.
And so different attachments can form early on.
And the aspects that seemed to really determine which people became the attached figures
for babies were the aspects of how these people treated the babies.
And what they found in their research was it wasn't dependent so much on which people
did the caretaking for kids.
That is who fed the baby, who washed the baby, who put the baby to bed.
What was really important were the interactions of who talked to the baby, who hugged the
baby, who played with the little child, who laughed with the child.
Very often it's one and the same person that does this.
But for example, if in one family the mother does all the caretaking, washes, feeds, cleans,
takes care of all the basic needs, spends more time with the baby, 90% of the time, the baby
might become attached to the dad or somebody else in the family if that's the person that's
showing more of the emotional social interaction.
So that aspect was very important.
There are other researchers that also looked at the early relations between a parent and
child and the interactions between them.
And these interactions seemed to have to do with the way attachments would form.
Condon and Sander were two researchers that filmed babies right at birth.
And what they found was, even at birth, babies begin coordinating what they do to sounds
and eventually to the sights and actions of other people.
So for example, if they played music for a newborn baby, the baby might listen but the
baby wouldn't coordinate his or her actions to that music.
If they played human speech, human sounds for that baby, the baby would coordinate the
movements, the turning, the actions in coordination with this human speech.
In fact, even if you had nonsense, if you took human speech and partialed it up into
making nonsense words or sentences, the baby would still respond.
The baby would respond regardless of the language.
You could take an American baby and play Chinese speech and the baby would still respond.
It was the human speech, that level, that tone that the baby coordinated to.
And this was at birth for all intents and purposes at birth.
Dan Stern was another researcher who looked into the early interactions of babies to their
parents or to other people.
And he found that very early on, there was a turn taking that started to develop.
So that babies and moms start learning to take turns.
Moms seem to do this automatically.
They don't necessarily think about it and the babies learn it pretty quickly.
The mother will talk to the baby.
The baby looks, pauses and looks.
Then the mother will stop and pause and the baby will do something.
The mother will do some action.
The baby will watch.
Then the mother pauses and the baby does something.
So for example, you say, hi, are we having a good day today to the baby?
Baby's watching very carefully.
And then mom stops, looks at the baby, and the baby goes, ah, ah, ah, ah, and flails
about.
Okay.
And it's a turn taking.
And then also, mothers start playing games with babies and the early turn taking games
are like peek-a-boo, pat-a-cake, these things where in peek-a-boo, where's the baby?
Where's the baby?
You put something like a cloth over the baby's head.
Baby pauses.
If you watch babies play this game, they're still, they don't say anything.
Maybe there's heavy breathing because they're emotional.
Okay.
And you say, where's the baby?
And then you stop and the baby rips off the cloth and maybe goes, ah, and makes sound
and flails about.
Baby's turned.
So right away, these Dan Stern and other researchers are showing that we start turn
taking.
And turn taking is learned extremely early.
That's very handy later on in all social interactions that require turn taking and particularly in
language communication.
But it seems to be part of this early attachment process as well.
Ken Kay did a wonderful experiment, I think.
And I remember seeing the videotape showing this experiment.
He set up a situation where he wanted mothers to teach their babies to do something.
At least that's what he told them.
In fact, hardly any mother could teach their babies to do this.
The babies were only a few months old.
But he really wanted to watch the way they interacted, the way they went about it.
And what he had is he had a mother have the baby sit on her lap.
In front of a barrier, it was actually a transparent plexiglass barrier.
He would have the mother get the baby interested in something like a set of keys and jiggle
them around and then try to teach and put the keys behind the barrier.
But the baby could see these keys and try to get and the mother's job was to try to
get the baby to learn to reach around the barrier to get the keys, to have to not go
directly through it, but how you can reach around to get it.
So mothers were really motivated to show how smart their babies were and try to get them
to do this.
Remember, almost no mothers got their babies at this young age to do this.
What he was really interested in was the process, but they would do.
And what he found, again and again, was mothers would first give the keys to the baby.
The baby would play with them, mouth them, suck them, do these things.
And then after a while, stop.
As soon as the baby stopped, the mother would then take the keys and shake them or do something
else.
And then the baby would take over again.
And eventually the mother would put the keys behind the barrier.
And the baby would get excited and bang on the barrier and try to get them, of course,
couldn't get them.
And then the mother would pause and do nothing while the baby was responding.
When the baby stopped, and very often when they stopped, they would look back over at
them on.
It's almost as if they were saying, I don't know what to do now, mom, it's your turn.
And then the mom would reach around and shake the keys, and the baby would go at it again.
Or maybe the mom would pull them back and try to show the baby that they went around
the barrier, put them a little closer, and then the baby would take a chance.
But the point is it was constant turn takings.
Moms would wait while the baby practiced.
Then the baby would pause and wait for the mom now to do something.
And this seemed to be the interaction that was occurring.
This give and take interaction then seems to be part of this process of learning to
be attached, of becoming attached.
In order to assess the types of attachment in the form, though, Mary Ainsworth developed
a technique that she called the strange situation task.
The strange situation sounds like a science fiction movie.
If you recall, I mentioned that she did a lot of her work first in Uganda and then in
Baltimore, and this is some of the research that she did particularly in Baltimore.
This was actually an experimental condition or task that was set up to elicit the kind
of attachment, the style or type of attachment that babies would have.
And it was a task that consisted of a series of events for the infant and the parent, usually
the mother.
I can't remember.
I can't keep track of the exact order, but essentially what it is is the infant is first
placed in a room with the mother, and the two of them are there alone.
They sort of get used to the room, a few toys, things to do in there.
Then at one phase, the mother gets up and leaves the room, and the mother's directed
on what to do.
And all this time, they're either videotaping or observing what the infant does.
In another phase, the mom returns.
In another phase, the stranger enters.
In another phase, the mother and the stranger are both present.
In another phase, the mother leaves, then the stranger leaves.
In effect, it's a series of events that they then observe the baby's reactions to separation
from the mother, reactions to a stranger, and reactions to reunion to the mother.
They looked at certain patterns of distress that the infants would show upon separation
from the mother and encountering a stranger.
But most importantly, they also looked for the patterns or the reactions of the infant
upon reunion to the mother.
The reunions were as important, if not more so, than what the babies did when moms left
or when a stranger entered.
They did extensive research with many, many families.
And from this, Ainsworth classified the various patterns that she found in the strange situation
task, and she came up with three main types of infant attachment.
Now, as a caveat, it isn't the case that kids fall in only one type, or lockstep in that
type forever and ever, and they're not so separate.
It's a gradual blending, if you will.
Sometimes they might do a little this type, sometimes a little bit of that type.
But they were able to classify kids as to their predominant pattern or type of attachment.
She had type A, type B, and type C. Type A, she called avoidant attachment.
And by the way, these same labels are used today, and in hundreds of studies using this
kind of task, these labels and this kind of task has been used.
The type A, or avoidant attachment, is in effect a case when the baby seems to ignore
the mother, pretty much so, shows minimal distress when she leaves.
And upon reunion, when she returns, avoids her, does not seem to be too emotional, does
not seem to care whether she leaves when she comes back, there isn't too much response.
In fact, almost stays away, sometimes won't make eye contact.
This is an insecure attachment type, according to Ainsworth.
The type B attachment, she called secure attachment.
And babies in this case, showed a lot of distress when the mom left.
They tried to seek her proximity and affection and her contact when she returned.
They would rush to her.
They shared their feelings easily, whether they were negative and they were upset or
whether they were positive and they were happy.
And they were easily comforted by the mother upon her return.
So even though they were distressed, when mom returned, all was right with the world,
the mother's comforted them and now they were fine.
And most children show this type.
So if you look at any thousands of families, most kids are going to fall into this middle
range.
Type C you could argue is maybe at the other end.
In type C, she called anxious ambivalent attachment or resistant attachment.
It goes by two names, anxious ambivalent, my favorite name, or resistant attachment.
And babies in this case, in the ambivalent case, seem to be ambivalent, seem to be inconsistent
in the distress they show when they're separated and in the reunion responses.
So upon reunion with the mother, they often move toward the mother rush and then back
away and they sometimes act like they're trying to punish the mother.
They make approaches, they'll touch her, they'll get a hug and then maybe they'll even hit
her or look away or push off and try to get away.
And some people have even pointed out, some people will recognize that times when they've
left a baby, the baby's upset and they come in, they think, oh, my baby's trying to punish
me.
It's so upset that I left.
If this is the predominant form, if this is what happens most of the time, they call
this ambivalent, anxious ambivalent, and it was also an insecure attachment type.
You see, for Ainsworth, except in rare cases, she didn't believe there were cases where
a kid was not attached.
Of course, there are.
Child is left alone to fend for herself without any adults.
But in most cases, she said, we're all attached.
We can't help ourselves.
It's the way we are as a species.
We become attached.
But some attachments are secure and strong and some attachments are insecure.
It's just different kinds of attachments.
So Ainsworth was followed by many other researchers, some of them her students, who used this classification
system in the strange situation task to indeed show that they exist, not just in her studies
but time and time again.
And that they actually, that these types of attachments will predict different aspects
of how the child develops subsequent outcomes that occur because of these attachments.
Mary Main, Deborah Vandell, and Easterbrooks are three researchers who come to mind who
have done a lot of work on the effects of insecure and secure attachments.
Children here is just a sampling of the findings.
Children who show very secure attachments to their parents, to their mother, their parents
as babies, are much more likely to show secure attachments to friends during the preschool
years and to have normal peer relationships or peer friendships.
So kids that have early attachments that are in the secure pattern now form friendships
pretty easily.
Those that are in one of the two insecure patterns are more likely to have problems with peer
relationships and forming friendships.
So already we see a strong and important result of these kinds of attachment patterns.
Children who show the insecure types of attachments also have more behavior problems when they
enter school.
They have more problems with teachers and getting along and following the rules.
And this is especially true of the resistant or the ambivalent, anxious ambivalent attachment
type.
Children and kids seem to be having problems, and they argued it's at least predicted by
attachment type, whether this is the full cause, at least it's predicted.
Children in the avoidant attachment type are more likely to show problems with depression
and mood disorders.
And so if you're in the avoidant attachment type as a baby, you're more likely to have
mood disorders later on as you go through school and become an adolescent.
Ainsworth, you could say, what are the reasons, causes of forming secure or insecure attachments?
And Ainsworth again argued that the main reason is insecure parent-child interactions.
In fact, this puts the blame mainly on parents or on mothers.
So this is a controversial point.
But in her research and experience, this is what she argued happened.
Let me now give you some research that was done to show how this inconsistent pattern,
the processes that may occur, how this might lead to insecure attachments.
And then we'll talk about the idea of whether this is really the cause or not.
I'm going to talk about some research that was done by T. Barry Brazelton, a pediatrician
and edtronic developmental psychology researcher who both did studies related to what I'll
call the stone-faced mothers, or lack of a better title for these kinds of studies.
The argument here was that if mothers didn't respond to their babies, we talked about how
they have to because of these build-in releasing mechanisms.
But not all people have the same level of these releasing mechanisms.
What if a mother or a father doesn't respond?
The babies make the responses, but all the time they don't.
Or they're really inconsistent in showing this response to babies.
What would happen?
Well, first, edtronic set up a study to try to demonstrate this.
Again, I've seen the videotapes of this, and it's quite compelling when you see it actually
demonstrate it.
What he did is he had some mothers come in with their babies, with their little infant
babies a few months old, maybe six, seven months old.
And he sat the infant in an infant seat in a situation to look at the mom.
The mom would stand in front of the baby, and he would instruct the mother, he'd say,
now what I want you to do is not act in your normal way.
I want you to show no emotions or no response to this baby.
In other words, I want you to have a stone face.
Whatever that baby does of yours, you stand there.
Don't smile, don't laugh, don't frown, no expression.
Stone face.
And then he videotaped the baby to see what the baby's response would be at the same time
that he videotaped the moms to see what they were doing at this time.
And what he found was this sequence of events for the babies.
The babies would first look at the mother who now came into view and stood there and
get really excited.
These were babies who were attached to their mothers.
These were normal babies, by the way, who were securely attached.
And they would flail about and smile and go, they're happy to see their moms.
And mom would do nothing, stone face, and the babies would pause.
And the turn taking I told you about was sort of a turn taking, but mother doesn't
respond.
It's her turn and she does nothing.
Babies would look at her.
So they'd try harder.
They'd do more exaggerated motions.
They'd smile, they'd do everything, and they'd pause and wait, mom's turn, and she does nothing.
And they would try harder again to get her to respond.
And then after a while they would try tricks that we'll call flirting, that I have a tendency
to think that babies even have and maybe we don't have to learn them, they're just part
of our nature.
They would turn away and look back sort of coyly and smile at the mother.
And mothers wouldn't respond.
It always worked in the past and now it wasn't working.
They would try everything.
And after a while, when they left me there, when I say after a while, after a few minutes
of this, the babies would turn away and would not make eye contact with the mother.
They wouldn't look at her.
And once in a while they might look back and even smile.
And if she hadn't changed, they'd look away.
And by the end of this study, they were looking away and they were slumped down in their seats.
They would just sort of melt, slump into this infancy.
It got so bad they had to stop the study at this point because the mothers couldn't take
it anymore.
And at this point of being abusive and their view to their children, it made them so sad.
It looked like those babies were depressed, that something was wrong with them and happened
within a matter of minutes.
And so his argument was, what if this happens over and over again?
If this is the way that parents respond or very often respond, let's say the mother's
depressed or the mother has some kind of disorder.
Something's happening and this is happening.
By the way, remember how it's reciprocal?
Moms had a hard time doing this study.
Not only would they get upset at their babies looking like this, but when the babies would
coily look at them and try to get them to smile, you'd see mothers who could hardly
stand to keep the stone face.
They'd be like this.
They started to grin, they had a hard time following the directions.
Barry Brazelton did a similar study, but this time in nature.
He did a case study, in effect, of a mother who was blind, had a sighted child, a baby,
and seemed to be pretty well attached.
And the father could see, and the baby seemed to be pretty well attached, but he filmed
in detail the sequences that they would go through.
And what he found in this filming was that the baby had learned to not make eye contact
or facial contact with the mother.
So the baby would not look at the mother's face and would look away.
And yet they had a strong attachment because the mother compensated.
She did a lot of rubbing and hugging and talking, and the baby was attached to her.
And the baby would make normal eye contact with the father, but not with the mother.
In this case it was a normal attachment, but it was compensated by some of the other things.
Okay, this is a case then to show maybe the processes that one might go through in developing
insecure attachments.
There's another case where you could talk about a natural example for insecure attachments.
In preterm infants, babies are often born and without some of the releasing mechanisms
we talked about, the full baby's features.
They might be a little more skinny or shriveled up.
They don't have quite the baby's features.
They don't respond because they're delayed in development.
They often don't show the eye contact, the smiling we talked about until a later age.
And they're also less predictable.
They're less stable as preterm infants.
Their routines don't get stabilized as soon.
And in fact, there is more of a problem of attachments for me to preterm infants of stable
secure attachments.
There's more likely to be insecure attachments.
This is particularly true if you have an infant that had a lot of health problems that had
to be hospitalized for some time after birth.
And in fact, they found that the visiting patterns of the parents predicted whether secure attachments
would form or problems would form.
Parents who visited daily and spent a lot of time with their infants in the preterm nursery
tended to do better.
And parents that stayed away often because it was so upsetting and because they didn't
know how to respond.
And they cared deeply, but they didn't visit and they didn't make this contact often had
more problems with insecure attachments later on.
So what they found was is that the babies who showed these patterns and the parents then
who understood what was going on with preterm problems and could adjust or compensate or
realize what was happening to them would do OK.
And in fact, now then, when you have preterm infants, hospitals will encourage parents
to take part in the care.
So for example, Tiffany Field has found that if babies who are preterm are rubbed and rolled
around these little fragile looking babies, but if they're rubbed and rolled around, in
fact, they'll increase significantly in body weight and in neurological development at
a faster speed than those babies who don't have this kind of rubbing and treatment.
It's changed in the way we look at our treatment of preterm infants.
There's others of question whether the quality and the consistency of parenting though is
a main cause of insecure attachments.
So even though Ainsworth said it has to do with inconsistent parenting, might there not
be some other reason for this as well?
Do we have to blame the parents entirely?
Well, the main other explanation that's given is an infant's innate temperament.
It may have a lot to do with just an innate style of the infant on whether secure or insecure
attachments form.
Jerome Kagan is one researcher who found that babies are born with different styles
or temperaments even at birth.
And some kids have this extremely inhibited style.
They're extra sensitive to stimulation from outside.
But being extra sensitive, they tend to freeze up and be wary and cautious, especially to
new aspects of their environment.
Something happens.
Something comes into their view.
They freeze.
They look around.
They can't function.
Other infants are born with an extremely uninhibited or outgoing kind of temperament.
Nothing phases them.
They're not as sensitive to change and nothing phases them.
And most people are somewhere in between.
In fact, what Kagan found was this inhibited temperament has a stable lasting influence.
Over time, these inhibited kids are more likely to become shy kids as preschoolers and school
aged children.
They're more likely to be kids who have problems with change and newness, novelty in their
environment.
Hill Goldsmith and others have taken this information and looked at attachment styles.
And they have found that highly inhibited children are more likely to have the Type
C attachment style of being anxious, ambivalent, or resistant.
For example, these children show more separation distress, stronger stranger fears than most
other children.
They have more difficult times with changes in the environment.
Children who are extremely uninhibited at the other extreme are more likely to develop
the Type A attachment style of being avoidant, of not caring.
So temperament from the child may determine the way they develop attachment, not so much
the actual way that the parents treat the child.
Kids are just born this way, and it's the luck of the draw, so to speak.
And surprise, surprise, most kids are in between.
Most researchers would now agree, though, it can't be one or the other.
It's probably a combination of temperament style and also the way they're treated, because
one thing that temperament style does not do, it doesn't predict the kinds of problems
that develop from these insecure attachments that you get just from insecure attachments.
So it's probably some combination, and that's probably the best way that we should look
at it at this time.
Next time, we're going to talk about a further consequence of attachment style, and that is
the relation of attachments to further relationships in adulthood.
Thank you.
