Lecture 15 Early Attachments and Adult Relationships
Hello. In the last lecture, we discussed the influence of secure and insecure attachment
on a child's development. Parent-infant attachments influence subsequent peer relations, but they
also have an influence on relationships in adulthood. You may recall that back a few lectures,
we talked about the various functions of this reciprocal attachment system, and one of the major
functions is thought to be the influence on later relationships, future relationships, of early
relationships. In other words, a healthy parent-infant attachment may make subsequent healthy relationships
possible. So today, we're going to discuss how these relations between early and later attachments come
about and what the nuances of this approach is. And we'll conclude today with an evaluation of attachment
theory. Last time we talked about some work mainly instilled by Ainsworth's theory and her research,
today we're going to switch back more to Bulby's theory and what he gave us. Bulby proposed that during
the first two years of life, children develop an internal working model of each of their primary attachment
relationships, and he called it an internal working model. What does this construct mean? Why would he give
it this title? Let me break this down. It's internal because it's a mental representation. It's a mental
representation that the child makes of the person to whom the child is attached, and also the behaviors
and the actions, the emotions that are involved in this relationship between this person, this attachment
figure, and the child himself. It's a model because it's a prototype or a copy of the person and the
relationship. It's a model or this copy to which the child can refer or think about. And it's considered a
working model, the keyword working here for two reasons. First, it's constantly changing. It's under
revision. Think of it as a work in progress. And second, it's constantly being used. It's constantly
being used by the child who forms this model to refer to and use. So think of it as a person works
with this model. Therefore, internal working models are what children develop and thought to develop when
children are separated from the attached person. If we were never separated from the people we are attached
to, we would probably never have to develop working models. If all of our needs were met
instantaneously, we would never have to worry about. But of course, that's never going to happen. When a child's
secure base, then, is not available, the child's going to feel insecure. And so it helps to have some kind of
reminder of that attached person, that reminder being around to work sort of like a security blanket
works for children. Now, if we think about this on the adult level, it will make sense what children are going
through, too. When we leave somebody that we're very close to, we go away on a trip, for example. We're going
for some period of time. And we're attached to these people. We know we're going to miss them. Very often, we take
something with us to remind us of this person. We carry around a picture of the person. We even take a piece
of the person. I think more in old days, people would take a lock of hair or a piece of clothing, a woman's
handkerchief. We also take things that might be valuable and remind us of this person or that belong to this person.
And these are like our security blankets, but one thing that they do for us is remind us of this person, having
heard there or him there with us. Children are doing the same thing. But children develop the ability to use
symbols and represent absent objects, somewhere generally in the second year of life, they get pretty good at this.
And when they have this ability, they become more adept then at creating some internal security blanket, so to speak,
rather than having to carry around some external piece of the person or have the person there. They can carry around
the person inside. When they develop this model or this representation of the person, they can have the person with them
at all times. They don't need an external object. So the idea of an internal working model, even though it's a fancy
term, is simply that the person has a representation of the attached figure and all that goes with that relationship and can
carry this around with her and therefore always has a secure base. So now when the child is not with the mother,
child's away at daycare, child still has a secure base. And that's the purpose, according to Bolby, of the development of this
internal working model that you think of as just this representation. And that's what we have throughout life. We can
throughout our life carry around representations or models of other people. But there's a very important byproduct of this
development of internal working models. And that is the model is around now to also become a model for subsequent
relationships. So now when a child encounters a new person, child's off at daycare now, and encounters a new peer,
a new person, what does a child do? How does a child know how to behave? If the child likes a person and wants to form a
relationship, what can she do? She needs something to guide her. She needs to know how to respond and react and interact,
I should say, with another person. And by turning to her internal working model, she already has a model of what to do.
This is the idea that Bolby tried to present. This working model is dynamic and changeable. It isn't always static. So it started with
a model from the earliest attachment relationships, but subsequent relationships can modify it. So a representation that you first
had and developed as a baby with your parents, you now can carry around. But as you make new friends, peer relationships, that's
going to modify your model. You've gained more experience. And you'll have other models, maybe several different kind of models, that you
can combine and put together to use to give you information about how to interact with others. Freud, I want to switch now to
another interesting point. Freud proposed a concept called transference. And transference occurs in Freudian terms when a person transfers
representations and emotions related to one person onto a new person. So emotions from a relationship that one had with one's mother or father is now
placed on a new person, such as one's spouse or the therapist. And for Freud, transference was extremely important as part of his therapy
in using this in therapy. But the point of transference that I want to focus on is how this concept may be related to Bolby's internal
working model. Because in a sense, the child transfers in an internal working model the experiences from the original attachment figure to the new
person in simply trying to figure out how to deal with this new relationship. It's not surprising then that experiences that we've had in previous
relationships now guide us in responding in new relationships. When Freud explained transference, it sounded sort of magical. But it's really not much.
There's not much magical about it. It's simply a common occurrence that we use what we've learned before in our experiences in new situations on new
relationships. In Freudian terms, the idea of transference can happen in many situations. It can happen as you form new friendships, as you form new intimate
relationships. It can happen in different kinds of relationships. You can transfer the parent-child relationship to a teacher-student
relationship. You can transfer the parent-child relationship to a therapist client or patient relationship. You can do many things. You can transfer your intimate spousal
relationship to some other kind of relationship. Sometimes it gets you in trouble because they're not the same kinds of relationships. Other times it's a pretty good way to learn how to respond in new
situations. The influence of an internal working model then, just like transference in Freudian terms, extends beyond childhood. You see, adults use these representations of the parent-child
relationship as the model to guide how they react later on with their own children. This was the point of Bowlby's internal working model as well. When you become a parent, it's the first
time. Now, you may have taken a parenting class, but for those of us who have taken a parenting class and then become parents for the first time, we realize it doesn't quite cut it when you get to the real
situation. What do you do? How do you behave? The argument is, you have this internal working model and you start doing things as your parents related to you. And thus, surprise, surprise, you start repeating some of the same
patterns of parenting that you experienced when you were a child. And you can repeat the positive, very effective, good things, and you can also repeat the negative, maladaptive ways of being a parent,
depending on what you experienced. I have a very good friend who's a teacher, a schoolteacher, and he said one day he was on the playground and kids were driving him crazy that day, and he started to yell at
some of them to get him to behave, and he says, as I was yelling at him, I heard my mother calling out to these kids. I looked around to see where she was, and I realized it was coming out of me.
So we do repeat the things that we've learned already. People also use the representations of their parents informing relationships with other people, not just parent to child, but in friendships or intimate
relationships. So now you're in an intimate relationships. How do you behave? What do you do? And the argument goes that you can go back to your parent-child relationship, but now you've incorporated as part of this model the way your
parents responded to each other. You look at how they responded as spouses, mom and dad, and use that from your model to learn or to gain experiences on how you would respond to somebody.
So in this case, a man now might start responding to his wife or his partner the way his dad responded to his mother, and the same thing goes the opposite for a woman.
There's a lot of recent research that provides evidence that there's a relation between the earliest attachments and subsequent attachments. This is the crux of this. If this is a good theory, if this really explains things, then it really should be these
early relationships relating and influencing later relationships. So let me tell you about one set of studies to begin with. This was done by Everett Waters and several other colleagues. Everett Waters was a student of Mary Ainsworth.
He did something that we've been waiting for for some time. This is a fairly recent study. People had not done longitudinal studies. They'd speculated about this, and they could even ask people about how things were when they were children with their own parents.
But think about it. None of us can really remember what it was like when we were babies with our parents. So if you ask somebody to say, what was your relationship like with your parents, most of the time adults are talking about what it was like when they were teenagers, maybe a little earlier, but they don't get the whole picture.
When you do a retrospective study like that, you do have some problems. We needed a longitudinal study. But this is a fairly recent concept, and people hadn't done it. Everett Waters and his colleagues have now done this.
What they did is they went back to the people who, as kids, as babies, were interviewed using Ainsworth's strange situation task, and they looked at these same people who are now in their 20s, in their mid-20s, approximately, and found enough of them, a whole slew of them, that they could actually assess their attachment styles now and what's going on in their life,
and they have all the actual data on the attachment types and patterns that they showed when they were babies. And what they found was, from infancy to young adulthood to people in their 20s, there's a fairly stable style of attachment.
72% of all of these people that they tested and interviewed continued to have the same either secure or insecure attachment styles in general. If you had a secure attachment style when you were a baby, you were more likely to have a secure attachment style now.
And they had this same style with their own children, the way they responded to their own children, and also the way they responded to their spouses.
64% of them stayed in the exact category. If they were anxious and bivalent when they were babies, they had an attachment style with their kids that showed an anxious and bivalent style with their own kids.
If they were avoidant as babies, they had an attachment style that showed that they were avoidant with their own kids. However, 72%, 64% isn't the entire sample. There are a lot of people who did not stay in the same attachment style that switched.
And so they wanted to try to understand which people would switch. And what they found was that the majority of people that switched from one attachment style as a baby to another attachment style as an adult had major stressful life events that would seem to be antisenes of these shifts.
So for these people, there was a death of an attached figure when they were a child. There was a major illness in their life or in the lives of those important to them and their family. There was a divorce of the parents.
There was severe child abuse. Something was going on. It wasn't a routine life, if you will. Some major stressful life events had occurred. And this was the case for most people that switched styles.
So in fact, what they concluded was you stay in the same style unless something comes along in your life that pushes you out of it and you switch. That seems a little general, but in fact, that's the best way of explaining it right now.
Now, if you look at spousal relationships, not just parent relationships, a person who had an insecure attachment style with his own parents was much more likely to show jealousy and controlling behaviors with his or her spouse.
If you were insecure as a baby, you were more likely to show high jealousy and more likely to be a control freak in your spousal relationship now. If as a child you showed a lot of derogation and anger towards your parents, you were more likely to show this same kind of derogation and anger towards your spouse.
If you saw your parents as being very helpful and caregiving and care seeking towards each other saw their relationship of how they were to each other, you were more likely to be loving and show less jealousy and aggression towards your spouse in the current time.
And you can also see some of these same parenting styles with their kids. I've already mentioned this, but if you had an avoidant style with your parents, you were more likely to be avoidant with your kids, or they were more likely to have an avoidant style to you as the parent, and so on.
Now, there's actually several places in the Bible in the Old Testament that give quotes like this. I found this in Exodus chapter 34 verse 7. And the last part of that verse, there's an injunction of the consequences that happen from certain kinds of bad behavior.
And it says, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children and upon the children's children unto the third and to the fourth generation.
Now it occurs to me that this statement may actually be a statement that reflects the natural order of things.
That a natural consequence of whatever happens early on is passed on from generation to generation. It's not automatic, it doesn't mean that we're locked into this forever and ever.
But it means certain problems that you had as a child, you are more likely to pass on. Good things are also passed on, and it may go from generation to generation.
Let me now tell you about some other research that was done on early relationships to later relationships, and this is in the way of influences on romantic relationships.
This research was done and started by Philip Shaver and Cindy Hazan.
Philip Shaver and Cindy Hazan used Ainsworth's three attachment classifications types once again as a model to try to explain interaction styles that we find in romantic relationships in young adults.
Their argument is that it would work for adults of any age.
But remember they went back to all of the literature on attachment to form this basis.
Now the way they assess what your intimate or romantic relationship style is, is now to ask a lot of questions that a person will then fill out.
And these questions deal with different styles, and in the long run what you end up getting from this person is strengths and weaknesses, which questions and you'd agree with, where you fall on these questions.
And what you can do is then give somebody a rating or a score on each different attachment style.
What they're really looking for is not absolutely one kind of style in a person, but the predominant style, even though we vary in relationships, the predominant style that we show.
Let me read you some statements. This comes from Shaver and Hazan.
I'm going to read you this statement. You think to yourself and then answer honestly. Do you agree with this statement? Does it apply to you specifically?
Does this explain the way you are or in fact does it not fit in at all? Here's the first one.
I am somewhat uncomfortable being close to others. I find it difficult to trust them completely, difficult to allow myself to depend on them.
I'm nervous when anyone gets too close and often love partners want me to be more intimate than I feel comfortable being.
Do you really agree with that for you? Does that fit you or not? Here's another one.
I find that others are reluctant to get as close as I would like. I often worry that my partner doesn't really love me or won't want to stay with me.
I want to get very close to my partner and this sometimes scares people away. Is that you? Here's the third one.
I find it relatively easy to get close to others and I'm comfortable depending on them. I don't often worry about being abandoned or about someone getting too close to me.
This is a supply to you. Well, the first case really was based on an avoidant attachment style. The second case was based on an anxious ambivalent attachment style.
The third case was based on a secure attachment style. So the way they translated these attachment types or styles for adult romantic relationships is the secure style shows really a balance
between a need or preference for closeness and a need for autonomy. In some ways, it's reminiscent of Erickson's accomplishment of both a secure identity and a sense of intimacy.
These people share feelings easily. They have little fear of abandonment. They find relationships easy. They tend to prefer, this is what Shaevernizana found in interviewing people,
people who say that they agree with these statements, tend to prefer sexual relations as part of their commitment to another person.
They like sex, but they like it in committed relationships. The anxious ambivalent style involves sort of an inconsistency of feelings towards another person.
These people are often overly invested in the relationship unless they exhibit a lot of jealousy and a striving for control. They often fear autonomy and they're fearful the person will leave.
They tend to have lower self-esteem when it comes to romantic relationships. They like physical contact, they report, but often have problems with actual sexual behavior.
They often drive their partner away by smothering the partner or their inconsistency in behavior.
And the avoidance style involves a focus on autonomy to the exclusion of closeness if we're talking about both the connectedness, the independence that we had discussed earlier.
These people don't share feelings easily. They experience repeated breakups and failed relationships. They experience less grief when they break up, yet they also report being lonelier.
They tend to have more promiscuous sexual relationships. In other words, they have sex without commitment to a relationship.
And in some ways, this style's reminiscent of Erickson's failed intimacy stage in which a person experiences isolation, even though they have social relationships.
Now, I realize this is sort of setting it as absolute. Like I said, people tend to sometimes waver. They tend to be in between, but Shaver and Hassan found that a lot of people have a more predominant style, a more modal style that they go to.
And they found that young adults who rated their style of their current romantic relationships as being predominantly secure also from the assessments they gave reported all evidence that they had secure attachment styles with their own parents.
They remembered their parents as being warm and affectionate, and that their current parenting to their own children if they were married and had children also tended to be sensitive and non-compulsive.
Adults who rated their styles in their current romantic relationships as being predominantly anxious and bivalent reported having anxious and bivalent attachments to their own parents.
And they remembered in particular their fathers as being unfair, and when they had children currently, their parenting style to their own children was somewhat compulsive.
And adults who rated their current styles being predominantly avoidant reported, again, having avoidant attachments to their own parents, and they remembered their mothers as being cold and rejecting quite often.
And when they were parents currently, they tended to be more rejecting in their relationships.
Now, I have one caveat for these studies. It seems from several different pieces of research that this way of classifying romantic styles seems to hold up.
But as of this time, we have not done longitudinal studies where we've really taken people that we know exactly what went on in their childhood and now rated it to their romantic styles in adulthood.
These have only been retrospective studies, so we have to be very cautious about any causal effect of what happened earlier and its influence on later relationships.
Let me now conclude by giving you a short critique of this theory of attachment. What are the good and the bad points as I see them?
Well, most developmentalists today accept the attachment system. How it develops, how it functions, they essentially accept it as it was described by Bolby and Ainsworth.
Currently, there is a lot of research that's based on attachment theory or has been influenced by it, and there's strong empirical evidence for this process occurring in humans as Bolby and Ainsworth theorize.
It seems to be the modal way that we form relationships early on, and it seems to happen fairly automatically.
The mechanisms laid out by this theory are certainly more precise in explaining the development of these relationships than the more general descriptions that Freud and Erickson gave us.
And there seems to be increasing evidence for long-term positive and negative influences from secure and insecure first attachments.
These attachment processes explain a lot of related behaviors like homesickness, like how we stay attached to people even after we split up relationships.
So very often, as Robert Wise pointed out, even if a marriage fails, we still are strongly attached to that person.
We don't think we love the person anymore. We may be angry at the person, but we can still have a strong attachment staying over, and for some time attachments end very slowly when we're strongly attached to a person.
So there's a lot of research and ideas on how these relationships are related to attachment.
Attachment theory has also been highly influential in changing policies. I've mentioned some of this as we go along.
Things aren't the same now. Parents stay with their children in hospitals. In newborn nurseries, mothers stay with them.
In newborn nurseries, mothers get to see their children, have them right after birth. This wasn't the case the way it was years ago.
In pre-term nurseries, and for pre-term infants, we change the way we handle them and the amount of interaction that parents have with their children.
So there are many different parent-child practices that have been influenced by this theory, but there are also some shortcomings to the theory.
One of the main ones is that it's still very much unclear what the causes of insecure attachments are.
If you recall, Ainsworth tended to blame the inconsistency of parenting behaviors, but it's probably some very complex mix of that and the attributes of the child.
Many see the aspect, the construct of an internal working model as a strong control of future relationships as being metaphorical at best and in some ways misleading.
A more parsimonious view that many people would take is it simple? Why bring in an internal working model construct to explain it?
Simply put, we gain experiences in everything we do in life, and when we have experiences or things we've learned in one situation, we apply them to future situations.
So our first relationships were with our parents or our first attachment figures, and of course that gives us experience and representations.
It's true that we then use in subsequent relationships, but think of as a chaining effect.
Our subsequent relationships now are changed and developed, and these, along with the first ones, influence the next set of relationships.
All along the way, any relationship will give you experiences or representations that use in subsequent relationships.
Therefore, the first attachment relationships are important because they started things off, but they don't control everything.
All relationships along the way are important.
I think this is the main way to look at attachment theory and its value today.
It seems to simplify an account of this process.
It seems to help us to look for the mechanisms behind the process, and it seems to help us to predict future relationships.
Though I think that it is far from over if you want to talk about a working model, this is a working theory that probably will be changed by the current research that's being done.
In our next lecture, we're going to shift to our fourth major theory, Bandura's theory of social learning, and we'll start that again next time. Thank you.
