Lecture 16, Bandura's Social Learning Theory.
Hello.
In this lecture and in the next lecture discuss the fourth theory in our sequence of theories
about human development.
This is Albert Bandura's theory of social learning.
But before we talk about his theory, first I believe we need to discuss a bit of traditional
learning theory.
For that I'd like to give you a little bit of a background about history and then we'll
discuss his main theoretical concepts and some of his research.
Albert Bandura's social learning theory was a modifinal learning theory and traditional
learning theory grew out of a behaviorist approach that as you recall was really started
by John Watson and then was passed on to others.
B.F.
Skinner was one of the most important and main people.
Another one was Clark Hull who influenced Bandura.
So I would like to give you some basic premises of this traditional learning because these
are the aspects, the principles that then influenced Bandura.
The basic model of a behaviorist or a learning tradition is what is often called an SR association.
The S refers to stimulus and the R refers to response.
And it's called an SR stimulus response theory because in this theory the stimuli from the
world and the responses or behaviors that emitted are what is important and the internal
ass happens in the brain is really not covered.
The mind is really not looked at.
The basic argument was if A, the things from the world, leads to B, what happens in the
brain and B, the responses, the behaviors, then A leads to C.
And we don't really have to worry exactly about these things.
We can't see them anyway.
We'll get it wrong.
All that an individual can do, all that it learns is dependent on stimulus input in this
model.
The input coming in through the senses to the organism, the S remember, is picked up by
these senses.
For example, we see an object such as a donut in our visual field.
The stimulus then excites afferent neural pathways, that is incoming neural pathways,
that then take this information to the central nervous system in the brain and it causes
associative firing and neural connections in there a signal is sent out on efferent pathways
that are connected to only two types of places in the organism.
First, a connection can be made to a muscle causing the muscle to contract.
Second, a connection can be made to a gland causing the glands.
And so there are the really a combination of muscle contractions and hormone releases.
So for example, we see and now because of hormonal releases, we might get excited.
We also see because of hormonal releases and because of muscle contractions and we eat
it.
Reinforcement, this is a big idea in learning theory, can be defined simply as a positive
or rewarding effect that is caused by the responses that we emit.
And this positive creates the likely respond in the same way the next time that the same
stimulus excites the neural system.
Likewise, punishment just refers to a negative or aversive effect that's caused to certain
responses and follows that same pathway.
So for example, we've eaten our donut and now if we feel full and we've gained a lot
of sensory pleasure, that acts as a reinforcement for the behavioral response we went through
of eating the donut.
We're more likely to eat one than it presents itself.
But if we feel nauseous after eating the donut, it's going to be a punishment and the next
time we see a donut we might be less likely to eat one.
So when the association is made between a stimulus and response, this association then
if it has rewarding results causes the pathway to become stronger and it's more likely that
this response will occur in the future.
And the stimulus response connection will be repeated and will become habitual.
Learning then can be defined as a change in this response.
See in learning theory they were trying to reduce things and try to explain them in some
basic way.
Most of learning theory and the research, the numerous studies that were elicited from
learning theory concern themselves with explaining the conditions and the patterns that would
come with the basic model of S to R and how reinforcers create these learned habits or
these pathways and going into the details of how we are under what conditions.
Now this approach has developed some very highly effective techniques to help change
behaviors in others and also that we can even apply to ourselves that really work.
If one considers this learning approach and also considers the basic mechanistic world
view or approach that we talked about earlier in these lectures, you should be able to see
that learning theory really developed from this mechanistic view of the world.
The organism waits to respond to stimuli from outside.
Learning is explained by basic laws of association but interestingly the workings of the association
areas of the brain or the mind are not considered to any great degree because the approach focuses
on what comes in from outside, outside in, not inside out.
That's a basic mechanistic approach.
Learning theory was also opposed to Freud's psychodynamic theory because in Freud's theory
there was so much putative internal motivation and internal conflicts and mechanisms that
learning theory couldn't get at.
They wanted to stay with them.
Learning theory thus became a theory of behavior, not a theory of cognition or intrinsic motivation.
Also learning theory does not consider the laws of learning to be any different or children
or adults or indeed for other animals.
So the same principles seem to apply to all organisms even across species.
There are no stages of development that are theorized.
This is not a stage theory.
That background I want to mention, Bandura was trained in this learning theory tradition.
This is how he started.
He was born in 19th PhD degree in 1952 from the University of Iowa and at that time the
University of Hotbed of research and theorizing and important work being done in the learning
tradition.
He then became a professor at Stanford University and he's still there today.
Now he expanded on the work of some others, in particular two people named Miller and
Dollard did some work in the early 40s and in 1941 coined the term social learning theory
and Bandura worked with what they had already offered but he added two crucial changes to
this traditional learning theory even to the social aspects of it.
He explained that the mechanism of reinforcement could really be understood in terms of the
expectancies that we process.
At the time I don't know if he would have defined it this way but he really added a
cognitive focus.
He came along was a precursor to what will later be the cognitive revolution, development
and all of psychology.
He described also this primacy in humans as opposed to lower animals of an observational
learning process that we learn through observing others and imitating them and this is different
for humans than for other animals.
He separated this.
So first let's turn to Bandura's view of expectancies, this first part that he added.
He discussed this process that occurred within the brain to change behavior.
The new emphasis for him was on internal processes so again he added this cognitive focus to
behaviorism and in fact at the time that he came up with his for some time afterwards
the extreme behaviorists rejected this theory and did not like it because of where he was
going with it.
He said when it rewards this outcome that will become a reinforcement if you will and
it occurs after we have already, it can't possibly have any effect on the behavior that
was just emitted.
The only possible effect it can have is on the future.
So you can't argue about reinforcements changing past behaviors, expectation of reward in
the future, not past behavior per se that actually changes or reinforces the response
rate of the future.
Reinforcement you've got, if you really want to be technical, it's what you believe, what
you expect.
Effectancy of some outcome, you have to believe in contingency occurs to some particular condition
or stimulus condition.
There's also a particular effect that's going to occur.
You have to see that as causal and related in some way and these expected contingencies
and under what conditions that you expect them, these are the, does that seem different
to you from what was the positive?
Well it's subtle but I think important to really be reinforced, you see.
One has only to believe that there's an expected contingency between a response and a reinforcement
to act.
You can be right or wrong.
You don't really have to have all of this experience as conditioning.
Learning causal also, important cognitive process, it isn't a mindless reflex if you
look at Bandura's approach.
So for example, you may believe from past observations that you've seen that if you
say please while you're asking somebody to give you something, you're more likely to
have the person give you what you want.
You may have never done it before.
In fact, it may not work but you believe it does and so you're more likely to say please
when the situation arises and you want something because you're going to act accordingly.
Now my guess is if you say please you need to get a better up you out but you could believe
something that may actually not be true and it's what you believe that counts.
So the focus is on the contingency, the expectations comes.
And along with this, this belief in expectations and contingencies, Bandura discovered a very
important process he called vicarious reinforcement.
See even if a person were never reinforced ever for emitting a particular response or
performing a particular behavior, that person might increase the rate of responding in a
particular way simply because she's seen others being reinforced for responding in that way.
So have to be reinforced, that's the change that he made.
We might expect a contingency but we don't have to experience it first hand.
This is a learned contingency by observing others therefore it's social, social learning.
It's called vicarious reinforced, it only happens to a person vicariously, not directly,
we're reinforced if you will vicariously but not in real life.
A real life case, this happened just recently on my son's playground.
There were some problems with bullying and some of the older kids were really picking
on some younger kids.
Now they had been taught in this school, contact an adult and adult would take care of things.
They had a quote, a zero tolerance view of aggression but they had some around monitor,
one adult who did not really follow that approach.
She was from an old school and the old school was boys will be boys and you have to learn
to work out your own problems and the other kids were there, the kids that had been picking
on them and a lot of other kids were also hanging out.
The teacher said, come on you kids, you have to work it out for yourself, guess what happened?
Bullying increased significantly, why?
Because the kids observed the adult interacting with these other expected contingencies and
now kids who had not been bullies previously started picking on other kids and the bullies
started doing even more of it, you were alert.
Vicarious reinforcement explains in which humans learn new behaviors or change the response
rates for old behaviors even though they're never directly rewarded or punished for these
behaviors and vicarious reinforcement also assumes some complex cognitive processing.
For example, you have self to the other person you're observing to believe that the contingency
occurs not only for that person but it's also valid for yourself.
That this is a precursor to seeing that children need to develop some love of taking of being
to see the connection, the cognitive connections, if you will, and the viewpoint of how others
do things.
This came along before Piaget's theory influenced others in this country but perspective taking
would be arguably to be able to see these kinds of contingencies to use them effectively.
Abandore's other major contribution besides this idea of expectancy which led to vicarious
reinforcement was the observation that much of what we learn even as young children comes
not in situations in which we are rewarded or reinforced or responding in a particular
way but under conditions that we observe others, it's certainly related, just from repeated
trial and error, cases where we simply observe others behaving and then we imitate or copy
the behaviors that we've seen modeled or performed by another person.
So in this case the child is the imitator and the person that she observes is the more strength
of observational learning for humans which you don't see in lower animals that a person
can learn a new behavior with no previous trials.
Learning theory focused on conditioning, how over a period of time reinforcements and
over a period of time you can set up these conditions, change their behavior.
Abandore came around seeing all kinds of things, they learned just like that.
Never have to try it, you learn all kinds of things that you've never even done just
by observing them.
So observational learning is efficient, it's powerful, it increases the rate and complexity
of learning in humans, far beyond levels of lower animals.
For example, if you've ever tried to teach a kid to tie his shoe, it's very difficult
to teach a kid to tie his shoe with giving him rewards, do just the right moves.
It's very difficult to teach a kid to tie his shoe, first you take this side, loop it
over here, put it around here, slip it around here, try to explain yourself behind your
shoe.
But all you have to do is show him fairly slowly a few times and kids will get it, relatively
few times they'll get it.
You don't even have to reinforce them so long as they have some kind of motivation, intrinsic
motivation to learn it.
All they have to do is observe it.
Complex behaviors can be learned through observation and imitation because it's a heck
of a long time to condition through just using reinforcement.
This depends on cognitive process.
Now in cognitive processing and learning, Bandora described a two-phase such learning
and the two phases he called in performance.
Acquisition was really the learning phase and he separated it from performance learning
theorists had always talked about.
So let me go back through these two processes.
Even in the acquisition phase, the child not only needs to attend to the model to watch
what's happening, the child needs some mechanism to encode these actions in his memory storage.
You see Bandora talking about the internal processes.
Bandora believed there are two main symbols of the observed information.
This is imaging, we'll call it imaging.
It's creating mental pictures and the second is verbal encoding and observed action into
some kind of linguistic narrative.
Now in today's work and research on cognitive processing, I think people would think this
was very simplistic to just talk about verbal imaging and, excuse me, verbal encoding or
imaging, pictorial imaging.
Cognition and the way we encode things is probably very complicated mixture.
It involves other kinds of symbols systems.
But let's time and before I go with it, let's be clear.
When we have imaging, we do in fact use that from time to time.
It may not be the only form we use, but we do it.
If I said to you right now, picture the door to your house or your apartment.
Now go to the doorknob.
Can you see the doorknob?
Go just to the right of the doorknob.
Can you see what?
You can do it, probably.
Most of you can.
Sure, a dog.
Now picture that dog being a German shepherd.
What do the ears look like on that dog?
Can you do it?
And this is imaging and we encode a lot of stuff this way.
But we also use this linguistic or verbal encoding to a large extent.
So as I'm driving someplace, very often I'm giving myself directions.
I'm saying, see, go four lights, it is the first, it is the second.
Okay, here we are.
Now turn left, stay in the left hand lane.
Have you ever given yourself directions like that?
All kinds of things.
Give yourself directions.
And very often you can encode what the process is or even think what you're doing by verbal
encoding.
So we do use both those forms.
Let me tell you about an experiment, a very simple experiment that Bandura did to build
acquisition and encoding phase of learning in the sense of imitating or observing others.
He randomly assigned a bunch of kids by random assignment in an experiment.
It means that there is no systematic bias for all intents in each group or equally smart
and equally motivated and equally functional.
We have a big group of kids, they basically get the same mixture in these groups.
In this random assignment to these three groups, had one group observe a model, do something.
And while they observed, he asked them to verbally narrate what was happening.
So they might say, now the model takes the block and sets it over here.
And they were supposed to talk out loud about what was happening and narrate it.
He had the model by twos or some kind of counting that he wanted to be.
So part of their brain, if you will, has to focus on the task of counting.
And part of it was observe the model, see what the model is doing.
The first task, task he wanted a facilitation.
He wanted to increase, if you will, and the second task he wanted to interfere with it.
And in the third task, he had a control condition.
They just observed and did nothing.
Then later on, he told all of these kids, very simply, do everything that the model
did and I'll give you a reward.
You get these toys over here, you get these candies for how well you do.
Some way you motivate kids.
That's not, that's a no brainer.
A few kids are going to do some simple, some kind of task that they found the model doing.
It was a sequence of things.
And guess what he found, think about it, easy.
In the group that had been facilitated, that verbally narrated what had happened.
In that group, they showed the most imitation, in fact, maximum imitation.
They did everything that they observed the model do for all intents and purposes.
In the group that was the control observed that had done nothing, they showed the next
most imitation of the model.
And in the group that had counted and had an interference, the least amount of imitation.
That's a pretty simple experiment.
But the argument he made was position phase, the ability to information and learn it, processing.
And you can either interfere, but this makes a difference.
Now, according to Bandura, after you have an acquisition phase, then you have a performance
phase.
This is what all the behaviorists had been talking about.
So you have encoded something, but you only will perform it if you've also encoded the
expectation of contingencies for what you'll get for doing it.
If you see a situation as being appropriate that these contingencies are in effect, that
now's a good time to do it.
So he argued that a person may, inside one's mind, having encoded it and carried it around
for a very long time.
We have a lot of deferred imitation.
We could carry it around for hours or days or years, and we'll never actually act on
it.
We'll never actually perform it, yet it's available if we need it.
So you may observe, a child may observe, his mom and dad yelling and swearing each other
in a fight, and encode those behaviors, pay attention, and develop some belief about what
will happen if he does those, and the dad solved their problems.
And several days later, he's in an argument with his brother, and he starts yelling at
him and swearing at him the same way he saw his parents do, and he does this much later.
Let me tell you about another experiment that Bandura'd pair the acquisition phase.
I think this is a very simple and elegant experiment.
Bandura again randomly assigned child subjects to one of these three conditions.
First condition, the child saw a model being rewarded, being given something, and preyed
for acting very aggressively.
It's a guess reinforcement, if you will.
In the second condition, the child saw the model being punished for acting very aggressively.
So the person took something away.
In the third condition, there was a control condition.
The person acted really aggressively, but there was no reward, no punishment.
And then afterward, the child was put in with the same materials, a bobble, doll, some stuff
to be aggressive with, and just left there, said, do it your way.
And surprise, surprise, in the condition in which the kids had seen the model being rewarded,
they showed a high level of aggression, in fact, maximum of the aggression of the model.
In the control condition, they showed a moderate level of, and should this surprise you, in
the punishment condition, very little aggression, almost none.
So in fact, there was vicarious reinforcement.
They had learned the contingencies and were following these, and what was now the next
part of the experiment is the most interesting and most important.
After all this was these levels, depending on the vicarious reinforcement, then Vandora
went back, asked all the children, he didn't reward them, he just said, we're trying to
see if you really knew what we did.
Can you show me, and he said this to all of the kids, and guess what, Princess, all of
the kids now imitated everything the model did, regardless of the reinforcement condition
they had seen it.
So the reinforcement was a contingency about what would happen to them if they did it,
but they had acquired the behavior in all conditions.
They had encoded the behavior along with the reinforcement condition there, and they could
do it.
Do you see that difference?
Now, why is that important?
Because these principles of learning, then, are profoundly important when we look at certain
behaviors that kids may pick up.
And one of the main areas that Vandora looked at was aggression and how kids.
He was one of the first people to really do a lot of strong studies on aggression.
He was one of the first to do work on the effects of the media on violence on children,
on the effects of TV on children.
In the early 60s, he started doing some of this work.
And this has been subsequently followed with work on both the positive aspects that children
can gain and learn from observing TV and models on TV, as well as the negative aspects.
But he found early on, through this approach that we talk about, that children, when they
observe aggression in others, can sometimes simply learn new behaviors that they never
had before.
They get new ideas.
And we see this sometimes with school shooters.
Some can learn or have a facilitation of behaviors they already know, as they see the contingencies
on maybe when they get reinforced.
Sometimes it will disinhibit them for performing something.
And sometimes they simply become desensitized, think enough times that they know a little
reaction to it, like seeing violence and goriness, and that no longer are inhibited from doing
it because it doesn't bother them the same way.
Observing then media violence has all of these research has shown them.
Well, in our next lecture, we're going to continue with Vandora's theory.
We're going to add that Vandora talked about a twist to understanding intrinsic motivation,
and that is the importance of this sense of self.
Thank you.
