Let's talk about Thomas' view of the universe, the creation, as he would have called it,
and how it proceeded and continues to proceed from the infinite God, who alone is self-sufficient,
the sole necessary being, the only being whose very essence is to exist.
All notions we've encountered already in this series.
Consequently, because of those notions, all creation proceeds from God and continues to
be sustained by Him.
God's creation is not simply a matter of originating, but also of maintaining in existence this creation
He has made.
Therefore, evil does not really exist as a distinct being, it's only a measure of imperfection
in real beings and in their interaction.
Thomas argues also, interestingly enough, that the created universe exists in and began
in time, although this article of the Christian faith, important as it is, cannot be proven
by reason alone.
To God, first of all, who is, of course, the creator of the source of the creation, and
who gives to the creation a certain essential character which derives in an infinitely inferior
way from Himself.
Thomas, as we've seen, conceives of God as the only self-sufficient being, as indeed
ends, I say, as he puts it, being in itself, and hence as the center and cause of the universe
and as its sustainer as well.
Thomas, in doing so, reveals a radiating center, as David Knowles put it, a living principle
and a final goal, where Aristotle points familiar to an abstract postulate.
The God of Aristotle was an extremely distant God, the unmoved first mover far beyond the
spheres of the noble universe up there in the Imperium, not pointless to try to pray
to or try to ask for help from.
Thomas' God is very, very different, a living principle, not simply a principle, not simply
a being principle, and a center which radiates out to the limits of what he has brought into
existence with a kind of curving light to take a metaphor of his which can always be
refracted by our misfortune or our fortune.
By going so far beyond Aristotle, Thomas strongly affirmed long-standing Christian
doctrines that the universe had been created from nothing at a timeless moment which began
time and that everything which exists has been created either directly or indirectly
by God, who is the final end of all beings as well as their first cause.
This is a huge topic.
In this short lecture, I want to touch simply on four points and briefly in them to be sure.
First of all, Thomas was concerned to assert that the universe is not eternal.
This was important in discourse with other Christian thinkers as well as in separating
Christianity off from Aristotle's pagan beliefs.
Secondly, God is the sole creator, the unique creator.
Thirdly, God is the final end of the creation.
He is the teleology of the universe.
And fourthly, evil has no essence.
It exists insofar as it can be said to do so, only as a privation.
Let's do the first one.
The universe is not eternal.
The Greeks, including Aristotle, thought and taught that the universe was eternal.
Instead, Thomas affirms the universe was created by God at the first moment in time.
Question 46 of the first part of the Summa Theologiae is dedicated to this doctrine,
which Thomas affirms is an article of faith, that is, something all Orthodox Christians
must believe.
Number one asks whether the universe or creatures always existed, to which Thomas's answer
is not surprisingly no.
But what is a bit surprising is that in that particular article, Thomas enumerates ten
objections, larger number than usual.
And when we look through these objections, I won't go through them all.
What we do notice is that most of them rely on authority of a pretty solemn kind.
Avesena, who is very often a positive authority for Aquinas, Averoes, as we know surprisingly
often, a positive authority, and of course, Aristotle.
But Thomas rejects the arguments of all these authorities in this case, in order to posit
the notion that neither the universe nor any of its creatures is timeless.
They all are created in time at some point.
It's an interesting statement, Thomas says in his reply to one of the objections, that
Aristotle's arguments here are only relatively demonstrative, not absolutely demonstrative.
This is the sign of the kind of critique of Aristotle's logic, according to the rules
of Aristotle's logic, which Thomas very frequently applies to the philosopher himself.
Article two of question 46 then goes on to ask whether this conclusion must be believed
by all Christians, to which the answer is yes.
But the reason why that is so is perhaps a bit surprising.
It has to be believed there's an article of faith because it isn't demonstrable.
And of course, it could be demonstrable, that would be better.
And it wouldn't have to be an article of faith.
But since we can't prove it, then we have to believe it.
The third article discusses in interesting ways the nature of God's creation of heaven
and earth in the beginning.
And this article touches on Thomas's rejection of Manicheism, of the dualistic Manichean doctrine
of the universe, and of the notion of angelic beings as intermediate creators, or of the
pre-existence of some kind of timeless matter.
It's important to recognize in all of this, though, that Thomas thought it was impossible
to demonstrate from rational proofs alone whether the universe was eternal or not, and
whether God created it in the beginning of time or from eternity.
This may be something of a surprise.
It's important to recognize that for Thomas, the statement of faith that the universe began
in time in the beginning, God created heaven and earth, the very first utterance of the
Holy Scripture.
This was for Thomas a mystery comparable to the mystery of the Trinity.
It was equally incomprehensible.
Thomas in this regard reveals very much the fact of the greatness of his mind.
I think we could say, trying to reduce this enormously complicated question to just a
few general truisms, that there had been two basic models about the universe.
One model, or the Hebrew model, is that it began in time, will end in time.
Often it began in a catastrophic fashion, will end in a catastrophic fashion.
For believing Jews, Christians and Muslims, this has to do, of course, with God's beginning
and God's ending it, for others that a God may not be present.
Interesting enough that the most modern scientific quasi-arthodoxy relies on the big bang, which
does not, in most scientists' explanation, involve a God, and presumably it will end
in another bang, after which there may be others or not, depending on which physicists
you're talking to.
But here we have fundamentally a Hebrew model of the universe.
The Greek model of the universe, by contrast, just assumed that the universe as we know
it, and of course you have a very small universe, a geocentric universe with the planets and
the stars circling around it, has always been here and will always be.
It's interesting that Thomas raised in a deeply Christian society, whose only major
real alternatives were Judaism or Islam, a deeply monotheistic, Abrahamite universe
of thought, somehow so thoroughly imbibed Aristotle that, to him, the eternity of the
universe seemed so plausible, so likely, that the Christian doctrine that it wasn't so was
a doctrine as hard to comprehend as the mystery of the Trinity.
And this sets Thomas apart, I think, not only for many other Christian interpreters, both
before him and during his time and afterwards, but sets him apart from most thinkers of our
time as well.
Now this issue of whether the eternity of the world could be disproven or not, whether
it was a necessary consequence of logic, which you had to believe the reverse of just because
you were a faithful Christian or Jew or Muslim, or whether it could, in fact, be proven false
simply by logic without the assistance of faith, was a major topic in the 13th century university
world of Paris, a major topic in other university centers too, but particularly so at Paris.
What Thomas is doing in arguing that the world might logically, scientifically, perfectly
well be eternal, but that you couldn't prove either that it was or that it wasn't simply
by logic, he's following here two very interesting sources, both of them perhaps somewhat surprising.
Albert the Great, that great leader of Dominican thought in its first serious university generation,
believed that, and he followed Rabbi Moses, Maimonides of Cordoba, that great Aristotelian
of the Jewish faith, himself a major Rabbi, born in 1135, dying in 1204, born in Cordoba,
dying in Cairo, where he and his family had to flee because of mounting persecution by
Muslims in the south of Spain and in Morocco.
Maimonides, the author of that remarkably important book, not simply to intellectual Jews, but
also to intellectual Christians, I don't know whether it had much impact on his law
or not, the book known as The Guide to the Perplexed, in The Guide to the Perplexed, actually
in chapter 2 and section 16 and 23, if you want to run it down, Maimonides argued this
question and came up with, of course, the right kind of religious conclusion based on
Genesis, but he also acknowledged that it seemed very hard to prove that the universe
was not eternal, fortunately, he was able to argue the attorney could not be proved
either.
Maimonides is a very interesting source for Thomas, I've mentioned already that Aristotle
was the philosopher, Averroes is the commentator, Maimonides is Rabbi Moses, these are his
three most commonly cited sources in this kind of familiar, this kind of friendly shorthand.
Maimonides is probably his major source for the third proof of the existence of God, which
most modern Tomas or Thomas sympathizers see as the best of his five proofs, his five efforts
to prove the existence of God.
Thomas probably preferred proof number one, but proof number three was certainly a very
close second as far as he was concerned.
Now this set of issues divided Thomas and behind him, Albert and Rabbi Moses very quite
sharply from Thomas' fellow Italian and fellow Paris-trained Bonaventura, the greatest contemporary
mind among the Franciscans, whom along with Thomas, Pope Alexander IV, had dispensed from
the requirement of further study towards the STM in the year 1257.
This area of disagreement was one of the chief factors in the condemnation of so much of
Thomas' teachings in the 1270s and 1280s.
There was a long legacy of Christian philosophy opposed to the notion of the eternity of the
world, not simply on the basis of Scripture, but on the basis of what these teachers thought
to be scientific.
One of the clearest instances of this is the work by John Philoponus, the great Byzantine
philosopher of the 6th century A.D., work entitled On the Eternity of the World Against
Proclas.
We'll remember how important Proclas' circle of thinkers was to Aquinas as a source of
Neoplatonism, but also as a source of trouble.
Proclas had argued that the world was eternal.
John Philoponus argued that it was not, and he argued that this was clear, not simply
on the basis of Scripture, but also on the basis of logic.
John Philoponus is cited with great pleasure by Bonaventura and others who rally all of
their logical powers against the claim that the world is eternal.
Closer to Thomas' own time, Alexander of Hales, a very important Franciscan, a Franciscan
who became professor of theology at Paris before Bonaventura and before Thomas, a theology
professor who was deeply interested in philosophical theology, not simply in the kind of biblical
and moral theology that was typical of Christian thought up to that time.
Alexander of Hales, who was a major model for Bonaventura, Alexander followed up on
the tradition of John Philoponus, and Bonaventure brought all of this into a great peak.
We can see Bonaventure present in Thomas' own Summa Theologiae in this very section.
In question 45, Article 2, Bonaventura is the source of one of the objections with which
Thomas has to deal, and he cited very prominently and very sympathetically with great respect
in that particular location.
Interestingly enough, there's also a very interesting parallel with Islam, interesting
to me at any rate.
One of the great Muslim theologians known to the West as Al-Ghazel, his name is somewhat
more properly pronounced as Al-Ghazali, wrote a remarkable book called The Incoherence of
the Philosophers, and Everewies would respond to it with a book called The Incoherence of
Incoherence in which he attacked Al-Ghazali.
Of course, Al-Ghazel and Everewies were not contemporary, so we don't have a perfect parallel
to the Bonaventura-Thomas conflict about this.
But Al-Ghazali tried to prove, from reason again, that the universe could not be eternal,
the world was not eternal, and he relied on Platonic logic and the kind of Aristotelian
logic that he had come to know from Avicenna.
Everewies will disagree with him very strongly, but the consensus of Islamic orthodoxy already
in the 13th century has chosen Al-Ghazali as the great master of reliable, of non-dangerous
philosophy and relegates Everewies to the exterior darkness of extremely dangerous heresy.
Thomas interestingly enough was not so relegated, although there were many in the intellectual
elite, of course in them at the time, who would have loved to see him expelled in that
direction in that kind of fashion.
Secondly, this creation which is not eternal, although it could have been, just simply God
chose to do it the way he chose to do it, for reasons Thomas could not bring himself
fully to connect with.
He understood them, I think, intellectually, but I don't know that he could really internalize
them.
This is an interesting aspect of Thomas that's been remarked that when Paul preached to the
Athenians and the Areopagus about the new God that the Athenians did not know, the God
who began all things, who began the universe, Paul was presenting to the Greek mind a radically
new and wildly dangerous kind of idea.
The notion that the universe begins in time, the Hebrew model, as I've called it, it was
a notion that was so strange to the world of Greek thought that it seemed absolutely
bizarre.
Now of course Christianity won out and Thomas grows up after a thousand years, a solid millennium
of Christian belief.
There was still a countervailing Greek belief in the early centuries of that millennium,
but that notion was long gone except as a historical curiosity over some 500 years before
Thomas went to school.
What Thomas is doing is reversing the situation.
What he does is present to a Judeo-Christian Muslim world that firmly believes in the
non-eternity of the world, an attitude which was radically opposite.
And some have said that although Thomas is credited by people like David Knowles with
creating a new and wholly original philosophy, it's too bad that it wasn't more original
that it wasn't newer.
Had Thomas not been sort of clipped in, had he lived longer, had his followers, the Thomas
not been so clipped in and controlled by the fierce Augustinian Franciscan reaction, they
might have gone forward with Thomas' profoundly radical recreation of the Greek notion of
the universe, which would have set us all up very much better for the encounter between
religion and science in the 17th century.
Certainly from the structure of the Newtonian universe, it seemed to be more reasonable
to assume that the world was always there than it began at a timeless moment beginning
time, which is the Jewish and Christian and Muslim doctrine.
Now with the Big Bang Theory, things have reversed again, and it's that kind of reversal
that Thomas was involved in.
I go into this at the length that I do because I think it's important to see just how Aristotelian,
and that means how Greek Thomas' thought really is, is Knowles' right about his incorporation
of integral Aristotelianism into the mainstream of Christian thought, or is Jordan right in
saying that his Aristotelianism is more alleged than real.
I think that to me, the historian, it seems that Thomas' Aristotelianism, every time we
follow him around a corner into a really difficult and deep question.
He borrows much else, but when we get down to the nitty-gritty, Aristotle is there telling
his disciple much of what he should think.
The third point.
In question 45, Thomas had already insisted on God's unique role in creation, and of
all creatures' dependence on him for their existence.
Just before that, in Article 1 of Question 44 of the Summa Theologiae, Part 1, Thomas
wrote, I answer that in one of these crucial kind of statements.
He's already made the authority statement in the on-the-contrary phrase.
Now he moves into his own develop reason with I answer that.
Thomas leads off one of those sections saying, I answer that it must be said that whatever
in any way is, is from God.
Now, Thomas here is departing from Avicenna, the Muslim Aristotelico-Neoplatonic thinker.
He's not particularly surprising, but what is surprising is that he is departing from
Peter Lombard as well.
Before we get to that, let me mention an interesting point in the first article of this 45th question.
Thomas gives a very interesting definition of creation, a very distinctive definition,
which is quite different from the definition of St. Augustine, and which goes to a little
bit of pains to correct St. Augustine's language.
Here's another way in which we see the relatively minimal Augustinianism of Thomas' view of
the universe.
His Augustine's usage, interestingly enough, is much closer to the modern notion of creativity,
artistic creativity, than is Thomas'.
I wish there were more time to go into that, but I think more crucial, more pressing issues
await us.
In Articles 5 and 6, Thomas goes into the question of God as the unique creator.
Now the Manichaeans, first of all, and much more within the line of orthodox acceptability,
of Asenna, had supposed that God shared the work of creation with various agents, particularly
angels who were very strong in the Muslim cosmology.
That is not a big surprise.
What is the big surprise is that Peter Lombard also at least entertained the idea and seems
to have entertained it, it seems to me, sympathetically, that God did not work out the creation all
by himself.
While the first efficient cause, the first mover, he then sort of deputed, or he delegated
to some of his superior creatures, the angels, a lot of the work which had to be done.
This is Peter Lombard, who is sometimes called the father of scholasticism, the founder of
scholasticism.
I think that's inaccurate.
Peter Abelard before Peter Lombard is at least as good a claimant to that title.
Peter Lombard and Peter Abelard were contemporaries, though Abelard belonged to an overlapping
generation.
Peter Lombard is, however, certainly the exemplar of scholastic method in the great four books
of sentences, which we hope we will recall, remain an essential item of Catholic and with
some expurgation of Protestant seminaries well into the 18th century.
So here we have continuing this Christian acceptance of the notion of a sort of shared
creative activity.
We're not talking about artistic creativity of human beings, but such things as bringing
planets and solar systems and so on into existence.
They didn't have solar systems, of course, if they had the sun, it was simply a planet.
But cosmic, major cosmic reality or major dimensions of the spiritual life of humans
as well as angels could be attributed by various people in this tradition to others than God.
God is only indirectly the creator of some very important dimensions of creation.
Not for Thomas.
For Thomas, God is the primary cause.
He is the efficient cause who brings into existence.
Perhaps we should remember that Aristotle and Aristotelians like to talk about four kinds
of cause, the formal cause, the final cause, the material cause and the efficient cause.
The common ordinary example is a table.
The table is made of wood, let us say.
The end of the table is to have people eat on it or perhaps sit around it and dispute
or something of that sort.
The table should be designed with that end in mind.
The formal cause is the actual design of the table and the efficient cause is the table
maker, the cabinet maker.
God is the efficient cause.
And he's also in a way that's quite strikingly domestic.
He is the direct efficient cause of all sorts of things.
Human beings are deficiently caused by God rather than by their father and their mother.
And this is certainly not the kind of thinking that would have been Lambert's answer to that
sort of question.
Thomas then moves on from asserting the unicity, the uniqueness of God's creative act to the
interaction of the three persons of the Trinity in the creative process.
The three persons of the Trinity collaborate, but they do not collaborate with angels in
any kind of really major kind of activity.
I think we should note here, Thomas' very Augustinian answer to the question whether
any trace of the Trinity is to be found in creative things.
This comes up in Article 7 of Question 45.
Augustine had said some brilliant things about the striking analogy between the father, the
son, and the Holy Spirit and the memory, the intellect, and the will in the human psyche.
And Thomas, instead of departing from that, picked up that Augustinian theme and developed
in extremely interesting ways.
He's more directly positive to a major original insight of Augustine's here than I think he
is all the time.
This question ends in Article 8 with the issue of the participation of nature or the human
will in the process of creation.
God creates nature.
Does nature then go on creating by itself?
What about human beings?
Do we create by ourselves?
And Thomas tends to say no.
Here he reveals an intelligent interest in the history of philosophical thought from
Plato all the way up to the previous generation of Christian theologians, like Peter Lombard
indeed like Alexander of Hales, coming even closer.
Thomas becomes historian for a while, intellectual historian.
Not something we expect to see from him from time to time, but he also shows elements of
an interest in a more modern kind of discipline or sub-discipline than we would expect in
discussing crucial questions.
I think we should notice this question of whether nature is adequate to explain the
creation, the relationship of this notion to the second objection of Summa Theologiae
1, Question 2, Article 3, the five proofs.
That remembers the first objection to the notion that God exists.
Question 45 owes a good deal to one of Thomas' earliest and most original contributions of
ontology, his opusculum on being in essence.
I think we should note especially the point that God is the only being whose essence is
to exist, unlike all other beings, which depend on him for their existence.
Now God is also the final end, and in Aristotelian terms the final cause, the determiner of the
teleology of all other beings.
This is a doctrine strongly maintained by Thomas throughout the Summa Theologiae and
reasserted in the Summa Contra Gentiles and elsewhere.
Thomas dedicated all of Book 2 of the Summa Contra Gentiles to creation, and in that work
designed for a non-Christian audience, he insisted that the diversity and inequality of individual
creatures as well as of species and genera are due to God's creative intent and depend
upon God's creative intent.
They are not due to accident or intermediate creative agencies.
He was also especially concerned to reassert, yet once again, that evil insofar as it exists
is not God's will or God's work.
Book 3 of the Summa Contra Gentiles is about providence.
In Chapter 7 thereof, Thomas offers no less than 10 arguments against the authentic existence
of evil.
I won't read these, but some of them are quite striking.
What he keeps arguing is that evil is simply a privation of something which a subject is
entitled by its origin to possess and which it ought to have.
Such is the meaning of the word evil among all men.
And Thomas is making another kind of linguistic statement.
And remember that each of the five proofs of the existence of God ends up with a philosophical
notion which all men call God.
What do all men call evil?
Not having what you have a right to possess.
Would we agree with that?
I suspect we might.
Now privation is not an essence, it is rather a negation in a substance, therefore evil
is not an essence in things, that's Thomas' crucial claim, not very original.
What is more striking is the way in which he tries to deny evil existence even.
Thomas goes on to say, each thing has actual being in accord with its essence, its existence
is in line with its essence, of course.
To the extent that it possesses being, it has something good, for if good is that which
all desire, then being itself must be called a good, because all desire to be.
As a consequence then, each thing is good because it possesses actual being.
Now good and evil are contraries.
Though nothing is evil by virtue of the fact that it has essence, therefore no essence
is evil.
A wonderful play of syllogisms, which might or might not convince everybody, but which
has a kind of, it's very difficult to dismantle it in terms of direct attack.
And I think the most wonderful thing about this statement is the wonderful optimism,
that glorious Thomistic optimism that informs his view of life, this person who was so innocent
of what we would call real life I suppose, and a view of real life far rosier than did
for example Augustine, who knew real life all too well.
Thomas then goes on into a classic sort of Aristotelian statement here.
He says, besides being is divided by act and potency.
Now act is such as good, for something is perfect to the extent that it is in act.
Potency too is a good thing, for potency tends toward act as appears in every instance of
change.
Moreover, potency is also proportionate to act and not contrary to it.
It belongs in the same genus with act.
And does not belong to it except as an accident.
So everything that exists, whatever the motive of existence, is a good thing to the extent
that it is a being, therefore evil does not possess any essence, or really I think we
follow this out a little bit any existence either.
This will not be as compelling to the modern man or woman in the street.
It's such an example of specifically Aristotelian action and assumptions, but I think it's
interesting at the end of this great list of reasons why evil doesn't exist, which Thomas
is so concerned to assert.
It's interesting to see what his authorities are.
He says Genesis 1.31, God saw all the things that he had made and they were very good,
which will remember repeats what has been said about every one of the days.
And Ecclesiastes, he hath made all things good in their time.
And also Timothy, every creature of God is good.
And now we move to Christian philosophers and Dionysus in chapter four of On the Divine
Names, the work which is one of the sources of Thomas's negative way of trying to describe
God, says that evil is not an existing thing that is in itself, nor is it something among
things that have existence, but it is sort of an accident, something like whiteness and
blackness.
Through this consideration then, the error of the manatees is refuted for they claimed
that some things are evil in their very natures.
In chapter 16, Thomas goes on to line up four arguments supporting the counter proposition,
one of his most suddenly optimistic doctrines, that the end of everything is a good.
Thomas Aquinas would even have to say, I suppose, that every sin is an effort to achieve
the good.
No one does anything except for the good.
Once again, his wonderful sunny optimism.
And as he argues elsewhere, even the most evil actions seek some deformed image of the
good, indeed some deformed image of God himself, to whom all things are ordered.
There's a wonderful statement right there in which he says, therefore God is obviously
the end of all things.
The next step that nothing can go seeking after something other than God, something
other than what is good, obviously, Thomas says, well, it was obvious to him as he tried
to explain this vision of the universe which he had to accept even though some of his intellectual
reflexes would not have entirely agreed, this universe which is not eternal, of which God
is the sole creator, and the teleology of which is established by God's being the final
cause of it, and thus a good final cause, and by which evil just really doesn't exist.
What a nice idea.
