Let's take a look now at Thomas Aquinas' basic teachings concerning God.
He was convinced that human reason could reach an adequate knowledge, or limited knowledge, of the existence of God without the aid of revelation.
His attitude upset various of his opponents, especially in the Franciscan order, in the Augustinian camp, and even more upset, a sort of generalized, fundamentalist, anti-intellectual sentiment, which was as widespread in the 13th century, probably as it has been at any point in the history of Christian thought.
It is also this notion that the human reason can reach an adequate understanding of God is pretty generally rejected today by the philosophical tradition, except, of course, for Thomas and a few others who feel the reason is able to go that far to an understanding of a God who is the God of the Hebrew and Jewish and Christian and Muslim traditions, the God of Abraham of Isaac and of Jacob, as he is often described, who can be identified with those figures from the Hebrew scripture.
To achieve a fuller understanding of God, however, in the fullness of his being, Thomas entirely agreed that the revelation of scripture was necessary. When Thomas attempts to describe God, he moves into the via negativa, the negative theology.
But at least one could begin to perceive the fact of infinite deity by reasoned argument Thomas thought, a reasoned argument, of course, for him of a highly Aristotelian character.
Now, Thomas discusses God, supposedly his first intellectual question as an infant. Remember that Friar Reginal tells us that the extraordinary precocious age of five, Thomas wanted to know what is God?
Although we think that's the kind of question that a five-year-old in the 13th century would have been asking, should have been asking a great deal earlier than that.
Thomas discusses God, this first concern, throughout his work. I suppose the most famous place to go looking for Thomas' doctrine in God is the Summa Theologiae itself, part one, which is entitled Very Simply God.
And Thomas does something quite similar with the Summa Contra Gentiles, starting out with God, proceeding to creation and proceeding to providence and so on.
The third part of the three-part Summa Contra Gentiles deals with providence under which is treated everything Thomas talks about in terms of the human condition, because of God, because of course for Thomas, everything that happens to the human being happens under God's supervision and direction, if not according to God's will, in many, many cases.
Thomas, as far as the Summa Theologiae is concerned, Thomas addresses that question directly in question two of part one of the Summa Theologiae.
Actually, his proof of God occupies questions two to eleven, and I think it makes good sense after we have taken a look at what we see in this presentation of God to carry on into later sections as well.
I want to call your attention to certain selections of Thomas' work. To tackle any one of the primary works itself is a daunting enterprise, but of course a worthwhile one.
Not really not as bad as climbing Everest or rowing across the Atlantic. However, the standard, current, best translation of the Summa Theologiae runs to sixty-one volumes of facing pages, Latin English, even if you had only the English translation that would be thirty-and-a-half volumes, and it's sizable indeed.
This is a very sensitive modern translation, which I think has some disadvantages, though. It gets rid of the formal structure of the Summa, the three objections, the I answer that, the on-the-contrary I answer that and replies to objections.
It tries to make this flow into a kind of more of a continuous piece of prose, rather like that of the Summa Contra Gentiles.
The best translation from the point of view of traditionalists like myself is the great translation undertaken by the English Dominicans in the first decade of the century and carried on into the early 1920s.
And that is the particular text that is used by what still seems to me the most convenient introduction to major thoughts of Thomas Aquinas, the great old modern library classic, which was published for the first time in 1948 and has been followed up in many other editions since then.
It's very forthright and direct and Anton Pages, a great scholar at the University of Toronto for the culmination of his career, who was particularly good interpreter of Thomas' anthropology.
Thomas' sense of the human being has broken up selections overwhelmingly from the Summa Theologiae into God, creation, man, the end of man, human acts, habits and virtues, law and grace.
So it's a very forthright kind of book.
There are more sort of up-to-date books if you want, some dozen years after Pages, Vernon Bork for a long of the University of St. Louis, St. Louis University, a great Jesuit institution, brought out a very popular pocket Aquinas, which has certain characteristics that Pages' work does not.
He approaches Thomas' thought much more in terms of methodology and topics, topics other than the explicit topics of God, man, grace.
For example, section one is about knowledge and method, then nature and philosophy, man and psychology, reality and first philosophy, moral life and ethics, society and political philosophy, beauty and art, a section which Bork treats more thoroughly than anybody else currently, and finally revelation and theology.
So this may seem to be a less God-centered selection of texts from Aquinas, although as you begin reading them you see that God is everywhere, overwhelmingly everywhere in Thomas' work, even in this selection from Thomas' work, just as Thomas felt God in fact was in the world.
Another nice thing about Bork's pocket Aquinas is that he translates sections from many, many other works than the summa theologiae and the summa contringentiles, lots of those questionis disputate, lots of those opuscula, lots of those other individual items.
There has been more recently published in 93 in a splendid book by Timothy McDermott called Thomas' Selected Philosophical Writings, which attempts to provide what Pages and Bork don't as well as to provide much of what they do.
And this is a book very much inspired by Anthony Kenny, the great English scholar since, that Thomas is a thinker both overvalued and undervalued who ought to be considered though as one of the world's, or at least of the western world's, dozen most important philosophers.
But let's go simply to Pages' selection, sections from the old translation by the English Dominicans, the one from the beginning of the 20th century.
And take a little bit of a look at the way in which question two called the existence of God, question two of part one of the summa theologiae, summa theologica, as Pages calls it, in the sort of older conventional title, is lined out.
We've encountered this before in a previous lecture, lecture number four, but let's return to it partly, once again, now with a somewhat different purpose.
What Thomas does here is explain the plan of the whole summa theologiae. He says that part one is where he will treat of God, part two of the rational creatures movement towards God.
That is the human being, though angels are considered rational creatures as well, and part three of Christ, who as man is our way to God.
And then in treating of God, he is going to be a threefold division, considering first the divine essence, then the distinctions of persons, that is, the whole doctrine of the trinity.
Then one of the most inaccessible and logically incomprehensible of the central mysteries of Christianity.
Thomas carries on the work of St. Augustine and of many of the Greek fathers of the church, whom he had come to understand either through Latin translations or through translations made extemporary to him while he was in the papal university.
He talks about the trinity in ways which are refreshingly fresh, not necessarily new. He combines doctrine here very, very carefully.
When he's dealing with strictly theological propositions, he tends to be much more careful about orthodox authority than when he's dealing with things which could be separated off from theology, philosophical issues involving logic, law, and so on.
And then after discussing the trinity at considerable length, in fact, on something like 17 different questions, he then moves on to the procession of creatures from him, which is, of course, creation.
And creation is a matter of tremendous importance to him, but I don't want to talk about that right now. God's enough, I think, for a half hour session.
When he talks about the divine essence, he asks first of all whether God exists, and then he asks about the manner of his existence, or rather what is not the manner of his existence.
Thomas did think that we could get to an adequate understanding of the existence of God, not an adequate understanding of the nature of God, simply by human reason.
One needed the Bible there, and one needed the, if we were using human reason, you would have to argue from analogy rather than from demonstrating logic, from certain logic, which Thomas thought you could use to get to the existence of God, but just the existence.
And then having dealt with the negative way, which Thomas draws very strongly from that mysterious fifth or sixth century Christian neoplatonist who called himself Dionysus the Areopagit, although he was not Dionysus the Areopagit,
Thomas then moves on to talk about God's operations, namely his knowledge, which he begins discussing in question 14, his will, which he begins discussing in question 19, and his power, question 25 on through 100 and something.
The power of God is a tremendously important topic for Thomas, and one of his most important opuskula is the work called Depotensia dei on the power of God, which means also not simply power, it isn't called Depotestata dei,
Depotensia, the kind of tremendous potentiality for his creation and for his creatures, which is in God himself.
Interesting kind of notion that God's creation is nowhere near complete. This is an open-ended vision of reality, which is particularly startling for the Middle Ages and something that I think is a particular value to remember as we move into and through the 21st century.
After talking about these issues, rather after narrowing down than in going on to the existence of God, Thomas is very moved, what he thinks he's established the existence, to talk about God's attributes, particularly in question 3 on the simplicity of God.
And after discussing the simplicity of God, after discussing how God is not, and how we can know anything about him, and how we name him, he then goes on to talk about God's perfection.
God is, of course, perfect. He's infinity. God is, of course, infinite. A God who is perfect and infinite was posited and almost understood by pagan philosophers who were pretty close to atheism, such as the skeptics and the empiricists of antiquity.
But what is the nature of the perfection of the true God, and what is the nature of his infinity?
Thomas tries to deal with that as well, even though, of course, he's laboring under the problem of the limitation of human knowledge.
He then wants to establish God's immutability and God's unity.
Back to the simplicity, which kicks off this whole chain of concern about perfection, infinity, immutability, and unity, Thomas asks whether God is a body.
The answer, of course, is no. There is God is utterly immaterial. Whether he is composed of matter and form, well, no, not even a spiritual matter.
Whether in him there is a composition of quiddity or essence and subject, a highly technical issue, almost always Thomas's answers to these questions are negative.
Whether he's composed of genus and difference, whether he's composed of subject and accident, whether he is in any way composite or wholly simple.
And, of course, the answer, he is in no way composite, as all of these previous questions have Thomas's assumes established.
And finally, whether he enters into composition with other things in the process of creation there, Thomas's answer is, again, perfectly clear, but rather muted.
Well, I think today, let's take a look at the existence of God. Thomas's claim that God does exist.
As mentioned in an earlier lecture, after presenting this kind of plan, this blueprint for the whole Summa Theologiae,
Thomas goes on to assert that the existence of God is not self-evident. We've talked about that.
And then he goes on, in Article 2 of Question 2, to ask whether it can be demonstrated that God exists, which, of course, Thomas does think.
And he thinks so very, very strongly, though he's aware that such important figures as John of Damascus, John Damascene, did not feel, Aristotelian though he was, did not feel that God's existence could be demonstrated.
And then thirdly, we get down to business, having cleared away the shrubbery. We now get to the big tree, whether God exists.
And Thomas says, we proceed thus to the third article. And he begins, of course, with two very, very powerful objections.
A simple question, which he's led up to logically, has got to be presented with obstacles right away. Nothing moves smoothly.
He does no bulldozing of the forest. We proceed thus to the third article. Objection 1, it seems that God does not exist.
Because if one of two contraries be infinite, the other would be altogether destroyed. But the name God means that he is infinite goodness.
If, therefore, God existed, there would be no evil discoverable, but there is evil in the world, and, therefore, God does not exist.
Now, this is the first great, ancient, fundamental, inevitable objection, not just to Christianity, Judaism, and Islam.
But I think we can say to any religions, any religions which posit goodness in the universe of any kind, and which posit any kind of a God idea.
If the universe is supposedly good, or meant to be good, even though it may be getting worse and worse and worse, as the Hindu Puranas think, with vast stretches of time,
essentially the universe once was very good, and how this evil came to take it over is a huge problem.
This Objection 1, I think, can be presented as the number one problem that any religion has, and Thomas tackles it directly.
There is no sort of skirting of the major enemy. The second objection is one that is particularly compelling to the modern western mind.
Further, it's superfluous to suppose that what can be accounted for by a few principles can be produced by many.
But it seems that everything we see in the world can be accounted for by other principles, supposing God did not exist.
For all natural things can be reduced to one principle which is nature, and all voluntary things can be reduced to one principle which is human reason or will.
Therefore, there is no need to suppose God's existence.
This is the great argument of enlightenment, atheism, or agnosticism, of much of modern scientific and even non-scientific thought.
The universe should be explained by the study of nature, which we call science, by the exploration of the human person, the human person's intellect and will, which we call psychology and other things.
You don't need God.
Thomas answers, on the contrary, it is said in the person of God, I am who am.
And so Thomas goes straight to the book of Exodus, the blood assertion of the direct existence of God, which is central to the Abrahamite religions the Jewish Christian and Muslim face, I am who am, sum qui sum,
as the voice from the burning bush told Moses in Exodus 3-4, at least in the Vulgate Latin version of it, which Thomas had.
Many questioned the validity of that translation from the Hebrew, but Thomas did not know that there was any linguistic problem there.
Then comes Thomas' statement and development of his own position, the I answer that formula.
Let me do some selective reading from this great passage, which I would urge anyone interested in these lectures to read over in full and with careful attention, because I think it poses wonderful material for debate even today.
I answer that the existence of God can be proved in five ways, the famous five ways, which continue to appeal to many thinkers, amateur and professional, and which continue to be rejected by most professional thinkers and by some amateurs as well.
And Thomas proposes, first of all, from motion, secondly from efficient cause, thirdly from possibility and necessity, fourthly from the gradation to be found in things, and fifthly from the governance of the world.
Now, the first three of these five proofs, these five arguments, have had the best time of it in terms of continuing intellectual respectability.
Many have felt that the fourth and the fifth are so culture bound, so tied to medieval reasoning that they're useless in the modern world.
Not sure if that's absolutely the case, and people like the great English commentator Craig and Brian Davies point out that once you understand something about the context of the fourth and fifth proofs, that they are very valuable indeed.
Let's look at the first proof.
The first and more manifest way, this seems to be Thomas' favorite proof, although most Thomas think that really the third proof is the best one, the first and more manifest way is the argument from motion.
We must understand, of course, that by motion, Thomas is referring to Aristotle's notion of motion, which is the reduction from a state of potentiality to a state of actuality, and he'll say that in the course of this proof.
It is certain and evident to our senses, notice to our senses the Aristotelian norms of understanding, that in the world some things are in motion.
Not that everything is in motion, but that some things are in motion.
Now, whatever is moved is moved by another, for nothing can be moved except it is in potentiality to that towards which it is moved.
That's the kind of Latin sentence that is much better in Latin than even in the great old translation by the early 20th century Dominican fathers.
To address a thing moves in as much as it is in act, for motion is nothing else than the reduction of something from potentiality to actuality.
So here we have a definition of what Aristotle means by it.
That might not mean a lot to one, unless one thought about it a bit.
And certainly anyone to whom Thomas was addressing this, although this is meant to be a set of arguments for beginners, would have encountered that element of Aristotelian thought.
But nothing can be reduced from potentiality to actuality except by something already in a state of actuality.
Here he gives an example, which modern admirers of Thomas always usually cringe at a little bit.
It's from medieval physics, a very simple medieval physics.
Thus that which is actually hot, like as fire, makes wood, which is potentially hot, to be actually hot, and thereby moves and changes it.
Now it is not possible that the same thing should be at once in actuality and potentiality in the same respect, but only in different respects.
For what is actually hot cannot simultaneously be potentially hot, but it is simultaneously potentially cold.
It is there, unfortunately, Thomas spends some time really working out this kind of simple-minded example, although the simple-minded example perhaps can be compelling if one is innocent of physics.
And after one has done a great deal of physics, I'm told by highly developed physicists, it's not such a bad statement.
What we call heat today is not fire.
Fire is just the most vivid kind of a case in which we see heat as purely present as they were able to approach it.
We should think, of course, of the burning bush. There's always this sort of biblical background to practically everything that Thomas does.
Therefore whatever is moved must be moved by another. If that by which it is moved be itself moved, then this also needs to be moved by another, and that by another again.
But this cannot go on to infinity because then there would be no first mover, and consequently no other mover, seeing the subsequent movers move only in as much as they are moved by the first mover,
as the staff moves only because it is moved by the hand. Again, another simple-minded piece of ancient kinetics.
Therefore it is necessary to arrive at a first mover, moved by no other, which Aristotle said too, and this everyone understands to be God.
Now there are certain things I think we ought to notice in the way Thomas sets this up.
First of all, it is very simply presented. It talks about such things as hands moving staffs.
It talks about such things as fire burning up wood and changing it in the process of moving the wood from potential heat to actual heat, potential hotness to actual hotness.
It is also very much dependent upon sense experience. It is really designed for pretty much for beginners.
And I remember encountering this material in a religion course in high school as an early teen, and it was, of course, totally compelling to all of us.
It was supposed to be a little bit less compelling later on, and perhaps it is most compelling when it is addressed to beginners,
which is not exactly what you would suspect as you look at the vast bulk of the Summa Theologiae in all of its five volumes of very thin paper.
It depends on sense experience a la Aristotle, and therefore it is to a certain extent empirical.
Now the five proofs are not empirical hypotheses in the sense in which that term is used by modern scientific thought,
but they do depend on our experience of the ordinary world.
Besides that, Thomas is very selective. He doesn't issue a great law about the universe being in motion,
but he perfectly well might have done so. Aristotle certainly thought so.
He just says, we observe that some things are in motion, and he gives very simple instances of that.
The second argument is the argument from the Nature of Efficient Cause, which is much swifter.
In the world of sensible things we find, once again, a selective Aristotelian appeal to experience,
we find there is an order of efficient causes. There is no case known, neither indeed is it possible,
in which a thing is found to be the efficient cause of itself.
Now what we end up with, of course, is if in efficient causes it is possible to go on to infinity,
there will be no first efficient cause, neither will there be an ultimate effect,
nor an intermediate effect of efficient causes, all of which is plainly false.
This is a reduction to the absurd. Here he uses the ancient rhetorical and logical technique
of reduction to the absurd, a way of proving something by proving that it's necessary opposite cannot be.
Nothing very deep, and certainly nothing original about that.
Therefore it is necessary to admit a first efficient cause to which everyone gives the name of God.
Once again, there is something in philosophy, there must be a first mover unmoved,
there must be a first efficient cause, and we call this thing God.
We, who are we, not simply the Christians, also the Jews and the Muslims,
and indeed Thomas knew enough about ancient history to know that even the skeptics,
even the atheists called that conception God, even when they rejected its possibility.
So what he's doing is not introducing anyone to the person flaming in the burning bush,
he's introducing his readers to abstract concepts to which we apply the name of God.
This is not pretending to be a total explanation of what God is.
The third way, most respected by modern Thomas, is taken from possibility and necessity and runs thus.
We find in nature things that are possible to be and not to be, we find in nature once again,
since they are found to be generated and to be corrupted,
and consequently it is possible for them to be and not to be.
But it is impossible for these always to exist, for that which cannot be at some time is not.
Therefore, if everything cannot be, then at one time there was nothing in existence.
Now if this were true, even now there would be nothing in existence,
because that which does not exist begins to exist only through something already existing.
Therefore, if at one time nothing was in existence,
it would have been impossible for anything to have begun to exist,
and thus even now nothing would be in existence which is absurd.
This is a sharper reduxy, a lot of absurdum, a sharper reduction to the absurd,
more likely to compel the general reader.
Therefore, not all beings are merely possible,
but there must exist something the existence of which is necessary.
And Thomas now goes back in thought to that earliest work of his,
the work on being and essence, in which he says that God is the only being whose essence is to exist.
The rest of us might or might not exist.
Therefore, not all beings are merely possible,
but there must exist something the existence of which is necessary.
But every necessary thing either has a necessity caused by another or not.
Now it is impossible to go on to infinity in necessary things,
which have the necessity caused by another,
as has been already proved in regard to efficient causes.
Therefore, we cannot but admit the existence of some being having of itself its own necessity,
and not receiving it from another, but rather causing in others their necessity.
This all men speak of as God,
again an appeal to a kind of universal consensus,
not only among theists, but among atheists as well.
This is the argument which has been considered by modern thought the most compelling,
is continuing to have a kind of validity in modern ontology.
And this comes again, as I've said from Thomas' very first work,
his Opusculum on Being and On Essence.
Once again, as Brian Davis remarked about Thomas' first summa,
his great commentary on the sentences of Peter Lombard,
Thomas would develop his positions, but in a sense he would never change them.
This is a man who had in his 20s a remarkably clear philosophical vision.
You can't talk about an early Aquinas and a later Aquinas,
and expect any major shift of attitude.
You can see shadings and development, but not radical change.
The fourth and the fifth ways, from gradation and from the governance of the world,
are I think much less satisfactory to the modern critic.
But let me read them to you anyway,
and there's been an effort of many Thomists, Brian Davis among them,
to point out the context in which they were stated,
and to try to restate them in modern terms,
which makes them not so silly after all.
The fourth way is taken from the gradation to be found in things.
Among beings there are some more and some less good, true, noble, and the like,
but more and less are predicted of different things
according as they resemble in their different ways,
something which is the maximum.
As a thing is said to be hotter,
according as it more nearly resembles that which is hottest,
so there is something which is truest, something best, something noblest,
and consequently something which is most being,
for those things that are greatest in truth or greatest in being,
as is written in metaphysics too, Aristotle's great work in metaphysics.
Important kind of statement.
Those things that are greatest in truth are greatest in being, as Aristotle said.
Now the maximum in any genus is the cause of all in that genus as fire,
the maximum of heat is the cause of all hot things, as is said in the same book.
This is again Aristotle's physics as well as Aristotle's logic, too bad for modern Thomism.
But no one I think is really set out to try to do a job on what contemporary physics
would do with these kinds of arguments, with these kinds of issues,
and contemporary physics is so rich, of course it changes so very, very quickly,
that this might be a project which a physicist is skilled enough to do the physics of it
and is skilled enough also as a philosopher to handle the philosophy of it,
might find daunting and probably not a very good idea.
Therefore there must also be something which is to all beings the cause of their being,
goodness, and every other perfection, and this we call God.
The fifth way, probably least persuasive today, is taken from the governance of the world.
We see, says Thomas, that things which lack knowledge such as natural bodies act for an end,
and this is evident from their acting always, or nearly always in the same way,
so as to obtain the best result. Hence it is plain that they achieve their end
not fortuitously but by design. Now whatever lacks knowledge cannot move towards an end
unless it be directed by some being endowed with knowledge and intelligence
as the arrow is directed by the archer. Again one of these wonderful Greek examples.
Therefore some intelligent being exists by whom all natural things are directed to their end
and this being we call God.
This is classic Thomism. He will enrich it greatly in the next nine questions
of the first part of the Summa Theologiae.
It's the kind of thing that generated the intense irritation of Bertrand Russell for example.
Bertrand Russell who said that all he's doing is positing the truth of what he's going to argue
and then he ends up restating what he was already positing
and this Bertrand Russell said is not philosophy but special pleading.
Many serious philosophers think Brussels sort of was in a bad humor at that point
there was more to it to be said than that. It is true that these last two arguments depend
on the premises of medieval culture. Jewish is an Islamic as well as Christian
and the first we assume the validity of Aristotle's logic and his epistemology.
So Thomas does not transcend the limits of his time and culture as much as many
Neo-Thomas would like but which philosopher?
