Hi, welcome back to the World of Game Theory, and it's quite a world.
We've visited a few points of interest already.
Key concepts, types of equilibria, atomic games, sequential games, simultaneous games.
We've covered a lot of ground, and it's only been five lectures.
It's been kind of a whirlwind tour.
In fact, I may be guilty of the same kind of fault as the 12 countries in 14 days tour guides.
I've shown you some of the sites, let you snap a few pictures and then pushed you back
onto the bus and onto the next location.
Fortunately, this travel metaphor only goes so far.
I can do what's pretty much impossible for the tour guide.
Revisit each place and let you wander around a little.
You're already oriented in these places, so I'm hoping that you'll enjoy a chance
to amble around a bit and explore some interesting locales.
I've chosen a few examples for today's class that use only the ideas that we've
already developed, but each has a twist, which I'm hoping you'll find interesting.
We're going to see why cigarette companies were happy when they were banned
from the TV airwaves.
We'll look at a situation where it could be in your best interest to let someone blackmail you.
We'll see how a bid of $98 can bid, be it a bid for $102 for a stock.
We'll see how insisting that you lose ties can be the one thing that lets you win.
And we'll begin with a game theoretic analysis of a famous scene from the movie,
A Beautiful Mind.
A Beautiful Mind is a rare kind of movie, one focusing on the life of a mathematician.
We're not often portrayed as being nearly as handsome or dapper as we are in real life,
so I was pleased that Russell Crowe was chosen to play John Nash, one for the good guys.
The movie is a fictionalized account of Nash's life, but its inaccuracies didn't hurt its reception.
It was a financial success, it garnered four Academy Awards and a number of nominations,
along with a lot of other honors too.
Personally, I have no truck with the historical inaccuracies, except one.
One where I have to draw the line.
In one scene, Nash and three of his friends are at a bar, imagining trying to pick up some girls.
The women under consideration are four brunettes and a blonde, and the blonde is viewed as being the most desirable.
In the movie, Nash gains his great insight, which we presume is the idea of the Nash Equilibrium.
Nash, excited, explains the revelation to his friends like this.
If we all go for the blonde, we block each other, and not a single one of us is going to get her.
So then we go for her friends, but they will all give us the cold shoulder, because no one likes being second choice.
But what if no one goes for the blonde?
We don't get in each other's way, and we don't insult the other girls.
That's the only way to win.
Nash is so taken with the idea that he hurries from the bar, offering a quick thank you to an understandably puzzled blonde.
Nice scene, and an excellent performance by Russell Crow.
Unfortunately, it isn't a Nash Equilibrium.
Begin with the solution that all four men go after brunettes.
You know what a Nash Equilibrium is?
The question is, would anyone have a reason to unilaterally change their behavior?
Yes, any player would have every reason to unilaterally change their behavior.
There's a completely ignored blonde over there.
The Nash Equilibrium of this game is actually a multi-player version of chicken.
The Nash Equilibria are one person goes for the blonde and the rest go after the brunettes.
So I'm putting Hollywood on notice.
You can mess with Nash's life, but don't mess with his equilibrium.
Personally, I've comforted myself with the belief that after his friends went after the brunettes, Nash snuck back into the bar and wooed the blonde.
All for the sake of mathematical consistency, of course.
Well, that was a pretty simple simultaneous game, although it's the first that we've seen that has more than two players.
Here's a many player game that's a lot more subtle from the world of corporate raiders, junk bonds and hostile takeovers.
Dixit and Nailbook discuss it and thinking strategically.
It's a slightly simplified version of a real world history.
It deals with a series of takeover bids made for federated stores in 1988.
Federated stores includes the very popular store chain Bloomingdale's along with some other properties.
So let's roll the clock back to 1988 and give you one share in federated stores.
Let's say your share is worth $100.
To get control of the company, their raiders need to get a majority of its stock.
That means buying it from the people who have it.
It probably means offering more to the shareholders than what their stocks currently worth.
If the takeover bid falls through, the stock's still going to be worth $100.
It's also going to be worth $100 after the flurry of a successful takeover bid dies down.
Keeping up with the financial news, you see that Macy's is making the bid on federated stores and is offering $102 per share.
There's a catch.
They have to get a majority of the stock or else they're not going to make the offer.
It's contingent.
Do you offer to sell your stock to Macy's?
Well, as I said, this game is not just a two player game.
It's a game with many, many players, all of the stockholders.
But let's see if you have a dominant strategy.
You'll remember from last time that a dominant strategy is the best one for you to play regardless of what the other players do.
So, suppose that Macy's gets at least 50% of the stock.
Then you sell for 102, which is better than the 100 you'd have if you kept it.
Selling's better.
Suppose that Macy's doesn't get at least 50%.
Then the offer falls through, you keep your $100 and you're no worse off.
So, selling to Macy's weekly dominates not selling.
You're always at least as well off by offering to sell and maybe better.
If you go with the idea from the last lecture of only selecting strategies that are not weekly dominated by anything,
that is strategies that are admissible, then what you're going to do is to sell.
That's actually pretty clear.
It might seem equally clear that if someone else is going to beat Macy's bid, they're going to have to offer more.
Well, that depends on how much that person knows about game theory.
To look at history, Robert Campo, it seems, knew quite a lot.
Campo was born in Ontario, Canada in 1923 and went to school only until he was about 14.
He worked as a laborer and machinist and eventually got into construction.
In Ottawa, his construction company flourished and he was widely recognized for his high quality work.
He was the most successful builder in the city.
He had bad relations with the mayor of Ottawa, Charlotte Witten.
Witten once said, when I look at his houses, I think that perhaps nuclear bombardment would not be such a terrible thing after all.
In the 1980s, Campo got into the game of leveraged buyouts of companies.
You may remember the popularity of junk bonds at that time.
This was Campo's approach and it's here that he comes into our story.
Campo made a bid on federated stores in 1988, just like Macy's did.
You'll recall that Macy's has a bid for $102 provided that it gets a majority of the stock.
Campo's bid was what's called a two-tiered bid, with the tiers being $105 and $90.
It was unconditional, so if you wanted to sell to Campo, you could.
The easiest way to explain how this two-tiered bid works is to imagine that everyone who wants to sell to Campo shows up at an auditorium where Campo is.
The first person gives Campo his share of the stock and Campo takes $105, the top tier price, and puts it in a big box off to the side.
The next person comes up and gives him a share and he puts another $105 in the box.
He does this for every share, half of all of the shares in the company.
It's at this point that the second tier cuts in.
Now, for every additional share that he gets, he puts $90, the lower tier price, in the box.
You might imagine there'd be a free-for-all to be among the first people to sell your stock, but that's not really necessary.
Once everyone who wants to sell their stock to Campo has done so, the money in the box is divided equally among all the shares, so that each share is worth the same amount of money.
Let's think about how this works.
If Campo gets 50% of the shares or less, every share is worth $105.
If Campo gets 100% of the shares, then the blended price is halfway between $105 and $90, which is $9750.
If he gets somewhere between 50% and 100%, then the price will be somewhere between $105 and $9750.
My description of how all this works is misleading in one way.
The stockholders aren't actually all standing around in the same location, taking turns. This is a simultaneous scheme.
You have to decide what you're going to do without knowing what anyone else is doing.
Before we analyze what you should do, I have to provide you with one more piece of information.
I said that if a takeover bid succeeds, the value of the stock stays at $100.
If a takeover bid succeeds, your stock is worth $102.
But if Campo succeeds and you didn't sell to him, then he can take the company private and pluck your stock from you for the fair market price, which is often taken as being the lower tier of a two-tiered bid.
So if Campo wins and you didn't sell, he can take your stock for only $90.
Okay, what do you do?
Well, we've already seen that selling to Macy's is better than not selling at all. It weakly dominates.
So the real question is, do you want to sell to Macy's or to Campo?
Let's look at the possibilities.
Possibility one, the other shareholders provide Campo with less than 50% of the shares.
In that case, you can sell to Campo for $105.
Even if the Macy's deal exists, it's only worth $102 or keeping your money at $100.
Your solution that's best, sell to Campo.
Possibility two, the other shareholders do provide Campo with a majority of shares.
Then the Macy's bid disappears.
You have two choices, sell to Campo, which will give you the blended price at somewhere above $97.50,
or hold on to your stock and he'll pluck it from you for $90.
Your best choice, sell to Campo.
So look at what we have.
Regardless of what everyone else decides to do, your best choice is to sell to Campo.
It strongly dominates every other choice that you have.
And this is true for every other player too, of course.
So you sell to Campo, all of you.
So Campo gets 100% of the stock.
And so the price he pays is halfway between $105 and $90, which is $97.50.
Did you get that?
Everybody has stock worth $100.
Everyone can sell to Macy's for $102.
And instead, everybody sells to Campo for $97.50.
In its July 1988 issue, Fortune magazine hailed this as the biggest, looniest deal ever.
And it's hard to argue with that.
But if you knew a little bit of game theory, you could see it coming.
This is a many player variant of our old friend, the prisoner's dilemma.
Every player has a dominant strategy.
And the only equilibrium is for them all to play it.
But that equilibrium is not Pareto optimal.
It's not efficient.
Everyone ends up worse than if they had sold to Macy's.
Or even if they had kept their own stock themselves.
As an addendum to this story, things didn't quite stop there.
Two-tiered bids are sometimes seen as being unfair.
And you can see why from our discussion.
And so some arguments in court have been made to impede them.
This was used in a court case for many takeover bids to argue against their legitimacy.
In this case, Campo did win the bid, but it was eventually with a modified offer
that didn't include the tier structure.
We'll see later in the course, in this course, that Campo did win the bid,
but unfortunately his running of the company was not.
His affairs were crushed by massive debt and federated stores declared chapter 11 in 1989.
Success in one game doesn't always translate to success in another.
Okay.
We'll see later in this course that the government, with its power to pass laws,
is a player in many games of business and one that you can forget at your peril.
While Campo's bid was masterful, unfortunately his running of the company was not.
Okay.
We've just looked at a simultaneous game with a surprising result.
Now let's look at a sequential game.
This one involving voting.
It goes like this.
A committee has three members, A, B, and C.
A is the current chair of the committee, but a new vote's about to be taken to decide
who's going to be the chair for the next year.
Here they are, sitting around a table.
Each member would like to be chair, and each has his or her own preference about the other members.
To say it concisely, each person thinks that he or she would be the first choice.
And as you go clockwise around the table, the candidates become less desirable.
So C thinks that she is best, followed by A, followed by B.
A thinks that he is best, followed by B, followed by C.
And B thinks that he's best, followed by C, followed by A.
And these preferences are common knowledge.
A, as the current chair, has the power to determine how the vote takes place.
He says this.
The new chair will be determined by voice vote with members voting sequentially.
B smells a rat, and sees a loophole.
We might each get one vote.
What happens then?
Who wins a tie?
You?
Because that's hardly fair.
Fine, fine.
A cuts them off with a hard smile.
All right, you win ties.
C then joins the discussion, thinking about first mover advantage.
Who gets to vote first?
I suppose you do, A says reluctantly.
The members agree and prepare to vote.
A had to give away quite a bit to get this vote going.
Ties go to B, and C gets to vote first.
The question is, assuming that the committee members are rational, who becomes the new chair?
Who becomes the new chair?
Well, let's build the decision tree and find out.
First, C votes, then B votes.
And finally, A votes.
Wow, 27 terminal nodes.
It's not as bad as it looks.
Let's put in the payoffs.
Any node where A gets at least two votes is a win for A.
A gets three points, C gets two points, and B only gets one.
B hates A.
This is a finite game, so ordinal payoffs are good enough.
This can happen in seven ways.
Okay, same goes for C.
If two people vote for C, C wins.
She gets three points, B gets two, and A, who hates C, gets only one.
Not surprisingly, this can happen seven ways too.
In every other vote, either B gets two votes and wins, or there's one vote for each person.
And so B wins anyway.
The payoffs are three for B, two for A, and one for C.
C doesn't like B.
There are 13 different ways that B can win.
That's almost as many as A and C put together.
B is probably feeling pretty good right about now.
The fact that there are more ways for him to win than anyone else is probably what he was worried about when he was asking about who would win ties.
But the fact that he has more ways to win would only matter if people were choosing randomly.
They're not.
This is a game, and people are voting strategically.
Let's roll back the tree for A.
Sometimes A has flexibility in whom he votes for.
Sometimes he doesn't.
I've highlighted all of his best choices.
You'll note, though, that one possible best choice for A is always to vote for himself.
I've highlighted these edges in black.
Voting for himself is called sincere voting, because he's voting for the candidate that he likes best.
All right.
Now let's roll back to B.
Again, sometimes B has flexibility in his best choice.
Sometimes he doesn't.
But one choice that's always best for B is to vote for himself.
Sincere voting, again.
I've shown these in black, too.
So sincere voting is an optimal strategy for both A and B, although they have other optimal strategies, too.
Those ones are shown in orange.
What does C do?
Well, if she votes for A, then A gets two votes and wins.
This is C's second choice.
If she votes for B, then B gets two votes and wins.
This is C's least favorite option.
If C votes for herself, then each person gets one vote.
And so B is elected.
And C hates B.
So C votes for A and reelects him.
C is better off voting strategically for her second favorite choice than voting sincerely for her first favorite.
This is an issue that often comes up in real life elections when people wrestle with the question of whether to waste their votes on preferred third party candidates.
Looks like old A knew what he was doing.
B has gotten his least favorite outcome.
What can he do?
He could say to C, look, vote for yourself and I'll vote for you, too.
I hate A and I'd rather have you.
True.
But look at the tree.
If C does vote for herself, it says that B votes for himself.
And then the best that A can do is to elect B, who C hates.
So B's offer is not credible.
As soon as C votes, B has every reason to change his vote from her to himself.
Again, you see how the fact that these games don't allow binding agreements is important.
In a cooperative game, things might turn out quite differently.
In this tree, I've assumed that B voted second, although I never mentioned that explicitly in the original problem.
I'll let you verify that if A goes second when you roll back the tree, you get exactly the same result.
A still gets elected.
Paradoxically, he would not be elected if he had won ties.
A bigger concern might be whether he can count on his fellow committee members to work all of this out.
There's no doubt that the result once explained to the players is self-reinforcing.
It's an ash equilibrium and benefits no one to deviate from it.
But you can see why the issue of rationality is one that arises again and again in game theory.
Just how rational can you expect people to be?
The surprising result for this game is that if it had been conducted simultaneously with everyone voting at the same time,
we would have had exactly the same results.
You can show that voting sincerely are still optimal strategies for A and B, and with that being the case, C votes for A.
A sequential game or a simultaneous game, in this particular case, it made no difference.
This is not the usual state of affairs, but you'd be surprised how often that fact is overlooked.
People often forget that their decisions may change the decisions of the people around them.
Of the people who follow them.
Supporting the decision to build up U.S. arms during the Cold War, Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard Pearl said,
If we're in doubt about the Soviet intentions, we should buy arms.
If the Soviets are aggressive, the build-up will be needed.
And if not, the only consequence is wasted money.
Pearl's reasoning presupposes that the U.S. military build-up will have no impact on the Soviet military decisions.
He's treating the sequential game as a simultaneous one, and thus overlooking this crucial distinction.
Okay, let's look at a simplified form of another real-world example.
If you're old enough to remember watching TV before 1971, you probably remember cigarette commercials on TV.
Me and my Winston's come all the way up to cool.
I'd rather fight than switch.
That's for Tarotten.
You've come a long way, baby. Virginia Slims.
The women's cigarette.
And of course, Chesterfield's 101s, the silly millimeter longer.
I watched way too much TV.
The commercials disappeared as a result of negotiations between the federal government and the four major tobacco companies,
American brands, Liget and Myers, Philip Morris, and Reynolds.
In 1964, the Surgeon General's report linking smoking to lung cancer came out.
So an argument could be made for the desire on the part of the tobacco companies to protect people from cancer.
I'm afraid I'm a bit cynical about this, especially in light of how hard the companies worked to prevent the link between cancer, smoking, and addiction in the years before 1964.
But then why would the cigarette companies agree to abandon advertising?
The answer is, it got them out of a prisoner's dilemma.
Before the ban, the decision of whether to advertise or not was really a four-player game among the four tobacco companies.
But we won't miss any of the salient points if we boil it down to just two companies, say Eagle Tobacco and Danil Boom, to keep me out of legal trouble.
Why advertise?
Yes, it does persuade some non-smokers to take up the habit.
But the biggest payoff is tempting smokers to switch from another brand to yours.
And we're talking about a big market.
In the 1960s, about 40% of all Americans smoked.
40%.
I've looked for the profit data.
In the 2000s, it looks like something like a $3 billion a year market for American smokers.
I don't know what it might have been in 1971, but the exact figure doesn't matter for this analysis.
Let's use the $3 billion figure.
And let's keep things simple.
Assume that each company has only two strategies, advertise on TV or don't.
TV ads will cost a company $500 million and will increase the number of smokers by 5%.
But the more important part is if you advertise and your opponent doesn't, you'll capture 80% of the market.
If you both do the same thing, both advertise or nobody advertises, you split the market evenly.
Okay, I have enough information to construct the payoff matrix for profits.
And here it is, expressed in millions of dollars of profit per year for the company.
You know how to analyze this.
Look for dominant strategies.
You'll find out that both players have them.
Regardless of which choice one makes, the other one is better off advertising.
So each player plays the dominant strategy, and the result is that both advertise, making $1.15 billion each.
If neither had advertised, they would have each made $1.5 billion.
You can see why I wasn't too worried about the exact size of the payoffs.
The truth is, they don't matter.
All that I need is that the preferences go best, my ads only, then no ads, then both ads,
then worst, your ads only.
These ordinal payoffs generate a prisoner's dilemma.
Again, both companies would prefer the solution of no ads, but to protect their market shares, they both have to run them.
So now you can see why the cigarette companies were only too happy to agree to the government ban on TV ads.
The government removed the other three squares from this matrix, leaving only the lower right cell.
All that was left was the Pareto optimal solution that the tobacco companies desired anyway, but couldn't sustain on their own.
In this particular case, I'd consider this a win-win-win situation.
Both companies make more money, and the size of the market is slightly curbed.
Not all legislation has so happy an effect.
When we talk about co-opetition, we'll see how some of the federal government's policies, for example, with Medicaid drug pricing,
actually raised the prices that they paid.
All right, I've got one more example that shows some surprising results.
It's another sequential game.
And I've said it in the context of a political election, but it could apply to a large number of different situations.
Anyone player, anyone where one player needs another player's help, but only for a while.
I'm sure you'll have no trouble imagining such situations in your own life.
Okay, we've got a mayoral election coming up in a large city and three candidates.
Rebecca is the Republican candidate, and she leads the polls with 45%.
Dennis is the Democratic candidate, and he's holding it about 40%.
The last 15% go to Indira, the independent candidate.
The election will go to whomever gets the most votes.
Indira likes Rebecca a little more than she does Dennis, but she's primarily concerned with zoning issues.
If she were appointed to be the head of the zoning commission, the planning commission, by Dennis, she'd be happy to give him her votes.
I'm going to assume that most of Indira's supporters would be happy to honor her endorsement.
The most important thing to Dennis is getting elected.
After that, he'd like freedom to appoint his own people, but that's negotiable.
The trouble is that the appointment to the head of the planning commission won't be made until after the election.
So here's the decision tree for the choices available to Dennis in red and Indira in blue.
Dennis can decide privately to offer the position to Indira, but this is a non-binding offer.
Indira can then choose whether to give her the support to Dennis.
If she does, Dennis will be elected, and then he can choose whether or not to give Indira the planning commission job.
Without Indira's support, Rebecca's going to win.
This again is a finite game, so the ordinal payoffs are good enough.
The key issues in deciding the payoffs were these.
Indira prefers getting a position to not getting it.
If she doesn't get it, she prefers Rebecca winning to Dennis.
Dennis' first concern is to get elected.
After that, he'd like to have freedom to appoint who he wants.
The worst thing for him is not getting elected at all.
On the tray, you'll see I've used some numbers that suggest how much a player likes one outcome compared to another,
but this really isn't important. Ordinal payoffs are enough for this game.
Well, it's easy to see what happens.
Once in office, Dennis wouldn't need Indira, and so he'd choose whoever he wanted for the planning commission.
Knowing this, Indira withholds her support, letting Rebecca win the election.
Dennis' first move of making the verbal offer is seen as cheap talk,
since he has no reason to follow through on it once he's elected.
In the language of game theory, Dennis has made an incredible promise, and Indira ignored it.
This topic of threats, promises, and the like, and how to make them credible,
is such an interesting topic that we're going to spend a whole lecture on it later.
The key, though, is nicely hinted at in a quotation by Tom Schelling.
The power to constrain an adversary depends on the power to bind oneself.
Here, both Dennis and Indira would be happier with a solution where Dennis is elected
and Indira gets the planning commission job. But how can this come about?
Well, suppose that Dennis reveals Indira a skeleton in his closet. Something a bit scandalous.
Revealing this information would hurt Indira a bit if she was in Dennis' administration,
but it would hurt Dennis a lot more.
Dennis has put himself in a vulnerable position. What happens now?
Well, here's the new tree. I've left off the cheap-talk note about whether Dennis makes the offer or not.
We'll assume he did, since he's revealed the scandal to Indira. Actions speak louder than words.
When we roll back this tree, we get this.
Now, if Dennis doesn't follow through on his promise, Indira can reveal the scandal,
which gives her at least one point of satisfaction for revenge.
If Dennis does follow through, Indira finds it in her own interest not to have the administration sullied by the scandal,
so if elected, Dennis is going to appoint Indira.
Knowing this, Indira gives Dennis her support. He gets elected, she gets the commissioners job, and the scandal is never brought to light.
Everybody wins. Except Rebecca.
So we have a strange situation. There are times when it can be to your advantage to let someone blackmail you.
In fact, there can be times when it can be to your advantage to give them the blackmail information yourself.
