Threats. Promises. Commitments. They're acts that we see in life every day. They're intended
to change the future course of events. Sometimes they do. Sometimes they don't.
Strategic moves aren't acts of desperation. They're moves that are added to an existing game.
When they're used properly, they can change the outcomes of those games dramatically.
No one would argue that you see a lot of these strategic moves in real life, but have you thought about what they really are?
Well, today and in my next lecture, we're going to take a closer look at strategic moves, how to make them work,
when you can safely ignore them, and the price that you pay to use them effectively.
It all starts with first mover advantage. We saw in an earlier lecture that there's no such thing as a universal first mover advantage.
But in some games, the player who goes first does indeed have an advantage.
When you use a strategic move, you're changing the game by adding a move at the beginning of the game and then taking it.
The particular move that you take is intended to give you a first mover advantage.
Threats, promises, and commitments all insert this extra move before the other player plays.
In addition to this, you have to get at least one more move after the other player plays.
To see what I'm getting at, we'll look at strategic moves in more detail.
As I said, strategic moves come in three flavors, threats, promises, and commitments.
A commitment is a statement that you will, at some future decision point, take a given action.
It's unconditional. Your claim is that nothing that happens will make you change your mind.
You could commit to doubling your production levels next year, or to not selling your house, or to getting out of Iraq by a certain date.
A commitment says, at a future time, I'll have this choice about what to do.
I'm telling you now what that choice is going to be, and it's not necessarily what you think I'd do.
I'm telling you I'm going to do this, and you can rely on it.
If this statement is true, and if the other players know that it's true, then your commitment essentially reorders the moves in the game.
For all practical purposes, you're taking a decision that's supposed to be made later, and you're making it right now.
Remember our discussion of the Airbus problem with the mid-sized jets?
We saw that Turn Order made a big difference there.
In our battle with the Sexes game, we saw that leaving a message on Taylor's answering machine,
I'm dressing casual tonight, goodbye, gave you the best payoff.
At least a dozen of Taylor believes you.
You've made a commitment to go casual, and the best that your date can do, if that's true, is to dress casually as well.
So that's a commitment in a game theoretic sense.
It's similar to the colloquial use of the word.
When we talk about someone in a relationship making a commitment, the implication is that the person is stating now that they'll remain in the relationship in the future.
To foreshadow a bit, I'll point out two simple points about such a commitment.
The first is that such a commitment wouldn't be necessary if the future of the relationship were guaranteed to be wonderful.
This commitment only has an effect when a person would want to leave a relationship.
The second point, of course, is that not all commitments can be believed.
We'll come back to both of these points shortly.
They're going to be central to today's discussion.
Well, if that's a commitment, what's a promise?
Well, just like a commitment, I make a promise to you before the game starts.
I say, if you make this choice, I will respond with a choice that you'll like, something that you wouldn't normally expect me to do.
While commitments are unconditional, I'm doing it, period.
Promises are conditional.
They only trigger if you do what I ask.
The third kind of strategic move is the threat.
A threat is less different from a promise than you might think.
A promise says, you do what I want, and I will make things better for you than you would otherwise hope.
A threat says, you do what I want, or I will make things worse for you than you would otherwise expect.
More specifically, if I threaten you, I make a statement before you move.
If you make this choice, I will respond with that choice, and it's something worse for you than what you would normally expect me to do.
So, a factory owner could threaten to burn his factory to the ground rather than give it up to a hostile takeover bid.
A competitor can threaten to undercut your prices if you undercut his.
And again, the same issue that we've seen before arises.
In a word, credibility.
Would the factory owner really burn down the factory?
Unlikely.
But how about the threat of the price war?
Credible or not?
This issue of credibility of strategic moves is central, and I'm going to look at it in detail in just a few moments.
But before that, I want to take a focused look at the reason that the problem of credibility arises.
It's a point that I've kind of hinted at in my discussion so far, but I haven't dwelt on it.
It's this.
To make a commitment, threat, or promise.
Your proposed action must be something that you wouldn't normally do when you reach that point in the game tree.
If I make a commitment to double my production in the upcoming year, I may be very happy with that decision,
provided that I keep my monopoly and that you stay out of the market.
But if you enter the market, my additional capacity costs me money, and using it drives the price of my product down dramatically.
I've said that I'm unconditionally going to double my production.
If you believe me, you'll stay out of my market, which is what I want.
But if you enter the market anyway, I'm going to want to go back on my commitment of doubling my capacity.
Following through is going to hurt me.
You can see that on the blue node on the upper branch of the tree.
If doubling production were the best choice when you stayed out of the market and the best choice when you entered it,
I wouldn't need to issue a commitment.
You could look at the game tree and see that I'm always going to double production.
Get the idea?
It's the same way with a promise.
Let's look at the example of the promise.
If you get an A in math, I'll take you to Disneyland.
Promise your kid.
In order for this to be a promise, taking the child to Disneyland is something that you'd rather choose not to do.
After all, you're trying to get the kid to study.
If the kid looks at your decision tree and says, hmm, if I get an A in math, we go to Disneyland because they promised.
But if I don't get an A in math, we go to Disneyland anyway because they want to go.
Well, the kid may not be a straight A student, but it's not going to take her long to figure out that studying doesn't really enter into the equation of going on the vacation.
Of course, this same situation can be framed as a threat.
If going to Disneyland is what you'd normally do, you could say, if you don't get an A in math, we're not going to Disneyland this year.
Your best situation is that the kid does get the A and you get to go on a mutually enjoyable vacation.
But if the kid didn't get the grade, you'd really like to go on the vacation anyway.
Again, to be a threat, the course of action you're threatening has to be one that you don't want to take once you get to the situation.
Suppose the kid gets a B. You're going to say that not going on vacations, not going to change the grade, so why not go?
Except, of course, that if this is going to be your line of reasoning once the grades are in, the kid has no reason to work for the A to begin with.
Your threat isn't credible since you have no intention of following through with it when push comes to shove.
I can't make this point strongly enough.
Threats and promises say that under certain circumstances, you're going to do something which you will not want to do when you reach that situation.
A promise that you want to follow through with isn't a promise, it's an assurance.
I can tell you that if we carpool, I won't intentionally drive off a cliff.
This isn't a promise, you know that I don't want to drive off a cliff.
Assuming that the oddness of my statement doesn't scare you about my sanity, you'll make exactly the same decision about carpooling as you would before I made the assurance.
In a similar way, a threat that you want to follow through with isn't a threat, it's a warning.
In our market example, suppose that I always did better by doubling my production even when you entered the market.
I can tell you that if you joined the market, I'm going to double my production.
Why wouldn't I double it?
But I don't have to threaten you with this.
All that you have to do is look at my decision tree to see that it's true.
If I told you that I'm going to double production, I don't have any credibility issues.
I haven't threatened you.
I've warned you.
Okay, assurances and warnings are just the obvious, stating things that the other person already knows.
What the rollback tree tells them that you'd do.
They can figure that out on their own, so an assurance or a warning isn't going to change anybody's decisions.
They serve no strategic purpose, but a commitment or a threat or a promise.
These can change how people play the game.
Let's assume for the moment that other people believe your strategic moves,
then the action that they take in their own best interest is going to give you a better payoff than what you originally had.
In our production example, if you believe I'll follow through on my commitment to double production,
it's best for you to stay out of the market.
That means I get to keep my monopoly and never suffer the downside of too much capacity.
If your kid thinks that going to Disneyland is actually worth the work needed to get an A,
then she'll respond to your Disneyland threat with what you wanted.
And you get everything you want, a good grade from them and the vacation trip.
A successful threat costs you nothing.
A successful promise, you have to pay up.
Okay, let's see an example of how promises work.
Suppose you and Taylor, you remember Taylor, your date from the earlier lecture, you guys made up.
Anyway, suppose that you and Taylor have two different movies that you'd really like to see with the other person.
But each of you thinks that the other person's movie looks kind of lame.
I'm going to assume that you get five points from watching your movie with the other person,
but lose one point from watching theirs.
Since this is a finite game, the exact size of the payoffs really don't matter.
Just their order of preference.
Your movie is on this week and Taylor's is on next week.
Look at the decision tree and roll it back.
No real surprises.
Regardless of whether Taylor goes to your movie or not, you're better off not going to Taylor's next week.
Knowing this, Taylor gains no benefit from going to yours, so you both stay home.
Zero payoffs to everybody.
Can a strategic move help?
How about a commitment on your part to go to Taylor's movie?
No good.
If your commitment is believed, your date now knows that there's no need for her to go to your movie or his movie next week.
You'll both go to Taylor's next week and stay home this week.
Taylor will be happy, but you'll get a minus one payoff.
You don't want that.
Okay.
Can you threaten?
No.
You're already following the course of action that Taylor likes least.
At least since you're staying at home next week, you can't threaten to do worse.
But a promise can work.
Suppose you can get Taylor to believe that if the two of you go to your movie this week, you'll go to hers next week or his.
If Taylor won't go to your movie this week, of course, you're going to stay home just like you are now.
Then Taylor has a choice.
Go to your flick, which then leads to going to Taylor's, and you get a payoff of four.
If you don't go, you both get a payoff of zero.
Four is better than zero, so you both end up going to one another's movies and you both get a payoff of four.
Better for everyone than staying home.
The three points that I want to make here are these.
One.
Your promise allowed you to get a better payoff than what you would have gotten without it.
It also gave the other player a better payoff.
Promises will do that.
Two.
Your promise made you do something that you didn't want to do.
After seeing your movie, your best choice is to blow off Taylor's.
Keeping your promise is always painful at the moment that you have to do it.
My third point is that none of this works unless the promise is heard and believed.
Strategic moves to be effective have to be observable, and they have to be credible.
It's this last point that I've hinted at several times in the lecture, but I haven't made explicitly.
Strategic moves don't work unless they're believed.
They have to be credible.
The most common way to refer to an unbelievable promise or threat in game theory is to say that it's incredible.
Given common usage, that might not be the best term.
Incredible promises aren't really great promises.
They're promises that are quite literally not credible.
The problem of credibility is pretty much universal when it comes to strategic moves.
After all, if what you're doing is telling the other person that you're going to do something that's not best for you,
then it's going to surprise them.
You're going to have to convince them.
A threat promise and commitment always involves you doing that, saying that in at least one circumstance,
you're going to take an action that is not at your best interest at the time.
And that's why credibility is an issue.
When the moment to make that decision comes, you're not going to want to follow through.
If people believe that you're not going to follow through, your strategic move has no teeth and will be ineffective.
Let's put this into a context.
Let's do a quick and dirty analysis of terrorist hostage-taking of U.S. citizens.
The U.S. government is going to respond to a possible terrorist act on the part of a terrorist organization.
We'll make a really simple model.
The terrorist organization can take hostages or not.
If they don't, in this simple model, let's call that the end of the game.
It's interesting to look at the variant where the terrorists get a useful response when they don't take hostages,
but that's for another day.
No hostages is a status quo.
If the terrorists take hostages, we'll assume that they make demands.
The U.S. government can either satisfy these demands or not.
In either case, the terrorists can either kill the hostages or release them.
Here's the game tree.
Note that my sequential structure for the game means that the government has to commit to either meeting or refusing the demands
before the terrorists release or kill the hostages.
This is usually the case.
Well, you can see what's missing.
You can't analyze a game without knowing what the payoffs are.
I'm not going to use mixed strategies in this analysis, so it's a finite game.
Ordinal payoffs are good enough.
I have to rank the results in order of preference for each player.
And I hope that you see that it's at this point that you have to be clear-eyed in looking at the other player.
It may be convenient or politically expedient to view the enemy as a bloodthirsty monster who delights in killing and hates our freedom,
but if this is actually the case, this game is going to end very badly.
If that's really so, the terrorists are going to take the hostages and kill them, regardless of what you do,
because they're bloodthirsty monsters, and for them, killing is too much fun to pass up.
So let me propose a different set of payoffs that seem more reasonable to me.
I've used the no-hostage situation.
The status quo is a baseline with zero payoff for both parties.
I'm assuming that the U.S. prefers this to any hostage situation.
We certainly say that we don't want hostages to be taken.
Having the hostages killed is bad, and so is giving into terrorist demands.
I'm going to assume that the demands are reasonable enough or limited enough
that saving the lives of the hostages is more important than caving to the demands.
For the terrorist, the most important thing is having the demands met,
taking hostages as a success if it leads to the satisfaction of the demands, otherwise not.
The second most important thing is not to be seen as submitting to the will of the U.S.
I'm also assuming that killing is undesirable, but it's less important than the other factors.
Now, I'm not saying that this model is correct for any given terrorist organization.
Part of how terrorism works is, well, terror.
It may be worthwhile for some organizations to take hostages and then release them,
even when their demands aren't met, or maybe to take them and simply kill them.
My point is that game theory allows us to analyze how the game should be played against each of these kinds of enemy.
This lets us know what characteristics of our enemy are key in deciding what we should do.
I am ignoring one other factor here, though, an important one that many of you may already have thought of.
I'm looking at this possible hostage situation as a one-time affair.
You may feel that this is just one episode in a series of similar games.
This is an excellent observation.
And later in the course, we're going to study iterated games of this type.
The fact that this game is, or maybe iterated, can have a strong impact on the optimal strategies of the players, as we'll see.
But this particular lecture is about strategic moves.
So if you will, grant me the current scenario for today.
Treat it as a one-shot.
We'll address your concerns about iterated games starting next lecture.
Okay, when you roll back the tree, you get this.
Hmm.
The terrorists take the hostages, the U.S. meets the demands, and the hostages are released.
This is the favorite outcome for the terrorists and the middle outcome for the U.S. preferences.
How could the U.S. do better?
It can make a commitment.
It's one you've heard from a lot of countries at many points in time.
And it has to be made before the hostages are taken at the beginning of the game.
We will not negotiate with terrorists.
If this commitment is believed, the terrorists can either take hostages and end up killing them for a payoff of negative one,
or take no hostages for a payoff of zero.
Zero is better than negative one.
So this commitment, if credible, stops this terrorist threat, at least for this organization.
But as always, how do you make a strategic move credible?
There are really only two possible ways.
Everything else is a variation on a theme.
The problem with the credibility of a strategic move is that when a particular situation arises,
you're not going to want to do what you said you would do.
One way around this is to change your own payoffs so that you will want to do what you said that you would do.
You can't make your own payoffs better, or you would have done that already.
But you may be able to make your payoffs worse, the ones from not following through on what you said.
That is, you change things around so that you'll be hurt if you don't follow through.
The other way to make yourself credible is to make the implementation of your strategic move irreversible
so that you can't change your mind later, even if you want to.
That is, you change things that, in some ways, you lose control of your own decision-making.
We'll look at these possibilities in turn and see ways that each can be accomplished.
But before I do, I want to make one other point that should be obvious, but it's sometimes overlooked.
It's this.
A threat, promise, or commitment can't be effective, even if it's believable,
if the other players don't know about it before they make their choices.
That is, strategic moves have to be observable.
This is a pretty obvious point, you'd think, but occasionally you'll see somebody creating an ultimatum in their own minds.
If he's late for work one more time this month, I'm firing him.
Without telling the target of the ultimatum about that decision.
In the movie Doctor Strange Love, the Russians create a credible deterrent to being attacked.
They built a doomsday device, an automated system that immediately, irrevocably,
launches a full-scale nuclear attack if Soviet aerospace is breached.
The doomsday approach, the automatic device, is one way to achieve credibility.
It certainly makes your threats irreversible.
The trouble was that the system was activated on a Friday,
and the Russians weren't going to announce it until the following Monday.
It was to be announced at the party congress because, as the Soviet ambassador told the U.S.,
you know the premier loves surprises.
Over the weekend, of course, the Soviet airspace was breached, and, well, bye-bye.
Alright, we've said that the first way to establish credibility is to change your payoffs
so that you get hurt by not doing what you said you'd do.
How do you do this?
One obvious way is through contracts.
If I go back on what I say to you in a contract, you can have me punished.
Obviously, the punishment has to be severe enough so that I won't be best for me to break the contract anyway
and take the punishment.
This works well enough for promises.
Breaks down a bit for threats.
Suppose I put a threat to you in my contract.
If you enter my market, I'll hurt both of us by upping my production levels.
If I don't up my production levels, you can take me to court and have me find a lot of money.
I hope you see the problem.
You're not going to hold me to that contract.
If you enter the market, I'm contractually obligated to hurt you.
That's something you don't want me to do.
But if the contract is with you, you're just going to say,
eh, forget it, we'll rescind that part of the contract.
So the contract really didn't provide credibility for my threat.
You can sometimes get around this problem by having disinterested third party brought into the situation
or by making an irrevocable unilateral action.
Let's go back to the ultimatum game from lecture two.
You'll recall that in this game, ten dollars worth of money is lying on the table between us.
You propose a division of that money and I get to say yes or no.
If I say yes, we divide the money in the way that you said.
If I say no, nobody gets anything.
It's a take it or leave it offer.
Our analysis of sequential game shows that assuming that money is all that you and I care about,
I should accept any division that gives me anything.
Getting a penny is better than getting nothing.
And consequently, you should offer me a penny and keep nine dollars and 99 cents.
Now, we've already talked about non-monetary payoffs and the feeling of being cheated,
but let me set that aside for today.
Let's assume that all I care about is money.
How can I get more of it?
I can threaten you.
If you don't give me at least half of the money, I'm going to veto the deal.
So I say, but you don't believe that, do you?
Do you think I'll turn down 499 if I really care about money or four dollars?
What is it that makes my threat credible?
This.
I pull five dollars out of my own wallet and I give it to the person conducting the experiment.
If I accept less than five dollars, you get to keep this.
Okay?
There's no reason the experimenter should refuse agreeing to my request.
Weekly dominates, not agreeing.
She has some chance of getting the money.
Okay.
Now, do you believe my threat?
Of course.
Accepting anything less than five dollars now is actually worse for me than getting nothing.
So to maximize your profits, you offer me five dollars.
Since I didn't accept less than five dollars, I get my deposit back from the experimenter and I'm five dollars up on the deal.
You can see from this simple example why the idea of an escrow can be so useful in making threats or promises credible.
In fact, once you start to look around, you can see lots of examples of this kind of thing, like around a lot of women's fingers.
We talked about the idea of commitment and mentioned that the word is often used in normal speech in relation to marital commitment.
So let's talk about the engagement ring.
The custom of giving engagement rings arose in the U.S. in the 1930s.
Then as now, it wasn't uncommon for couples to sleep together before they were married after they got engaged.
But societal attitudes toward premarital sex were much harsher than they are now.
The reputation of a woman who slept with a man who she did not then marry could be ruined, seriously hurting the prospects for another marriage.
Sleeping with a man was thus very much of a big risk if it turned out that he wasn't going to marry you.
For a while, the courts used to allow a woman to sue for breach of promise if a man broke off the engagement without a good reason.
And this could discourage frivolous engagement promises by young men, but then the courts stopped hearing breach of promise cases and credibility became a more serious problem.
A woman might be willing, or more than willing, to sleep with her future husband.
But a commitment to marry by the man and accepted proposal was not itself credible to her.
A man who wanted only sex with a woman could propose, sleep with her, and then leave.
An engagement ring, an expensive ring, changes the payoffs.
The woman keeps the ring if the man breaks off the engagement or disappears.
A man who intends to marry the woman is in effect putting a non-refundable deposit down on the marriage.
At a future time, he may get cold feet, but the cost of the ring is one inducement to keep his original commitment.
On the other hand, a man who knows that he doesn't intend to marry is essentially paying a high cost in gold and diamonds for her temporary favors.
This greatly increases the credibility of the marriage commitment.
By the way, there is one other lovely aspect of this that I want to point out.
My description wasn't only of a man who was changing his payoffs so that he'd follow through with a commitment.
It was also one of two types of men, one who wanted marriage with the woman and one who wanted only sex.
It's likely that only the marrying type would give the ring to begin with.
What this means in the language of game theory is that the chance to give an engagement ring is a signal.
We'll be talking about signals in another lecture, but saying it simply, we've got a good trick.
We can now tell the future husbands from the future heartbreaks.
You've introduced an observable into the situation in which they're likely to respond differently.
This escrow notion that we've introduced in this example can be used in businesses when they observably spend money on a project that they have verbally committed to.
Expensive advertising campaigns for products that don't yet exist are one example.
You've now thrown the money away unless you actually make the product.
Well, I hope that our discussion so far has gotten you interested in the ins and outs of strategic moves.
In my next lecture, I'll be continuing with this topic.
The focus will be credibility.
I think you'll find that some of the pathways to it will have you seeing the acts of others, perhaps even yourself, in a new light.
