Greetings. My name is Jay Garfield, it's very nice to meet you. Normally you can find me
at Smith College in Massachusetts where I teach philosophy, but I also teach at the University
of Melbourne in Australia and the Central University of Tibetan Studies in India. But
for the next 36 lectures, I'm with you, which means I get to travel even more than I ordinarily
do. We'll be talking about the meaning of life. It's one of the big questions, of course,
maybe the biggest question. And the reason that I do philosophy in the first place is
because it allows us to ask the very big questions. So I hope that you enjoy our exploration as
we try to really sort out the answer to this biggest of all, what is the meaning of life?
Now, when we begin by asking the question, what is the meaning of life, we need to start by asking a
prior question. And that is what we mean by the very phrase, the meaning of life. Because in
philosophy, we're trying to think reflectively, and we often have to move back a step before we
can move forward. Let's begin with the word meaning itself. The word meaning has got itself
many meanings. We can distinguish at least three meanings that are going to be important for us
here. The first and most obvious is what we might call linguistic meaning or semantic meaning. This
is when we talk about the meaning of words. So we might say, for instance, that the word bachelor
in English means an unmarried adult male. Or we might say that the words rouge and red and marpeau
mean the same things in French, English and Tibetan respectively. That's one very good sense of
meaning. We have a second sense of meaning that we sometimes talk about. And that is what we might
call indicative meaning. So I might look up at the sky and say, those clouds mean rain, or that
expression on her face means trouble. There we're not talking about linguistic meaning or semantic
meaning. The clouds aren't literally signs or symbols in a language. And we're not trying to
interpret them. Rather, what we mean is they indicate to us that it's going to rain. That scowl on
her face indicates that she's lost her temper. So those are at least two senses of meaning. But
there's a third sense of meaning. The third sense of meaning is the sense of meaning where we might
talk about significance, something being important to us. So I might say talking to you, this ring
is of great meaning to me. It signifies where it represents my marriage vows. Or I might say, the
monument I visited today on the National Mall is deeply significant. It resonates with me. It gives
me a certain sense of value and importance. It's the third of these, this notion of significance.
That's clearly the core meaning when we ask the question, what is the meaning of life? I said it's
the core meaning, but it's not the only meaning. For we are indeed asking why life is significant,
why it's important, why it matters to us. But the others are important too. And you'll discover
especially later in this course, when we move to Native American perspectives, we're going to actually
trying to understand our own lives and things around us as linguistically meaningful, as indicative
in important ways. For now though, let's notice that all three of these senses of meaning, even
though they're different from one another, are related to one another in an important way. Because
in each case, we're talking about the sense of pointing to something outside. When we think about
linguistic meaning, we mean that the word red points to or denotes or expresses the color
redness, which is outside of the word itself. When I say that my ring is significant, that is that
it's meaningful to me in this way, I'm saying that it points to or refers outside to marriage
commitments or something like that. And finally, when I say that those clouds mean rain, I mean that
by looking at those clouds, I get information about something beyond them. So all of these senses
of meaning have a sense of one thing pointing to or indicating something well beyond it. And in
general, we'll ask the question, what is the meaning of life? We're asking the question, what is it
beyond our existence that gives our lives significance that makes it indicate anything? That's
one question we need to ask preliminarily. But there's certainly another one. Because we began
by asking the question, what is the meaning of life? That raises a prior question. Is there a
meaning of life in the first place? And this is a question that we all ask ourselves and ask it in
different ways at different developmental stages. When we're young children, maybe when we're lying
awake in bed, and we suddenly realize that, you know, we're just one person among many, and our
parents know a whole lot more than we do. And our grandparents are very old. And some of our
friends are nice and some aren't. We might ask ourselves, what's this all about? Famously, of
course, when we hit adolescence, we begin to ask this question in a deep and existential way. What
am I here for? What is my life going to be? And as we grow older, with hope and a little philosophy,
we hope that we ask more reflectively and in a larger, less egocentric way, not just what's the
meaning of my life. What's the meaning of our lives? What's the meaning of existence? What's it
all about? So at different stages of our lives, we think about these things very differently.
But we do have to ask the question, does life have meaning? And the answer to that might be no,
because after all, there are some things that simply don't have any meaning at all. After all,
there are some rocks in my garden right now that I know are absolutely meaningless. And it might
well be that human life is something more like my rocks than it is like my wedding ring. It may
be one of those just plain meaningless things, full of sound and fury, but signifying nothing. We
just don't know that. And the other issue, of course, is that some lives might mean more than
other lives. That is, we might say that certain lives are meaningful, but some lives are just plain
meaningless. That's a reasonable possibility. If that's so, we can still ask the question,
what does make a life worth living? What makes some lives more meaningful than others? What is it
about those lives that are meaningful, that makes them meaningful, and those lives that are meaningless,
that makes the meaning less? And that question is one we can ask, even if it's a difficult question
to answer. And so even if we were to discover that not all lives are meaningful, that life isn't
meaningful per se, it may well be that we can still say in what the meaning of life consists
for those lives that have meanings. There's another question we might ask ourselves.
What raises the question of the meaning of life in the first place? Why is this one of the questions
that we feel absolutely bound to answer? And there are several reasons, there are several things that
raise that question. One that we find that raises that question throughout the history of philosophy,
whether we're talking about European philosophy, Chinese philosophy, Indian philosophy, African
philosophy, is a fundamental awareness that human beings develop at some point of our
finitude in a vast and infinite universe, that we are very small, limited, and ephemeral phenomena
in a universe that goes far beyond us. That finitude has several different dimensions.
On the one hand, there is the obvious finitude in space and time itself. If you think about the
extent of the world and the universe in which we live, it's quite vast. The globe that we dwell
on right now is enormous. It is dwarfed by the solar system, a solar system that is no more than
a speck in a galaxy, and a galaxy that is one of billions in a galaxy cluster. And as we extend
our gaze across the universe, in the vastness of time from the Big Bang to the eventual cooling
of the universe, the amount of space and the amount of time that any one of us occupies is so tiny
and so insignificant that we could well ask who cares. But even if we restrict our gaze and get
a little less cosmic and just think about human history, we see that we're very small moments.
We're here for a few years, maybe even a hundred years if we're lucky, but in the course of human
history, which extends over hundreds of thousands of years already, that's absolutely nothing.
We know that even if our children may remember us, maybe our grandchildren, our great-grandchildren
will look at photographs and ask, who was that? And people might say, I don't know, somebody who
was a member of our family at some point. Most of us are not going to be remembered. And so we need
to ask, what is it about our ephemeral lives in human history that makes them worth living in the
first place? Now, there's a couple of different ways that we can think about the question about
human life even within this context. One of the things that we need to ask if we're asking about
the meaning of life is just what it is for life to be a human life. Because after all, we're not
here asking about the meaning of the life of dogs or the life of snails or even the life of chimpanzees
and mountain gorillas close to us in the evolutionary tree, though they may be. We are looking explicitly
at the meaning of human life. So we need to ask at some point, what is it that makes us
characteristically human in the respect that is relevant to asking this question? One possibility
is that the answer to that is biological. If the answer is biological, then we would be saying
that what it is to be human is perhaps to have a certain kind of DNA, to have a certain genetic
code, or perhaps it's to have certain organs. Most of us might point first to the prefrontal
cortex of the brain. We might say to be human is to be biologically like us, to be genetically related
to us, to have the kind of functioning organs that we do and ask, what is it about that biological
nature that's important and significant? And as we will see, certain of the figures who we are going
to examine in the history of philosophy are going to be paying attention to our biological constitution.
On the other hand, we might think that the answer to the question what makes us distinctively human
is a psychological answer. We might say it's not the meat, it's not the biology, it's not the brain
stuff, it's how we think, it's what goes on in our minds, it's what we're capable of deducing,
the intentions we're capable of forming, and so forth. And so we might even say even if something
were biologically different from us, maybe a Martian, but who was psychologically like us,
that thing would be human in all relevant respects, and we could ask about the meaning of its life
just as we could the meaning of our life, even though it's biologically distinct from us.
On the other hand, of course, if you thought the answer was biological, you might say who cares
about the Martians? I care about people who are biologically like us, even if they're psychologically
unlike me, even if they're severely disabled, comatose, or whatever. Those answers pool in
different directions. We might give a spiritual answer to that question. We might say that what
makes somebody distinctively human involves something like their relationship to a deity,
their relationship to a religious practice, to a religious tradition, or something like that,
something that transcends biology and psychology, and is somehow a deeper fact. Or we might say
that there's a moral dimension to humanity, and that what makes our lives meaningful is our
capacity for caring about each other, for understanding the difference between right and
wrong, for standing under moral imperatives, and for taking responsibility for our actions.
And we might say that anything biologically, psychologically, spiritually different from
us, however different it may be, if it's morally like us, that's the kind of thing whose life is
significant. I promise you that as we work through this series of lectures, we are going to find
each of these answers taken seriously. Another question gets raised before we can begin to
ask the big question. And that is the question, to what extent are we in control of our lives?
Because many people would say that our life is meaningful only to the extent that we are able
to do something with it. But after all, what kinds of things are we? If we're biological animals,
made of flesh and blood, in a deterministic universe, it may be that everything that we do,
and everything that happens to us, is completely, causally determined. Or it might be that we're
free, and that we have a deep free will. In either case, our lives might be meaningful or
meaningless, but the sense of meaning is going to be very different. Of course, on the other hand,
it might be that we can find a middle path, that certain things about us are determined,
but certain things about our lives are free. Perhaps the meaning lies in the places where
we can make choices. We'll see that possibility raised in the Bhagavad Gita very shortly. But
it might be that the meaning lies in exactly how we're determined. It might be, for instance,
that it's what God has in mind for us that makes our lives meaningful. All of these questions
will require being raised. Now, there's yet another important question to ask. We have been
presuming so far, and unfortunately presuming, that there might be a single right answer to the
question, is there a meaning of life, and if so, what it's meaning, what that meaning is.
But that might not be true. There might be many meanings of life. There may be many different
answers. For instance, the answer might vary over time. It might be that in one era, the meaning
of life is one thing. But in another era, perhaps a more technological era, it's a different thing.
It may be that what makes a life meaningful for a small child is different from what makes life
meaningful to an adult, different, again, from what makes life meaningful to an elderly person.
So meaning may vary not only over cultural time, but it might vary over individual time.
Meaning might vary from culture to culture. We might say that what the meaning of life
for somebody growing up in classical India is different from the meaning of life growing up
in modern Europe, different, again, from the meaning of life growing up in contemporary
United States. That's a possibility that we'll have to investigate, and we will certainly see
many different answers to the question of the meaning of life that come from different times,
different cultures, and individuals at different stages of their own lives.
What would count as an answer if we even knew what the question was to the question,
what is the meaning of life? We're going to need to think about that. One kind of question
answer might be this. It might be taking very seriously that problem of our finitude and the
infinitude of the universe, that the only thing that could be an answer to the meaning of life
question would be some account of the relationship between finite beings like us and a vast infinite
universe. That's one possibility. Another possibility is we take the spiritual dimension to humanity
more seriously, that the only possible answer to the question, what is the meaning of life,
is an answer that gives us some sense of what our relationship is to a divinity,
to a God, to a greater spiritual existence. By the way, we're going to see each of those kinds
of answers offered. When we look, for instance, a bit later on to people like Marcus Aurelius,
the Stoics, we're going to see people trying to understand the meaning of life in terms of our
relationship to the eternal cosmos. When we look, on the other hand, at the Bhagavad Gita, at the
Book of Job, we're going to be interested more in our relationship to a divinity. But there are
other possibilities too. We might be asking about the relationship of our own lives to the lives of
those around us, to our immediate past, to our ancestors, and to those who come after us. We
will certainly see social accounts of the meaning of life, both in the Confucian tradition, in the
Native American tradition, that are going to place a very special importance on the relationship
between our own lives, the lives of our ancestors, and the lives of our children, in determining
what could make our own lives meaningful, as well as accounts in the words of people like Aristotle,
who are going to see the meaning of our life constituted primarily by our relationship to
our own contemporary communities. There's two big dimensions that we need to consider as we pose
the big question of the meaning of life. And these two dimensions are going to animate our discussion
throughout this series of lectures. One I'm going to call the personal dimension, and one I'm going
to call the collective or the relational dimension. When we ask the question in the personal dimension,
we're asking the question, if I simply think of myself as an individual worrying about my own life
in what does the meaning of my life consist? We might have a number of different kinds of answers
to that. We might say, a meaningful life for me is a life of reason. That is, it's a life that is
led reflectively, thoughtfully, where I make my choices in an informed way, where I've got good
reasons for the things that I do, and I can look back on my life and say, yes, I did the right
things, and I did them for the right reasons. On the other hand, it might be that I say for me
a meaningful life would be a life of faith, a life in which I find some higher value,
some spiritual value, and am able to accommodate myself and my concerns to what I see as the
dictates of that higher spiritual value. That's possible. On the other hand, I might say that what
makes my life meaningful is that I'm able to lead it naturally in harmony with my own nature,
in harmony with the nature that I find around me, where I think of myself fundamentally as an
organism, and I try to shed social accretions, get back to my natural way of being, and live that
way. We're going to see this valorized, for instance, by the Taoists and by certain Zen thinkers
when we move to that part of the Asian tradition. Or I might say, for instance, from a Confucian
or an Aristotelian, that what gives my life meaning is that it's a social life, that I'm a member of
a culture, a member of a society, a member of a family. Or perhaps I could say with Nietzsche,
as we'll see further on, that what makes my life meaningful as an individual is that I lead an
independent life, that I'm the author of my own life, I create it as a piece of art, and I don't
worry about the demands of others, the demands of society around me, or external values. I make
my own values, and I make myself, and that kind of autonomy and individuality is what gives my life
meaning. That's one dimension. But beyond this individual dimension, there's a second social
dimension to thinking about the meaning of life, this connected dimension of connectedness.
And in that dimension, we need an account of what our relationships are to each other,
to the broader world, to the universe, to our society, in order to answer the question,
what is the meaning of life? On this dimension, we might ask the question, are we primarily
independent agents in voluntary association with one another? That is, when we think about our
society, is it a group of individuals who get together and say, let's form a society and make
some agreements, as we might see in the social contract tradition, where we see government and
social institutions as constituted and legitimated by the wills of individuals? Or it might be
that we are essentially social beings, that that's what our fundamental nature is, and that when we
think about ourselves as individuals, that's no more appropriate than it is to think of my hand
as an individual, instead of as a part of my body. For Aristotle, for Confucius, we will think of
ourselves primarily in a social context, whereas we'll see that for Kant and Mill, we'll think of
ourselves primarily as individuals and of social contexts as built out of individuals. Do we choose
our roles in society, or does society give us our roles? Or is our context not primarily social,
but natural? Are we fundamentally animals living in an ecosystem, and so that what gives our lives
meaning is our connection to other animals and plants in that broader ecosystem? We will see
that kind of question asked by such thinkers as the Taoists, and also by Native American thinkers
like lame deer. Or, as the Stoics might have it, are we simply tiny parts of a very vast cosmos,
and that we need to think of ourselves relationally in relation to the whole? All of these possibilities
are going to be open for us in this set of lectures. Each one of them will be fascinating,
and I promise you, we will not need to make choices saying, this one is right, this one is wrong.
Rather, the beauty of doing philosophy this way is we'll be able to draw insight, inspiration,
and understanding from each of these perspectives, and to see that by bringing a vast network of
texts, a vast network of thinkers together, we can shed more light on our question and gain deeper
insight than we can by only looking through a single lens. Now I want to talk with you a little bit
about what it is to do philosophy. That's what I do with my life, and it's a really good life,
I must say, and it's a life that I look forward to sharing with you. When I do philosophy, I always
think of myself as part of a great philosophical tradition, and it's important to think of that
tradition, I believe, not simply as say the Western tradition beginning in Greece and
going to New York today or something like that, but rather to think of it as a global tradition
of philosophy, because philosophy has been done all around the world for thousands of years.
So the philosophical tradition that I invite you to inhabit with me is a philosophical
tradition that has roots in Greece, but also in China, also in India, also in Africa, also in
pre-European North America. All of these areas are going to contribute to our thinking.
And when we do philosophy with a tradition, that means paying attention to listening to
and taking seriously the thinking of those who went before us, those who contributed to that
tradition. Taking a text seriously and taking a tradition seriously means taking reading seriously,
and reading isn't just a matter of running one's eyes over the page and being able to say what the
text was about. Reading is a very complex skill in philosophy that needs to be learned. One of the
things that we're going to see is that different traditions compose their texts in very different
literary styles, and so demand of us different kinds of reading. For instance, we're going to be
encountering texts that are written in epic poems. Those require a certain kind of interpretation
and a certain kind of wondering what is left for the reader to understand. Some texts that we're
going to see are kind of dry philosophical treatises offering detailed arguments. Some are highly
evocative, tiny bits of poetry where the reader is left to construct the argument. In each of these
cases, learning how to do philosophy is not just learning how to think, but learning how to read
with these traditions. So while sometimes I am going to lecture to you and just tell you about
what's going on in these texts and offer you my interpretations, very often I'm going to treat you
the way that I treat my own students at Smith or at Sarnath in India or in Melbourne. And what I
like to do with my students is to invite them into my office to sit down at my table with a book open
in front of us and to read together. And I will often invite you into my office in exactly that way
to read with me, because part of what I want to teach you may be even the most important thing
that you will learn over the next 36 lectures is to learn how to read in these various traditions.
In order to do this, it's not important for you only to learn what's said in these great texts,
to say to learn what these people thought, but to learn how to read. Why do I hope that? Because
I hope that your interest in this problem and I hope that your interest in this literature
doesn't end with the conclusion of this course. That would be a tragedy.
So I hope that you are going to be thinking about the meaning of life and reading philosophy
long into the future, even without me being present. And if that's so, you need to learn
the skill of reading. And so the most important thing that I hope you will learn is how to approach
these texts, read them and draw understanding from them. So we'll spend a certain amount of time,
as I like to put it, getting textual. There will be some surprises in this course.
And some of those will be cross-cultural surprises. We're going to begin by visiting classical India
to read the Bhagavad Gita. Then we're going to move to Greece with the work of Aristotle.
These cultures might seem very different from our own, but in each case, we're going to find
accounts of life that's made meaningful through understanding, through reflective thought,
life that's made meaningful through careful self-cultivation. And we're going to find accounts
according to which human happiness is indeed achievable through our own deliberate choices
and our own actions. These accounts are therefore going to seem surprisingly familiar,
even though they're culturally distant. But our third stop is going to be in the
Hebraic tradition, looking at the foundations of religions such as Judaism, Christianity,
and Islam. And you might think that that's where things are going to feel familiar.
We'll be reading the book of Job, though. So you should be prepared that things might be
surprisingly foreign. While abroad we found happiness attainable through our own activities,
at home in Job, happiness might not be in the cards at all. And we might even find
that our own human agency really doesn't matter at all that much at all, certainly much less
than we'll see it mattering in India and Greece. So here's the plan. We're going to embark together
on a global exploration of the question, what is the meaning of life? And my hope is that you
are going to find, as I have found throughout my life, that some of the ideas from some of the most
distant cultures and unexpected sources will seem the most familiar and the least exotic,
and thus open our horizons to appreciating the wisdom and the understanding in these extraneous
cultures. I also hope that you're going to find that some of the ideas we encounter closest to
home, not only biblical ideas, but also ideas in modern Europe and in post-modern Europe,
are going to be some of the most surprising. Some of the ideas that we find most unusual
and difficult to grapple with, and that will remind us that even where we feel most comfortable
in our home cultures and our home traditions, we may be alienated from unaware of currents in
our own thinking, our own thought, and our own orientation, that deep philosophical reflection
can bring to the surface and allow us to problematize. So what's our route going to be?
As I said, we're going to begin in India and in Greece and in the Middle East with the Hebrew
Bible. From there, we're going to move to China and Japan, looking at the Taoist tradition,
the Confucian tradition, and later on the Zen Buddhist tradition. We'll move then on to European
modernity, to the work of people like Hume, Kant, and Mill, and then join the post-modern turn,
when we examine the critical philosophy of writers such as Tolstoy and Nietzsche. We'll
conclude in what I call the post-modern globalized world and its re-engagement with the classical
tradition, looking at the 20th and 21st century at the work of people like Mahatma Gandhi,
the 14th Dalai Lama, and the great Native American philosopher, Lame Deer.
So now a word about the text where we're really going to begin. We're going to start with a
Bhagavad Gita. That will be our very next lecture. It's a poetic text. It's a song. The word Gita
means song, and it comes from ancient India. It's an academic text. It's not an academic text.
It's a beautiful poetic text. Our second text, though, is an academic text. It's, in fact,
a set of lecture notes. The Nicomachean ethics, though it's attributed to Aristotle, is in fact
lecture notes taken by his student, Nicomachus. And then we're going to be reading an old book
from the Hebrew Bible. These are very different texts from one another. We're going to start
elsewhere with the most unfamiliar and allow ourselves to problematize familiarity.
What I'm hoping is that you will see that these three texts offer dramatically different perspectives
and that you're going to see these perspectives repeated in later approaches in different
variations developed in different ways. They will also introduce us to three very different ways
of reading. Reading poetry, reading lecture notes, reading the Bible. And that's going to give us
a sense of the complexity of that task of reading. This will give us a very broad framework that will
play subsequent texts in their context. So I'm hoping that you will join me in our very next lecture
when we open the Bhagavad Gita, the Song of the Lord, and examine Arjuna's fundamental choice
and what it is for us to choose in context. We're starting there not because it's the oldest of our
texts, but because it's got some of the oldest roots and it addresses almost every issue we're
going to think about. It might seem exotic at first, but I think that you're going to find it's familiar
in some very startling ways. So I will see you in the next lecture for the Bhagavad Gita. Thank you very much.
