Welcome back to the second lecture in our series and the first to talk about the Bhagavad-Gita,
the great Indian epic on the nature of choice, on the nature of duty and on our place in
the universe. We're going to begin today with a bit of background on the Bhagavad-Gita by talking
about the story of the Mahabharata, the great epic in the context of which the Bhagavad-Gita occurs.
The term Mahabharata means the great epic of India. Bharat is the Indian name for India,
the Sanskrit and the Hindi name. Mahabharata, the great epic of India. The Bhagavad-Gita is one
section of the Mahabharata. So we'll begin by talking about the big story so that we can
understand the context of the small story. And that will give us the context for the battlefield
that we're going to enter and the tremendous choice that our great hero Arjuna will face,
the choice that will structure the text itself. After discussing the context of Arjuna's choice,
we're going to pay attention to the poignancy of the choice, why the choice is so important,
why the choice is so much like choices that we make every day in our daily lives. What we're
going to see is that the Gita is giving us a very detailed and deep anatomy of the nature of
deep existential choices. And the fact that we are not always conscious that we're not making
deep existential choices doesn't mean that we're not making them. Later on in this course,
for instance, when we read Tolstoy's great book, The Death of Yvonne Ilyich, we're going to see
that the failure to understand the fact that we've been making choices all our lives can in
fact be one of the most devastating realizations to which we can come. But why are we reading the
Bhagavad Gita? Well, as I said, the Bhagavad Gita is part of the great epic, the Mahabharata. Mahabharata
itself wasn't composed by a single author or at a single time. It was composed over about an 800
year period, beginning in about 400 before the common era and reaching its present form in about
400 after the common era. And it's a sprawling many volume epic. The Gita itself is a relatively
small part of that big story. And we believe that it was composed at around the year 100 of the
common era, more or less, and reached stabilization soon after that. The Bhagavad Gita is an
extraordinarily important text in Indian life and in Hindu moral life. Many people call it the Hindu
Bible. That's not strictly true. But it does function in Hindu culture in many of the ways that the
Bible functions in our culture. It's a text that religious Hindus will frequently quote from, a
text that is regularly studied, a text to which people turn from moral and spiritual guidance, a
text that is sort of found prominently in Hindu temples and very much beloved in India. So it's
very, very important text in Indian cultural context. Moreover, the Bhagavad Gita was also the
central resource for the great leader Mahandas or Mahatma Gandhi in developing his own moral theory,
his account of Satyagraha, of insistence on the truth, and of nonviolent resistance to injustice.
Now Gandhi, of course, was in turn deeply influential on the great American leader, Martin
Luther King. And so, even though we don't find King citing the Bhagavad Gita, King through Gandhi is
imbibing a lot of the insights of the Bhagavad Gita. And it can be very instructive to read King's
work in the context of this text. Martin Luther King was not the first American to have been taken
by the Bhagavad Gita. It was also read very closely by American transcendentalists, such as
Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson. They took it as providing the essence of Hindu
thought. And for a long time in American letters, Hinduism was equated with the Bhagavad Gita because
of its influence on the transcendentalists. So even though this is a very old text, and in some
ways it's going to seem very unfamiliar, it's a text that has seeped into our own cultural
context. And we're going to see a lot of ideas that are going to strike you as very familiar,
even though they're raised in unfamiliar contexts. The other thing about the Bhagavad Gita that's
worth emphasizing before we begin is, as I mentioned in our last lecture, it's a verse epic. And so,
part of what we're going to be doing is learning how to read a verse epic, how to read these verses
as more than just poetry, but as articulating philosophical insights and philosophical ideas.
It has a narrative voice. It's a narrative verse. And so, we have a kind of fictional narrator who's
reciting this to a fictional audience. We'll talk about that in a little while. The text itself has
its entire tone set by an opening question, as we will see the question about what happened on this
great battlefield that we'll be visiting very soon. Chapter one poses that question. And the question
is posed to this great seer, Sanjaya, who is the narrator of most of the text. He's going to set
the scene. And in chapter one, he's going to take us to this epic battlefield, a battlefield that is
probably mythological in a battle that's probably mythological, but which is deeply metaphorical,
and tell us about the forces that are arrayed and the dismay of our hero, Arjuna. Now, it's going to
turn out that Arjuna, great general, though he is, and poised on the great, on the brink of this
great battle, is reluctant to fight. Fortunately, however, for him, as we're going to see, it's going
to turn out that his charioteer is the deity, Krishna, the embodiment of the Godhead in Hindu
theology, and so he's a general with a God for a charioteer. And it's Krishna's instruction to
Arjuna that constitutes the bulk of the text itself. In the second through the fifth chapter,
Krishna explains to Arjuna the nature of discipline, the nature of yoga, as we call it in Sanskrit.
In chapters six through seven, Krishna talks about the relationship between yoga and understanding,
or judgment. In the eighth through the eleventh chapters, Krishna introduces the notion of the
divinity and our relationship to the divine aspect of the universe. And this leads very naturally
in 12 and 13 to a discussion of the nature of devotion and the importance of devotion in our
lives. Chapter 14 through 16 address and analyze the nature of the world we live in and the nature
of personality. And the final two chapters 17 and 18 address the nature of faith in the context of
all of this. That's an outline of the text. But now let's look at the bigger context. Let's talk
about the story of the Mahabharata, the great epic of the founding of India, which as I say we should
treat as a kind of mythological text, but also a text rich in metaphor. So the Mahabharata begins
this part of the Mahabharata. We're going to be concerned with the struggle for the ancient kingdom
called Kurukshetra in North India. Now Kurukshetra is probably a legendary kingdom. We have no real
evidence that it ever existed. Maybe it existed or maybe something like it existed, but it's at
least a wonderfully metaphorical battlefield. So we've got a struggle for a kingdom. The struggle
is between two sets of cousins. We have the five sons of Pandu versus the 100 sons of Dhritarastra.
But both Pandu and Dhritarastra are sons of the great legendary King Bharata who in Indian mythic
history is thought of as the founder of India. So that Bharata up here is the founder of India
and he's got these two sons, Pandu and Dhritarastra. Now we get the story of a weirdly dysfunctional
family. Dhritarastra is the older of the two sons and so you would think that he would inherit the
kingdom from Bharata. But unfortunately Dhritarastra was blind and so because of his disability his
younger brother Pandu becomes the king. However it turns out that Pandu has a curse placed upon him
and the curse requires Pandu to be celibate on pain of death and this is a problem because then
Pandu can't produce any heirs to the throne so he does the obvious thing. He retreats to the forest
becoming a forest aesthetic leaving his older brother the blind Dhritarastra as his regent.
Now things get a little bit weird and I don't want to try to go into the biology of all of this
but somehow in the forest five different gods help the celibate Pandu father five sons
and these five sons are called the Pandavas the five sons of Pandu. Now being royal princes the
Pandavas are raised in the court and being raised in the court they're given a spiritual teacher
his name is Bhimsa he's going to figure later on and they're given a martial arts teacher Drona
and it turns out that these five are just better at everything than their hundred cousins the sons
of Dhritarastra. They're better at archery they're better at poetry they're better at everything you
mentioned they just taught the class. The oldest one of these Yudhisthira should be the heir to the
throne because of course his father was the oldest son of Bharata but Duryodhana the oldest cousin
who's been kind of in charge of things wants to rule so you've got the Pandavas on one side
and you've got these hundred sons on the other side and they need to decide who gets to run the
kingdom and so they do what you would probably do in your family to make a decision like this
they roll the dice. Now the stakes go like this the loser has got to go into exile for 13 years
while the winner rules the kingdom and after 13 years you get to come back and have the kingdom
so the Pandavas it turns out lose the role of the dice and they have to go and live for 13 years
and exile in the forest. As our story begins the Pandavas are returning from their 13 years of exile
and they'd like the kingdom on the other hand as you can probably guess Duryodhana who's been
running the kingdom for the last 13 years kind of likes this gig and he would like to stay king
and so they have to fight. Now the battle forms the context of the Bhagavad Gita that's what it's
about and this battle whether historical or mythical or if I'd like to understand it metaphorical
raises very deep questions that are going to be important to us in our investigation of the
meaning of life. Questions about honor, questions about family duty, questions about ritual duty
which is very important in the Indian context and as we will see has its echo in our own kind of
context personal destiny good and evil and even the order of the universe this is a really important
battle in all of these respects. The battlefield is Kurukshetra this mythical place and Vyasa
who is the author of the Mahabharata and Indian legend allows in this context Dhritarastra the
father of the hundred cousins who are ruling the kingdom now to hear a blow-by-blow account
from Sanjaya. Sanjaya is a seer a kind of prophet who can mystically see what's happening on the
battlefield. Mythically the text is giving us a literal battlefield with our real armies and a
huge battle about to take place whose stakes are who's going to rule the kingdom so that's the
mythical situation but allegorically what the Bhagavad Gita presents us is a battle between
convention and higher duty a battle between order and chaos a battle between individual desire
and understanding one's own place in the universe in the broad picture. The Bhagavad Gita invites us
to an inquiry through this epic into the question how can you lead a life detached
from your narrow egoistic desires how can you put those aside and lead a life that's got meaning
beyond that. Remember when we talked about the meaning of life we said meaning always involves
going beyond the particular to something outside in this case we're worried about going beyond
one's own narrow viewpoint. My plan for this particular lecture is that we're going to get
as far as understanding that important question what is it to act in this more meaningful way
but the other thing to see is that the Gita is also despite its epic scale a deeply personal text
it's the story of personal agony in the context of hard choices it's the story of one man Arjuna
who has got legitimately very difficult choices with no clear right answer and high stakes
and so it is really about our own personal relationship to the world in which we live
because as far as the Gita is concerned the central insight we want to draw from this text
is that we live a life in which we are constantly making poignant important choices existential
choices and if we don't understand how to make those choices there's no way of making meaning
out of that life so now what I would like to do is take you to the beginning of the text and to
read the opening verses to set the scene for the battle. Dhritarastra says Sanjaya, remember Sanjaya
is the seer, he says Sanjaya tell me what my sons and the sons of Pandu did when they met
wanting to do battle on the field of Kuru on the field of sacred duty.
Now let's pause on that phrase for a moment that last phrase on the field of sacred duty
he could have just said on the battlefield on the field of Kurukshetra but he didn't
he called it the field of sacred duty and this really indicates the metaphor with which we're
working because this isn't a meant to be a kind of historical war story like D-Day or something
like that it's meant to be a story that has is about a story that illuminates the way in which
we work out our duty and so when we think about the field of sacred duty you and I have never
been to Kurukshetra and probably never will be to Kurukshetra but the point that the Gita is making
in this opening verse is that every one of us does battle every day on the field of sacred duty
that is the domain in which we need to make important moral choices in circumstances of
uncertainty where we really have to look into ourselves to see what we're doing.
Now in the next few verses Sanjaya basically begins the story of the of the battle he says
well your son Juryodhana said to his teacher Drona there's a huge army in front of us the
Pandavas have got a big army but your son had confidence because he'd said I've got a pretty
big army too there's lots of heroes fighting for me lots of great generals and moreover our army's
bigger than their army your son was confident he thought you were going to win and then the battle
really gets ready to start Sanjaya says that lots of conch horns begin to sound from the armies
there's a clashing of spears on shields there are trumpets blaring people are yelling the battle
is about to get going this is where we're going to get the context for the main part of the text
because at this moment Arjuna one of the great generals of the Pandavas asks his charioteer
who by the way just happens as I mentioned earlier to be the god Krishna this is a very very convenient
charioteer to have and I advise that if you ever need a charioteer you get a deity to drive your
chariot asks Krishna to drive his chariot out to the middle of the battlefield and to stop in
between the armies so that he can survey the field this is the moment of choice that constitutes
the rest of the text this is the frame Arjuna is our hero he's the representative of humanity
he is you he is me and he stops with god in the middle of this conflict just before he makes his
crucial choice about what to do with his life to consider his options and so now what I want to do
is to read the discussion of this crucial choice with you it's absolutely beautiful poetry I hope
you're going to enjoy it Arjuna saw them standing there fathers grandfathers teachers uncles brothers
sons grandsons and friends he surveyed his elders and companions in both armies all his kinsmen
assembled together now pause on this for a moment look at what's happening as I said this is a battle
between family members we've got two sets of cousins opposing each other we've got uncles and
grandfathers on each side and Arjuna is recognizing that if he fights if he prosecutes the battle
that he's come to fight he's going to be slaying his own kinsmen he'll be attacking his own family
and that's something that none of us would ever wish to do and Arjuna surely does not here's what he
says next the text reads dejected filled with strange pity he said this Krishna I see my kinsmen
gathered here wanting a war my limbs sink my mouth is parched my body trembles the hair bristles on my
flesh the magic bow slips from my hand my skin burns I can't stand still my mind reels I see
omens of chaos Krishna I see no good in killing my kinsmen in battle what is Arjuna saying here
he's telling us that this idea of launching a battle against his own family seems to him to be an
absolutely terrible thing to do on the one hand is a soldier that's his duty that's what he's come
to do on the other hand as a human being how can he wage war against those he loves I want to
read what Arjuna now says to Krishna again he says how can we ignore the wisdom of turning away
from this evil when we see the sin of family destruction Krishna when the family is ruined
the timeless laws of family duty perish and when duty is lost chaos overwhelms the family
saying this in this time of war Arjuna slumped in the chariot laid down his bow and arrows
his mind tormented with grief I'd like you to notice here that what the Gita is setting up
is a conflict between in this case caste duty and family duty in the hindu classical tradition we
have these four principal castes the brahmana priestly caste the kshatriya or warrior caste
the visha or merchant caste and the shudra or servant caste and Arjuna as a member of the
kshatriya class has a duty to fight he's a soldier now all of this might seem completely irrelevant
to us we don't live in a caste system but nonetheless note that we often have duties peculiar to our
stations in life or to our professions a doctor may have a duty to heal his patients to maintain
confidentiality and so forth a lawyer to defend his client even if he may not agree with the cause
a teacher to teach his students even if he may not like them very much we often have duties that
attend to us in virtue of our station in life these are the kinds of duties that structure a great
deal of our life this is just like caste duty the name for this in sanskrit is svadharma one's own
duty and the idea that the gita is pushing here is that our own svadharma our own personal duty
may sometimes conflict with larger duties larger principles and this is what generates
the really hard existential choices in our lives so this is about personal duty it's about svadharma
and in this case it looks like the right thing to do is to forego the fight it looks like that
should be the right thing to do and let's see arjuna worried about that we read from the text
arjuna sat dejected filled with pity his sad eyes blurred by tears and krishna gave him counsel
now pause for a moment here this is a wonderful moment to think about arjuna has understood
that he's being asked to do something pretty terrible something that he believes is deeply
immoral to wage war against his own family in order to win a kingdom and he knows he's got god as his
charioteer so he asks him what should i do the rest of the baghavad gita is about what krishna
tells him and you would expect that what god will tell him is forget all this violence forget this
kingdom don't fight make peace but here's what krishna says in fact krishna writes why this cowardice
in time of crisis arjuna the coward is ignoble shameful foreign to the ways of heaven don't
yield to impotence it's unnatural in you banish this petty weakness from your heart rise to the
fight arjuna how surprising is that you ask god whether you should fight or make peace and god
says kill your kinsman there's a big surprise here and so we're going to have to explore exactly
why that happens arjuna himself is puzzled by it and he asks krishna how can i fight against
bimsa and drona with arrows when they deserve my worship it's better in this world to beg for
scraps of food than to eat meals smeared with the blood of elders i killed let's reread that verse
it's so beautiful it is better in this world to beg for scraps of food than to eat meals smeared
with the blood of elders i killed so arjuna is emphasizing here that if he fights then no matter
what he gains even if it's a whole kingdom he gains it at the price of having committed this
terrible sin of killing his relatives of doing something one should never do he's torn deeply
between his duty as a warrior and his duty to family his duty to his brothers and his duty to his
elders between the justice of his cause because his cause is just and the imperative to make peace
arjuna's duty as a warrior is to fight his cause is just but in this case that's not enough
because on the other side are his relatives and he has a duty not to harm them just as he has a
duty to fight for his own side and moreover their cause is just too this is a kingdom to which each
side has a legitimate claim and that is so important for the bug of agita our important
our difficult decisions in life aren't decisions between what's obviously right and what's obviously
wrong our difficult decisions emerge when there are good reasons to do each of two things where
those two things are alternatives or good reasons to forbear from doing each of those two things
when those things are alternatives that's arjuna's problem it's a real decision not an easy decision
and arjuna doesn't want the kingdom he notices that greed doesn't justify violence he doesn't
want to as he put it to eat the food smeared with blood so arjuna has to ask himself is he motivated
by greed or is he motivated by the quest for justice is he motivated by honor or is he motivated by
fear of the battle or fear of doing this terrible thing is arjuna motivated by concern for the
immediate context for his own actions or is he can motivated by concern for what's universally
right most of our important choices our existential choices are just like that they're genuine conflicts
not apparent ones they're conflicts between important values and the fact is that even if we
don't notice that our choices involve conflicts like that they do and to fail to take those
conflicts seriously is just to act in bad faith that's something arjuna is not doing he takes the
conflict seriously that's why he's a model for us arjuna's despondency arjuna's terror at this moment
isn't fear of battle it's the unwillingness to do what's wrong it's the unwillingness to commit sin
that's a noble sort of terror but the problem of course is and what makes the thing so poignant
is that paralysis even though it feels noble might arise from taking too narrow and too personal
of you now arjuna's choice as i said might appear outsized in mythic very few of us fight battles
for kingdoms very few of us have deities for charioteers but really as i said it's a very mundane
choice the essential parts are a conflict of duties an uncertainty about what's right a really
complicated social situation being stuck in conflicting social roles a kind of uncertainty
about what one's motivations are and the need to act right now with a lot hanging on it so much
of our lives are like that even the parts that we don't notice so arjuna's choice is our choice
arjuna's problem is our problem the Bhagavad Gita is about us and it presupposes some totally
natural things about the nature of action it presupposes that we are the authors of our own
actions that we can control the consequences of our actions those consequences are often important
and for that reason that whether or not we lead a decent or meaningful life is fundamentally under
our control but given our conflicting roles and duties given the difficulty we have of understanding
our own motivations given the reality of deep value conflict it means that we are often in our
lives making deep existential choices and maybe making them thoughtlessly let's listen to Krishna's
advice at this point Krishna says to arjuna you grieve for those beyond grief and you speak words
of insight but learned men don't grieve for the dead or the living never have I not existed nor you
nor these kings and never in the future shall we cease to exist Krishna is pointing out that there
are long-standing eternal large issues to worry about focus on what is permanent what is stable
but focus on the big context on the other hand he says we shouldn't focus too much on the ephemeral
Krishna continues context with matter makes us feel heat and cold pleasure and pain
arjuna you must learn to endure fleeting things they come and go and this is such an important
part of the message if you want to choose meaningfully notice that we are ephemeral what happens to us
is ephemeral but the universe and the big structure of values endures and that's what matters we should
be focusing in making these choices on that big context Krishna continues indestructible is the
presence that pervades all of this no one can destroy this unchanging reality our bodies are
known to end but the embodied self is enduring indestructible and immeasurable therefore arjuna
fight the battle arjuna should fight because fighting is what realizes the eternal values of
justice of svadharma of his duty as a warrior that's why it's important and we're going to see
how that's going to work out in a minute Krishna continues death is certain for anyone born and
birth is certain for the dead since the cycle is inevitable you have no cause to grieve that is
everybody's going to die the people on this battle are going to die someday all that happened
as a consequence of battle is they're going to die a little bit earlier than they would
don't focus on the small things focus on your duty focus on what you ought to do
look at the big picture you need to act in a detached way detached from those fleeting
things that come and go detached from cold and heat which enslave you by generating desires
by generating this kind of focus on one's own egocentric view get beyond the egocentric view
get to something meaningful but this raises the big question what is it to act in this detached
way what is it to act with genuine discipline what is it to recognize our duty and how can we
reconcile individual choice freedom and attachment with duty that's the topic of our next lecture
it's the topic of the principal part of the Bhagavad Gita in which we're going to examine
three kinds of discipline that Krishna lays out and to demonstrate how they generate the
possibility of freedom genuine choice and a meaningful action I hope you'll join me for that lecture
