Welcome back to the battlefield of Kurukshetra, the field of sacred duty, our second lecture
on the Bhagavad Gita.
Yesterday we introduced the Bhagavad Gita and said it in the context of the big story
of the Mahabharata, and we introduced the idea that the Bhagavad Gita was providing
us with a metaphor, a metaphorical battle that allows us to understand the serious situations
that we face when we make deep choices, important choices, choices that involve conflicts of
duty.
And we saw that it introduced the idea of the importance of developing a kind of detachment
from self, a detachment from desire, a detachment from our senses, a detachment from the short
term if we're going to make meaningful choices that are going to give our lives the kind of
richness and significance that we would like.
We introduced at the very end the importance of a focus on duty and action and the idea
of a focus on what's eternal as opposed to what's ephemeral.
So our plan for today is to go deeper into the text.
We're going to be asking the question, what is a transcendent view of duty?
We're going to talk in a bit more detail about the idea of caste and svadharma, which we
introduced last time, the idea of one's own duty, and we're going to start talking about
how we can think about caste as a metaphor for social role and svadharma as a metaphor
for our role-specific responsibilities.
We are then going to introduce the idea of yoga.
The idea that yoga means discipline, a kind of deep commitment to a certain way of life.
The Bhagavad Gita is going to introduce to us today three kinds of yoga.
The first is going to be karma yoga, the yoga of action.
The second, jnana yoga, the yoga of knowledge.
And finally bhakti yoga, the yoga of devotion.
These three yogas are going to structure the Gita account of how we can actually choose
meaningfully.
And so we're going to begin by examining what Krishna develops as what we could call a transcendent
view of duty, the view of duty that is more than just asking what's expected of me now.
And Krishna emphasizes at the outset the primacy of one's own particular role in life.
We're now going to quote from the Bhagavad Gita.
And remember for a moment before we read this, the context of all of this, we're still in
that chariot, we're still poised between these two opposing armies, Arjuna is trying to
figure out what he ought to do and he's asked Krishna for advice.
And Krishna, the embodiment of divinity, is offering him that advice.
So Krishna says, look to your own duty, do not tremble before it.
Everything is better for a warrior than a battle of sacred duty.
If you fail to wage this war of sacred duty, you will abandon your duty and fame only to
gain evil.
So let's pause on this for a moment.
What does Krishna mean when he says you will abandon your own duty and fame only to gain
evil?
Well, what he means is this.
Arjuna has to face the fact that certain duties come to him in virtue of his particular station
in life.
From a classical Hindu perspective, that's his caste, his caste is a warrior.
But we might understand from our own perspective that sometimes the duties that we have have
to do with our own roles, the occupations we choose, the place we play in a family, the
place we play in an organization, those aren't things to be shirked lightly because our choice
of how to lead our lives in that way is often a choice about what our real duties are.
Krishna continues, people will tell only of your undying shame and for a man of honor,
shame is worse than death.
So Krishna points out that this isn't just a matter of choice.
This is a matter that if you do the wrong thing and you forgo what's expected of you,
you're really living in shame.
Now the next point that Krishna makes is a very deep point indeed and one that people
often miss when reading the Gita.
One also that people often miss when thinking about their lives.
Krishna is going to make a point now about what is within our control and what is not.
There's a lot that we can't control.
We can't control what other people do.
We can't control what the consequences of our actions always are.
We can't be sure that when we act we're going to be successful.
The one thing that we can control is our own action.
And so now Krishna emphasizes that what we need to choose are actions and not worry about
the consequences, about the parts over which we have no control.
So Krishna writes, be intent on action, not the fruits of action.
Avoid attraction to the fruits and attachment to inaction.
Perform actions firm in discipline, relinquishing attachment, be impartial to failure and success.
This equanimity is called discipline.
This is really phenomenal.
What is discipline now?
The discipline is this relinquishing of attachment.
It's giving up attachment to the consequences of actions.
In a metaphor that we might encounter later when we encounter Taoism and Zen, there's
a Taoist saying that you can control your shooting of an arrow.
What you can't control is where the arrow goes after the bow.
So focus on the shooting, not on the target.
Don't be attached to success.
And Krishna is pointing out here that one's obligation is an obligation to act.
If you remain attached to the consequences, you lose the focus on what's truly important.
The second sort of detachment, though, is a really nice one and is an attachment from
the senses.
Krishna says, brooding about sensuous objects makes attachment to them grow.
From attachment, desire arises.
From desire, anger is born.
From anger comes confusion.
From confusion, mindfulness lapses.
From broken mindfulness, understanding is lost.
And from a loss of understanding, he is ruined.
Now what's the point here?
The point here is that when we think about freedom and attachment and we think about discipline,
they come together in a really important way.
The vision of the Gita is that we lose our freedom when we subject our action to immediate
sensory stimulation, when we allow ourselves to be controlled by feelings of heat and cold,
feelings of anger or desire, feelings of desire for food, feelings of aversion.
If we allow ourselves to be controlled by those, the world buffets us about and we give
up our free will to the world.
But if we detach ourselves from those ephemeral causes and focus on our duty, that's when
we gain discipline, that's when we gain control.
And so Krishna writes, a man of inner strength whose senses experience objects without attraction
and hatred, that is we might say somebody who's cultivated that discipline, without attraction
and hatred in self-control finds serenity.
So this kind of serenity that we can achieve through this detachment requires discipline
that allows us to constrain ourselves, to focus on what's important, to eliminate our
being buffeted about from the sensory stuff happening around us.
Without discipline, Krishna continues, he has no understanding or inner power.
Without inner power, he has no peace and without peace, where is joy?
And so Krishna argues that joy doesn't come from enjoying the ephemeral sensory stuff
around us.
Joy comes from shutting that out and from paying attention to what is more important,
what is more transcendent.
On the other hand, Krishna says, if his mind submits to the play of the senses, they drive
away insight as a wind drives a ship on the water.
When he renounces all desires and acts without craving or possessiveness or individuality,
he finds peace.
So this is the first big detachment.
And so we see freedom here as gained through discipline, the discipline that allows ourselves
to shut off our connection to the immediate and the transitory.
Second big idea is the idea of caste and svartharma.
We might say that the idea of svartharma is the central idea of the Bhagavad Gita.
It means, as I said last time in our last lecture, one's own particular duty.
What one is obligated to do in virtue of who one is.
Most classically in India, that's all about caste.
Caste determines what job you have, caste determines how you should behave, how you
should conduct yourself, and so forth.
And Arjun is a kshatriya, member of the warrior caste.
So his svartharma is to fight.
And this structures the story.
But we have to note that svartharma isn't the only kind of dharma, the only kind of
duty that is in play here.
Arjun, for instance, like all of us, has a more general dharma, a more general duty.
His duty is a family member, as a citizen, as somebody who should do good.
And that also structures the story.
Now we could lose all of this by being very literal and tying all of this to a matter
of caste in classical India.
To do that, though, is to lose the fact that the Bhagavad Gita is a great text, what Gautama
called an eminent text.
An eminent text are texts which live through the ages and get read again and again, even
outside of their cultural contexts.
They deserve a modern read.
They deserve to be read in terms of what they can offer us.
And the Gita does more than almost any other.
We indeed each, as I emphasized last time, have our own svarthamas.
We have them in virtue of the jobs we occupy, the vows we take, the promises we make to
each other, our social roles, and so forth.
And we also have general dharmas, general duties that we have just in virtue of being
human beings or being citizens of our countries.
And sometimes we find these in conflict.
Our hardest choices in life are when duties conflict.
The Gita is about the conflict between our particular duties and our more general duties,
and about how to make our lives meaningful by understanding what our duties are and when
to pay attention to our particular duty as opposed to our general duty.
Now, why does yoga matter in all of this?
And why do we care about it?
First of all, let's talk for a moment about the word yoga, just as we talked about the
word svarthama.
The word yoga means originally, yoke, the kind of thing that oxen wear when they're
pulling carts.
So yoke, in this sense, means a kind of discipline.
So the word yoga, in its original sense, doesn't mean doing postures on the floor, it means
a discipline.
Hatha yoga, the bodily yoga that people practice a lot of the United States, is one kind of
discipline, but far from the only kind.
And in particular, the kind of discipline that we intend by yoga is the discipline that
permits us to accomplish things.
And we're certainly familiar in our ordinary lives with discipline being the kind of thing
that allows us to accomplish.
Anybody who has practiced a musical instrument knows that yolking yourself to that instrument
for practice sessions, disciplining yourself, enables you to become a good musician.
Anybody who has practiced a sport knows that yolking yourself to the practice, yolking
yourself to training, that kind of discipline is what's necessary for excellence.
In this case, Krishna is emphasizing to Arjuna, when we talk about the yoga of action, that
discipline involves restraining ourselves from desires.
Because the idea in the Gita is that desire is caused in us from the outside through contact
with sensory objects.
I see the chocolates in the window and I want them.
I see the nice car and I want it.
I see the advertisement and it causes me to desire things.
So desire is something on this view that happens to us, not something that we do.
And the way that we free ourselves from those external influences so that we can act on
our own is to discipline ourselves as the key to freedom, as the key to attaining the
freedom from being driven by transitory impulses that come onto us from outside.
And so the central teaching of the Gita, the central teaching is that liberation, genuine
human freedom comes first through discipline, not release from discipline.
We become free by being disciplined.
We don't try to free ourselves from discipline.
So there are three kinds of discipline in the Gita, three kinds of yoga and these represent
three aspects of life and it will be important as we work through them to see them not as
alternatives to each other.
We don't invoke one discipline rather than another.
But it's three aspects of a complete life and they're presented in order in the Gita
from the most mundane form to the most transcendental.
The idea is that a meaningful life is a life disciplined in these three ways.
The first is karma yoga, the yoga of action.
The word karma by the way means action originally, it can mean the consequences of action as
well but it means action.
The karma yoga is the yoga of action.
The second is nyanayoga, the discipline of knowledge.
The word nyanayoga is in fact the Sanskrit root of the English word to know knowledge.
And finally the third discipline is the discipline called bhakti yoga, the discipline of devotion.
We're going to begin just as the Gita does with karma yoga, the discipline of action.
Arjuna begins this discussion by asking a fairly obvious question.
Why should we even be worried about mundane action, especially when it looks really terrible?
I mean why is Krishna telling him to act?
Why not just forget about that?
Why not keep your eye on the transcendent?
Arjuna asks, if you think understanding is more powerful than action, why Krishna, do
you urge me to this horrific act?
I mean after all if knowledge is what's important, why in the world should Krishna be worried
so much about this action?
Now Krishna immediately reminds Arjuna that there's a reason for that.
We live in a world and it's a world where we cannot forbear from acting, a world where
action is essential.
Krishna says, earlier I taught the twofold basis of good in this world, for philosophers
discipline knowledge, for men of discipline action, that action is part of the twofold
basis.
Krishna says, a man cannot escape the force of action by abstaining from actions.
He doesn't obtain success just by renunciation.
No one exists for an instant without performing action, however unwilling every being is forced
to act by the qualities of nature.
This is a very nice insight.
We might think that in times like this our choices are between action and inaction, that
Arjuna's choice is either to fight or just not to fight.
But Krishna is making it clear that our choices in life are always choices between actions.
There's no such thing as not acting.
For Arjuna not to fight is for Arjuna to act, just to act in a different way, to act by
putting his weapons down as opposed to using them.
So inaction is never a choice.
The only question is how to act wisely.
And now Krishna tells Arjuna, he says, when his senses are controlled but he keeps recalling
sense objects to mind, he's a self-deluded hypocrite.
That is, we should not be thinking even in action about immediate transitory things.
Krishna continues, when he controls his senses with his mind and engages in discipline of
action with his faculties of action, detachment sets him apart.
So the point here is that action is always necessary.
We can never escape it.
But you have to act in the right way.
And one way of understanding this is to think of actions as the Gita does as a sacrifice,
as a ritual.
That is, whenever we act, we act by taking seriously our obligations to the world and
think of our actions as something we do in virtue of those obligations that we do for
the world and to choose in that way as opposed to grabbing the chocolate because we just
happen to see it.
And so Krishna says to Arjuna, perform necessary action.
It's more powerful than inaction.
Without action, you even fail to sustain your body.
After all, Krishna is pointing out, you have to even eat.
That requires action.
He continues, action imprisons the world unless it's done as a sacrifice.
Freed from attachment, Arjuna, perform action as a sacrifice.
So let's sum up this discussion of karma yoga.
First thing the Gita is pointing out is inaction is no option.
Inaction itself is a kind of action.
And so that if we try to just withdraw from the sacred field of duty to just go someplace
else when action is called for, that's both ineffective and it's hypocritical because
we're simply abdicating our responsibility to act by acting.
But if action is to be meaningful, it has to be done as a sacrifice, motivated by higher
goals and duties, not motivated by immediate results, done for its own sake, that's the
central idea of the discipline of action.
Second form of discipline is nyanayoga, the discipline of knowledge.
Because action is one form of yoga, one form of discipline, but it's not enough.
It's not enough to generate a fully meaningful life.
Because if we only focus on our actions, what we end up with is an unreflective life, a one
dimensional life, a life that's not informed by careful thought about what we're doing.
And so if action is to be truly effective and to be truly meaningful, it has to be supplemented
by knowledge because it's that knowledge that allows us to act properly and to act
in a way that is deeply motivated and deeply valuable.
So one way to put this is that there's a deep relation between understanding and action.
Action without understanding is shallow.
It's knowledge that deepens and enriches our actions.
But knowledge without action is kind of pointless.
So let's hear what the Gita says about this.
Again in Krishna's words, Krishna says to Arjuna, a man who sees inaction in action
and action in inaction has understanding among men, disciplined in all action he performs.
The wise say a man is learned when his plans lack constructs of desire, when his actions
are burned by the fire of knowledge.
Now there's a lot of metaphor here.
The point though is that the point of action is to deepen our understanding of the world,
to give us the kind of insight that allows us to continue to behave meaningfully.
Knowledge is what allows that deep insight and allows us to transcend the world in which
we ordinarily act.
It allows us to enjoy contemplation, to be able to contemplate and to understand the
world is something that requires a foundation in action but a foundation in knowledge as
well.
And so to continue the metaphor the Gita says, again we have Krishna's voice speaking.
Just as a flaming fire reduces wood to ashes, Arjuna, so the fire of knowledge reduces all
actions to ashes, a man of faith intent only upon this knowledge, his senses well restrained
will obtain it and once he has obtained it he soon reaches supreme peace.
Is it of what you want is a liberation from being buffeted about, the ability to understand
and to contemplate the world and to live at the world in peace and not effortfully.
The way to do that is to gain deep understanding.
That's what allows everything else to kind of shrink in significance and to allow us to
understand the big picture.
And so action that's guided by knowledge, unlike action that's guided by desire, unlike
unreflectively reaching for the chocolates or responding to the advertisement, action
that's guided by knowledge and reflection, Krishna points out to Arjuna is not binding,
it doesn't bind us and enslave us but it liberates us and this is the way the discipline is liberative.
So again we have Krishna's voice speaking to Arjuna, Arjuna, actions do not bind the
man who announces his actions through yoga, who severs doubt by means of knowledge and
who is in full possession of himself.
You are with this sort of knowledge, sever this doubt that rests in your heart, Arjuna,
this doubt of yours that arises from ignorance.
Stand up then and stand upon yoga.
What does all of this say about nyanayoga?
Well, the first thing is that wise action, given that action is necessary, demands knowledge.
And one reason for that is that knowledge is what enables us to make the right decisions,
to understand what's important as opposed to unimportant, what's permanent and long
lasting as opposed to what's ephemeral, what is part of our duty versus what's part of
our desire so that Arjuna can know whether he's acting from duty or acting from greed,
for instance.
Another reason is that knowledge allows us to cut off desires and as we've seen for
the Gita, desire is always binding.
It causes us to act because of forces outside of our control.
And for this reason, to be liberated, one needs free actions, actions grounded in knowledge
and the discipline of knowledge.
That's two of our yogas so far.
We've talked about karma yoga and nyanayoga, the yoga of action and the yoga of knowledge.
Now we turn to the third yoga, bhakti yoga or the yoga of devotion.
So what is the meaning of devotion in this sense, in the context of the Bhagavad Gita?
The meaning of devotion in this sense is a surrendering of our own goals to the order
of the cosmos.
That's a big idea.
But the idea is very much this.
When we think about devotion, it doesn't mean saying lots of prayers, lighting lots of candles,
engaging in lots of prostrations or anything like that.
Because the fundamental object of devotion here is the cosmos as a whole, the context
in which our lives are led.
And so the idea of devotion is taking my own ends, my desire for the chocolate, my desire
for the new car, my desire to teach the class I've always wanted to teach.
And to ask myself instead, what's my role in the cosmos as a whole?
How can I align my goals with the goals of all of those around me and what's happening?
And so to surrender my own egocentric desires and to align my wishes with the desires of
the greater whole is what's meant by devotion here.
Now devotion then requires a special kind of mindfulness.
The mindfulness that devotion requires is a mindfulness of one's own place in the world
and of a relationship to the whole.
This idea of mindfulness is really important.
It requires it from moment to moment.
I ask myself, as Arjuna asked himself, am I acting from greed or am I acting from duty?
It asks us, is this particular thing that I'm about to do egocentrically motivated or
is it altruistically motivated?
Am I acting in conflict with others or in harmony with others?
And this notion of devotion then requires mindfulness.
The mindfulness requires knowledge.
And that's why the yoga of knowledge is the foundation of the yoga of devotion.
Let's hear the Gita now.
We're way up in chapter eight talking about devotion.
Again the voice is Krishna's voice.
Krishna writes, one should close down all of the doors of the body and keep one's mind
within one's heart.
One should establish one's breath within the head and remain fixed in yoga concentration.
For a man who always remembers me, who keeps his thoughts only on me and on nothing else,
for an ever disciplined yogin like this, I am easy to find.
This is personified in Krishna so we can use that first person pronoun, me.
But Krishna as this embodiment of the cosmos stands for the entire cosmic order.
And so the real idea is keep in mind the larger order of things.
Keep in mind your place in that order.
And if you do that and act mindfully of that, then your actions will be most meaningful,
most fruitful, have the best kinds of consequences.
And so it's these three kinds of yoga, these three kinds of discipline that allow a life
of action, the life that Arjuna leads as a warrior, the life that I lead as a teacher,
the life that you might lead as a carpenter, as a doctor, as a lawyer, as a soldier, as
a policeman, as a dentist, a life in which we are always performing actions.
To be a coherent life, to be an integrated life, and to be a rational life.
This is terribly important because we might think that if we lead lives of actions, all
we need to do is to act properly, to act for the right reasons, to act in the right way.
And indeed, as we've seen in this articulation of the yoga of action, of karma yoga, that's
really important.
But the point of the Gita is that action needs to be informed by deep knowledge, by reflection.
And for that reason, a discipline of reflection, a commitment to gaining understanding, a commitment
to thinking deeply about things is necessary in order to inform our action.
And again, you might think, OK, that's all that's important.
I've got to be reflective, I've got to be thoughtful, I've got to be knowledgeable,
and then I've got to be disciplined in my action.
But the Gita's point is that's not enough either.
There's a kind of devotion necessary, if this is going to be truly meaningful, that devotion
doesn't have to be specifically theistic, that devotion doesn't have to be manifested
in religious ritual.
But that devotion requires a kind of subordination of my own goals, my own interests, my own
direction in life, to the direction, the goals and interests of those around me, of the larger
holes in which I figure.
And that is the discipline of devotion, which enriches and enhances the lower two disciplines
while depending upon them.
It enriches them by giving them the context that makes them make sense.
It depends upon them because it's the kind of mindfulness and the kind of restraint that
is cultivated in those two that makes it possible to be devoted in this sense in the first place.
And the final thing that I think is really important to take away from these chapters
of the Bhagavad Gita is this idea of discipline as the key to freedom.
Very often in our contemporary life, we think of discipline and freedom as opposites of
one another, as antithetical to one another.
If we're in a situation where we're subject to a discipline, a military discipline or
a corporate discipline or the discipline of the classroom, we long to be free from it,
to do just whatever we want, thinking that if I can just do what I want, respond to things
that happen, that would be true freedom.
The insight of the Gita here is that that's not freedom at all.
What that does is to give up control of my life to ephemeral forces outside of me, that
freedom is self-control, and self-control is achieved only by discipline.
Now, in our very next lecture, our third and final lecture on the Gita, we're going to
explore how all of this forms a foundation for a more general account of the relationship
between our individual lives and the entire cosmic order.
I hope you'll come back and join me for that next lecture.
Thank you very much.
