Hi, nice to see you again.
In this lecture, we will be completing our discussion of the Bhagavad Gita.
I'd like to begin with a brief review of what we've covered in the last two lectures.
We've discussed the notion of Svadharma, or one's own duty, the obligations one has
in virtue of one's own station in life, one's occupation, one's particular place in a social
position, and the way that that can sometimes conflict with what we see as our broader duties,
as well as with our individual desires and inclinations.
As we saw in the previous two lectures, the Gita's answer to how we make these
tremendous existential decisions that we find ourselves facing every day, whether we're aware
of it or not, is to develop a kind of freedom, but a freedom that's conditioned by discipline,
that's conditioned by the kind of discipline that we refer to as yoga, this word which has its root,
same root as the word yoke, to be tied to something, to be bound to something.
The Gita, as we saw, distinguishes three kinds of yoga, three distinct kinds of discipline,
karma yoga, the yoga of action, nyanayoga, the yoga of knowledge, and bhakti yoga, the yoga of devotion.
We saw that these are not alternatives, but represent three dimensions of discipline,
three dimensions of the ways in which we need to discipline ourselves in order to achieve
the freedom from external influences, from desires, that actually make meaningful action possible.
The consequence of this, we saw, was a location of value at a kind of cosmic level, value at a level
that represents true values rather than momentary things, a focus on what's permanent,
what's immutable, what's important, instead of a focus on what's ephemeral, what comes and goes,
and what's not so important to us.
Now, I'm hoping that you're really enjoying our discussion of the Bhagavad Gita, and that you're
discussing this, enjoying this text. I find this to be an extraordinarily beautiful text,
though also, of course, a very difficult text. The beauty, of course, comes from the poetry,
and I'm hoping that as we read through this poetry, some of that beauty is coming through,
despite the fact that we're compelled to read it through translation. As a translator myself,
I know how difficult it is to read a gorgeous text in a language that's not the language in which
it's written, but I think that the beauty does shine through, and I hope that you appreciate that.
But what makes the text difficult is the same thing as what makes it beautiful.
What makes it difficult is the fact that so much of the meaning is conveyed metaphorically
through these kinds of poetic images in these very brief verses, and that it's left to us as the
readers to unpack those metaphors, to discuss them, and to bring them into contact with our daily
life. Now, as I said at the outset, one of my principal goals for you, one of my principal
goals as a teacher always, and indeed as a scholar, is to be teaching this craft of reading and to
practice this craft of reading. The reason for that is really simple. The legacy that we have been
bequeathed by these tremendous literary traditions from Asia, from Europe, from North America, from
all over the world is a legacy of texts, and if we're going to be able to show respect for that
legacy and to really inherit and take ownership of that legacy and to learn from it, we need to
learn to read those texts. And so, for that reason, we're spending a lot of time being textual,
and I'm hoping that that is both a pleasant thing for you and an important thing for you.
So, now let's talk about our plan for today. We have already talked a great deal about what I
like to call the Gita's mundane account of the meaning of life. That's the account in terms of
the three yogas, in terms of discipline, in terms of recognition of Svat Harma, and so forth.
Today, we'll be completing that, but moving to this tremendous moment in the Gita, what I call the
second climax, and that is the one that is usually referred to as the Theophany, the revelation of
God, where Krishna reveals himself to Arjuna in his divine manifestation, and so reveals the nature
of divinity itself. The first climax, of course, happens at the very beginning of the book, and
that is where Arjuna takes his chariot with Krishna at the helm to the position between the two armies
and engages in this questioning born of despair. But the second climax, the climax that will
reach today is this great Theophany. And in this Theophany, Krishna discusses the nature of unity
with divinity and how that issues in unity with the universe. Our task is going to be to see how
that union with divinity and consequent union with the universe confers meaning on life. So we'll
be talking about karma or action, union with divinity, purpose in life, and the final message
of the Bhagavad Gita. So let's begin by returning to the Gita's mundane account of the meaning of
life, the temporal account. And let's notice that meaning in this case is actually located on two
axes. The first axis is that of disinterested individual duty. And we saw that disinterested
individual duty has two complementary and almost contradictory characteristics that
generate these kinds of moral tensions and existential choices. On the one hand, individual
duty is highly personal. My duty may be very different from your duty. A duty as a teacher
is very different from the kind of duty that a doctor, a lawyer, a dentist, or a carpenter
might have. So in that sense, it's very personal. But in another equally important sense, duty has
to be depersonalized. I can't be thinking about my duty egocentrically. I can't be thinking about
my duty in terms of what I desire or what I want to do. And I can't even be thinking about it
in terms of the consequences of my actions, so much as worrying about what I am obligated to do.
And in that sense, it's the duty that anybody would have in my position. And so it is depersonalized
even though it's also personal. The other piece, the other axis, is the axis of freedom and discipline.
And that is a complex axis we've seen because while the Gita is urging us to attain an important
kind of freedom that allows us to make meaningful choices, that's not the freedom of arbitrariness,
of doing whatever we want, of following our desires. In fact, it's a freedom from desire,
because on the model of the Gita, desire also always is heteronymous. It always involves us
being driven by factors that come from outside of us, by things that we want or things that we
don't want that repel us. So true freedom is a freedom to put all of that aside, to set aside
our desires and to act according to our better selves, a freedom to act instead of a freedom
to do whatever we want. This freedom we've seen is secured by this triple discipline,
the discipline of karma yoga, jnana yoga, and bhakti yoga, the yoga of action,
the yoga of knowledge, the yoga of devotion. This gives rise to disinterested action
guided by reflective knowledge and reflective knowledge that locates our value in devotion
at what's relevant about our own action and our own thought for the world as a whole,
not just for us as individuals. That's the mundane account of meaning of life, the mundane
account of enlightened action. Now we turn to the transcendent account, the great theophany.
As I said, the theophany is usually considered the great second climax of the Bhagavad Gita.
At this moment, Krishna, who as we've said is the embodiment of divinity for the Hindu tradition,
reveals himself not as a pretty wise charioteer, but rather as that embodiment, as divinity,
as the entire universe itself embodied in this single being. And in doing so, what we're going
to see is that Krishna isn't so much revealing himself as divine, but rather himself as identical
to the universe, and therefore revealing the divinity and the significance of the universe
as a whole. And so what this is going to do is to allow us to ground an account of how we can
connect our individual action as human beings to the cosmos as a whole, and hence to divinity,
and hence to give this transcendent meaning to each action we perform, to each thought we think,
to each word we speak. So let's begin by explaining how Krishna manifests this idea that the entire
universe is divine. Before we look at the text itself, I want to talk a bit about how we might
want to read it, because as I said earlier, we're entering maybe the most metaphorical part of the
text, the text that requires of us the most interpretative work in order to make these very
distant Indian metaphors make sense for us. There are two ways that the divinity of the universe
can be taken that can be very useful to us. One way that many people take this is to say
that when Krishna reveals himself as the universe, he's revealing that there's a hidden spiritual
dimension to the universe that beyond the ordinary day-to-day things we see, tables and chairs and
cows and pigs and cars and trucks and dogs and chickens, beyond all that ordinary stuff hidden
behind it, there's a spiritual reality that's accessible to us if only we discipline ourselves
through the three disciplines of the Gita. That's one way to understand it, and that's useful,
but I honestly don't think it's the deepest way. The deepest way to understand this is to recognize
that what Krishna is doing in manifesting the identity of divinity with the universe
is to point out that the universe itself is already infused with a kind of spirituality
and significance without looking any further. Let me explain what I mean by that. I think this is
in a large measure, the deepest message of the Gita if we take it seriously. We often think
that we live in this kind of mundane work-a-day world which by itself is kind of trashy meaningless
ephemeral and so forth, but that somehow beyond it, if only we were wise enough, if only we were
deep enough, if only we were good enough, we'd see a kind of luminous spirituality that is somehow
hidden from most of us. That's a kind of depressing model of our lives because it makes everything
that's real and around us seem kind of second rate and that we're kind of holding our breath
for the real thing. One way of understanding what the Gita is saying in the second dimension
is to say that the universe itself is already infused with meaning and spirituality. We only
have to see it for what it is to see it as right and then we can understand why our own being,
our own action, our own concerns are already significant that we don't need to look beyond
for the significance. So now let's turn to the text itself. It's absolutely lovely today.
So we're now in chapter 9 and Krishna is revealing himself to Arjuna in all of his majesty
and you've got to kind of imagine this as kind of kaleidoscopic and psychedelic,
lots of color, lots of sound, this overwhelming majestic revelation and so Krishna says in the
midst of all of this, I am woven into all this world yet my form remains unmanifest. All beings
find their support in me whereas I do not depend on them at all. I am the way and the support,
the Lord and the witness. I am your dwelling, your refuge and your heart's friend. I am the
world's origin and its dissolution, its stability, its treasure, its imperishable seed. Now I'd like
to pay careful attention to these verses because they're very important. In particular, I want to
call your attention to the last two lines of that first verse because reading them closely
will really help us to understand this text and how to read a text like this.
All beings find their support in me whereas I do not depend on them at all. Because it's pointing
out that on this view, everything in the universe, all creatures, us, the chickens, the birds, the worms,
but also you can think the cars, the trucks, everything that exists, exists in the context
of this massive cosmic hole that where they get their importance is as parts of this whole thing.
Let's think about this by way of a kind of boring analogy. If you look at say a piece of a car, say
a gear shift or a knob on the dashboard, by itself it's not very important. It absolutely has no
significance at all. But it's part of a whole car, right? And all of these things exist in the car
and that gives us, it gives it its point. In the same way Krishna is saying, everything we look at
has a place in the entire universe and it's that location that gives it significance. We don't want
to say it the other way around though. We don't want to say somehow that the entire car is present
in the gear shift or in the knob on the radio. It's not that those things become terribly important
in themselves and that the car gains its importance from those pieces. Instead, the pieces gain their
importance from the whole. Similarly, this line is saying that we each gain significance in our
lives through our relationship to the whole, but it's the whole that's the source of meaning.
Krishna continues, I myself radiate this heat. I withhold the rain and then I release it. I am
immortality and mortality both. Arjuna, I am being and non-being both. What does it mean? Even
natural phenomena, the weather, heat waves, clouds, rain, death, all of these things. What exists now,
what existed before but no longer exists, non-being, what will exist in the future but doesn't exist
yet, it's all part of a whole. And this adds a temporal dimension to the meaning of life. It
means that we gain our significance not only through our relationship to what happens to be
actual at the moment, not only to being but also to non-being, also in relationship to the past that
is no more, to the future that is yet to come. So a consequence of this that's extraordinarily
important is that if we begin to understand our actions, coming back to karma yoga, coming back
to jnana yoga for the understanding, we can understand ourselves as acting in a way that
dedicates everything we do to playing our part in the whole. And that is the notion of bakta yoga
or devotion. So that whole mundane account of the meaning of life is getting its grounding
in this transcendental account of the meaning of life because by understanding that each of our
lives has its place in this cosmic whole, we understand why each of those lives has significance.
Now, the Gita makes this point more explicit in the next verse I'd like to read, which is verse 27.
Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever offering you make, whatever you give, whatever austerity
you perform, arjuna, do it all as an offering to me. If we take this very literally, we end up
with this kind of strange theism where we're each supposed to be believing that Krishna is our God
and performing these ritual actions, that's not what the Gita is about at all. At least it's not
how we want to understand it if we want to learn anything about our present life from it. Rather,
it's a suggestion that whenever we act, whenever we think, whatever we do, we want to do
in consciousness of our role in the larger holes of which we are parts, family holes, corporate holes,
urban holes, national holes, universal holes. Those are the holes that give our lives significance
and only by thinking of each action in relation to those can we make our lives more than minor
temporary distractions in the history of the universe. Now, at this moment, we get the theophany
itself, this fabulous, poetic representation of what the realization of divinity actually is like.
So Krishna now says, Arjuna, look at the forms that I take, hundreds of them and thousands of them,
so many divine forms, so many colors and so many shapes. Look at them all, gods of heaven,
gods of light, terrifying gods, the celestial twins and the storm gods. Look at these wonders,
Arjuna, so many, never seen before. And then Sanjayi interjects, because remember, he's relating all
of this to King Vrishashtara. Oh my king, thus he spoke, Krishna, the great Lord of Yoga, who is also
Vishnu, and thus he unveiled to Arjuna his supreme majestic form. Krishna in this form was a great
wonder to see. His divinity was an endless profession of wonders. There, Arjuna saw the
entire world, the whole world in all of its infinite manifestations, drawn together as one in the body
of the god of gods. So what we have here is Krishna giving you this poetic representation, or the
Gita giving you this poetic representation of what the realization is like. You might think this is
really strange, that this is really weird, this is really Indian, but you know what, we can make
really good sense of this. How many of you, for instance, have seen the images from the Hubble
Telescope? They're absolutely gorgeous, they're psychedelic, they're multi-form, they're wondrous,
there's so many things happening in these galaxies and nebulae, and the beauty of the lights that
are revealed in the universe. How many of you have seen even a very close-up picture of a beautiful
flower or an insect, and you see all of the detail that's there? How many of you have considered the
complex web of interdependence between human beings on the planet? It's incredibly rich, it's
incredibly beautiful, even the economy, even when it crashes, is revealed in this kind of beauty of
interconnectedness and complexity. What the Gita is doing is asking us to pay attention to that scale,
to pay attention to this vast interconnected unity, to pay attention to the cosmos as a unified
whole, where each phenomenon is interdependent, where each phenomenon has its own kind of beauty,
and where each phenomenon has an identity that in a certain way transcends our own individuality,
but also its individual context. Its identity, its beauty, and its significance is all gained
in the context of this vast whole of which each piece is a part. Our lives, the lives
whose meaning we're concerned with in this particular course, are each parts of this very
vast cosmic order, and as the Gita emphasizes, that order far exceeds our comprehension. It's too
vast and splendid for any of us to imagine and for any of us to see as a whole, but yet we can
know that it's all out there. We can know that we are part of such a vast, beautiful, complex,
interdependent whole. And that information alone, that insight alone, but more than that insight,
that experience should lead us to see that in acting significantly, we act in that recognition,
we act as components of that greater whole. There's a nice line from a recent Indigo Girl song
about Virginia Woolf that goes, each life has its place. And I think that's a lovely way to think
about what the Gita is telling us here. Even though the cosmos is vast, each life has its place,
and that place is something that we need to recognize by recognizing our Svat Harma,
by recognizing our connection to a larger whole, and by recognizing that whatever is
significant about our lives derives from that place in the larger whole. Now,
each of us is actually familiar with this kind of insight in a lot of different ways,
though it often eludes us, I think, moment to moment. So suppose, for instance, that you are an
officer in a large company, or in a military organization, or in a government agency, or even
a member of a sports team. You know that in order for your actions to be useful, in order for your
contribution to make sense, in order for you to advance the goals of the whole of which you're
apart, and not just to be getting in the way, you need to be aware of the role that you play.
And it's important that in doing that, you don't try to play somebody else's role,
that you become aware of your, as we put it in Sanskrit, Svat Harma, your own duty. But
that you also, as we've said earlier, depersonalize it. That you take care to perform the actions you
ought to perform, letting go of the consequences. As the Gita said early in the text, you know,
focus on the action, but detach yourself from the consequences. The consequences you can't control.
What other people in the organization do with what you've done, you can't control. What the
organization happens to the organization as a whole, you can't control. But you know that you
can be a good team player, and that you can contribute. And that's what makes your participation
meaningful. The Gita is making exactly that kind of point with regard to our role in the cosmos
as a whole. We are members of a really big team, a really big organization. It's the only organization
that matters. The totality is all that matters. And anything that matters within it, matters only
because of its place in that grander whole. And so, if we care about our own lives, and they're
being meaningful, we need to focus on where we fit in. Returning to the text itself in the Theophany.
Krishna says, I am time, the agent of the world's destruction, now grown old and set in motion to
destroy the worlds. That, by the way, is one of my favorite lines in the entire text. Even without
you, and of course Krishna is addressing Arjuna here, all of these warriors arrayed in opposing
battle formation will cease to exist. Remember where we are. We're still on the battlefield. We're
still in Kurukshetra. We are still on the field of sacred duty. This whole discourse that we've
been talking about over these last few lectures is all an answer to this deep question, what should I
do? Should I fight? That's Arjuna's question. And now Krishna is bringing that back to the context of
decision. I'm time grown old, he says. The whole universe is kind of extended in time and in history.
You're paying attention, Arjuna, to these particular warriors arrayed in these hostile ranks,
the ones that you're worried about. But whole planets are going to disappear.
Think about this for a moment. Our own earth will indeed cease to exist. I hope this isn't news to
you. The sun will burn out. The earth will grow cold. It'll all be gone. That's the context that
we live in. Our task is to find meaning in our lives in that global context. So Krishna is saying
to Arjuna, you're paying attention to something very local to the lives of these beings who are
going to be measured in decades. Pay attention to the fact that the life of which you're a part,
the life of your culture is measured in centuries. The life of our world is measured in millennia.
And the life of our universe is measured in billions of years. I'm time grown old.
So if you're really trying to think about the meaning of your life, look at the big picture.
You're in a battle now. Putting your bow down won't stop the battle. It won't make these people
live forever. It won't bring about justice. It won't bring about injustice. Think about the
action that's required of you in this particular circumstance and think about it in this large
context. The whole Gita is devoted to this dialectic, this particular circumstance,
yours Fadharma, and this grand context in which your circumstance figures.
So in the theophany, the Gita represents the universe as this vast organic unity.
The beauty of that is that that unity is represented itself as divine, not as something
that stands between us and the divine. This isn't a vision of a transcendent God and an imminent
universe of a universe that itself is meaningless, but gains its meaning from something beyond it.
Remember when we talked about the notion of meaning, we're always talking about the reference
of something local to something beyond. You might have thought that that reference would be achieved
in the Gita by the reference of an imminent universe to a transcendent deity, but we've seen
that's not what happens. Instead, what we're looking at is the reference of an individual life
in an individual context to a universe which is already divine, already transcendent, already
a locus of meaning, and the reference comes from context. And this means that even though we might
not recognize this and in bad faith we might deny it, our lives are already divine. This is the sense
in which the Gita and in which Hindu views in general say that human beings are already a
part of the divinity. And we recognize that meaning, the meaning of our lives, when we recognize that
fact. Because the meaning of our lives is given in this divine context, that meaning emerges
from that identity. And that's why we can say that what the Gita offers us is a vision of a kind of
union with the Godhead, a union with divinity through a union with the universe. Because we are
part and parcel of the universe, we are part and parcel of the divine. And this allows us to
depersonalize. This allows us to say, I'm just a piece in this. What I happen to desire, what I
happen to want isn't so important. It's what this broader whole has as an interest that's important.
We began with a question, how can a finite life be meaningful in an infinite universe? And we
turn to the Bhagavad Gita. That question became really urgent for the Gita because of the nature
of moral conflict. And it became urgent because we saw that deep moral conflict and existential
conflict is built right into the human condition. The Gita offered us a unique vision of this
as determined by the dialectic between sensual bondage and narrow self-interest and freedom
born of discipline. We've finally seen that union with this infinite universe and source of value
is what makes it possible for us to be free, non-conflicted, and to be meaningful.
None of this means that we're to withdraw from the world and to become hermits or to only look
at something transcendent. But rather it's a message that encourages fully engaged action within
the world. Arjun is going to pick up his bow and fight. As the Gita says, works of sacrifice,
of gift-giving, of austerity should not be abandoned. In fact they should be performed
because of course we're already divine. Sacrifice, gift-giving, austerity, these things purify
men of insight. But while such actions should be performed, one should abandon attachment to
them as well as their fruit. Arjuna, this is my final judgment on this. So this engagement,
the engagement with the world that the Gita is urging, is an engagement with the world that's
detached from ego involvement and that's why it is so globally meaningful. In a few more lectures
we're going to be entering the book of Job and we're going to see there a very different vision
of the relationship between divinity and the world and a very different vision of what the
nature of the meaning of life is. In fact a much more pessimistic vision. But for now what we've
seen is that for the Gita we have a vision in which our action is inevitable but attachment is not
and attachment to consequences is not. This attachment arises from a failure to see our own
unity and to see our unity with the universe as a whole. In our very next lecture we're going to be
moving from this kind of vision of transcendence and its relationship to the imminent world
to Greece where our life is going to be much more contextualized in the here and now.
So I hope you'll join me in the next lecture for a discussion of Aristotle and the Nicomachean
Ethics. Thank you very much.
