Welcome back. Good to see you again. So we've completed our discussion of the Bhagavad Gita,
and we're now going to move on to a very different text. But we're still asking the
question, what is the meaning of life? What is it to lead a meaningful life? I don't have to tell
you that the ancient world is not a monolithic thing. There are a lot of ancient cultures,
and there are many voices, and these voices come from very diverse cultures. So far we've
been focusing on voices from classical India. But we're now going to move from India back to
the West, getting a bit closer to home. In India, we saw that the account of a meaningful life
really wove together the transcendent and the imminent into a single whole. In the West,
we've got two very different roots that come together as foundations for our culture. The first
of those is the Greek, and the second is the Semitic. From classical Greece, we inherit a
philosophical vision that we derive from people like Plato, Aristotle, and so forth. From the
Semitic, we get our biblical heritage that grounds the religious traditions of the Judaic,
the Christian, and the Muslim tradition. We might say that in this tradition, the Greeks focus on
the mundane dimension of an account of the meaning of life, and the Hebrew Bible, and the Semitic
tradition it represents, gives us the transcendent. So often when I think about how Western philosophy,
subsequent to the classical period, begins to think about moral psychology and human life,
I think of it as a union of this focus on the mundane character of human life out of Greece,
and this transcendent vision of the universe that comes out of the Middle East. Now, there's
another kind of transition that we'll be making today that I want to talk about just a bit. In the
Gita, we saw a very poetic text, a text that expressed itself in a kind of epic poetry, very
rich in metaphor, very beautiful text, and our task as readers was to take these beautiful
poetic verses and see them as more than just beautiful poetry, to read the metaphors and to
provide the philosophical analysis and argument that lay beneath them. But a text that we're going
to be reading today is a very different kind of text. In say, somewhat drier text in some ways,
it's prose. More than that though, it's not even a text written by Aristotle even though we call
it an Aristotelian text. The title of the text is the Nicomachean Ethics, and what that means is
it's the text on ethics that was edited and composed by Nicomachus, hence the term Nicomachean
Ethics. It's Nicomachus' ethics. Who was Nicomachus? Nicomachus was Aristotle's son and student. I
actually think it's a really bad idea to teach your own kids, but Aristotle was a heavy dude,
he's allowed to do what he wants to do. But anyway, so what Nicomachus was doing was sitting in
Aristotle's lectures in the Academy on ethics and taking notes, and what we have in the Nicomachean
Ethics is Nicomachus' lecture notes on Aristotle's ethics. It terrifies me to think of what would
happen if one of my students' lecture notes were published centuries from now over my name. I know
that it wouldn't be exactly what I said, I know that I'd be misquoted, and I know that I'd be really
embarrassed by some of the things they chose to actually write down, but that's Aristotle's fate.
So we'll be reading a text that will be a bit dry because we're actually reading lecture notes on
ethics written by Nicomachus. So our textual task will be slightly different, the kind of reading
that we'll be doing will be slightly different, but on the other hand, the good news is that while
in the Gita, so many of the arguments and analysis were kind of left in the background and merely
suggested, we're going to see that the beauty of Aristotle's text is that the argument is right
there on the page, crystal clear and sharp and there for us to read. That's the benefit. So today,
what I want to do is to begin by talking a bit about the context of this text and of Aristotle's
life. Talk a little bit about the Platonic background against which Aristotle works,
including Aristotle's relationship to his teacher Plato, and then spend most of my time on the
architecture of Aristotle's view, only dipping into the text at the very end and focusing on the
text in detail in the next two lectures. So let's begin with a bit of context. Aristotle himself,
of course, lived in Greece. He lived from approximately 384 before the Common Era to 322
before the Common Era, and he was clearly an aristocrat, a citizen of Athens, and a member of a
reasonably noble family. He studied with Plato at Plato's Academy and was, of course, Plato's star
student. And after graduating from the Academy, he became the tutor to Alexander the Great, who,
of course, conquered the world. That's a pretty good lineage, Plato, Aristotle conquered the world.
Besides being Alexander's tutor, he taught at his own Academy called the Lyceum in Athens for many
years. Late in his life, he had to flee Athens because he was charged with impiety. Now, of course,
you know that Aristotle was not the first Greek philosopher to be charged with impiety. That's
the charge on which Socrates was tried and executed. So Aristotle, not wanting, as he put it,
the citizens of Athens to commit a second sin against philosophy, fled Athens and died at the age
of 62 in Chalcis. Plato, of course, is most famous for writing in a dialogue form. Aristotle also
wrote dialogues, and he wrote quite a bit, apparently. Unfortunately, none of Aristotle's
own texts survive, even though we have a large Aristotelian corpus. All of that corpus is in the
form of lecture notes, but at least his students took good notes. So this is a bit of the context.
Aristotle's teacher, as I said, was Plato, and Aristotle also established as a wonderful precedent
in the history of Western philosophy, because very often we think that students inherit their
teacher's views and propagate them. Aristotle showed that that needn't be so, and that the best
philosophy emerges when a teacher actively is criticized by his students. And so we find that
whereas Plato emphasized the abstract and the ideal, argued that the material world is not nearly
as real as a perfect world of forms or concepts, whereas Plato argued that we have innate knowledge
and that sensory knowledge is all kind of confused, Aristotle focused on the importance of sensory
knowledge, argued that all of our knowledge is acquired, argued that the theory of forms doesn't
make any sense, and provided a completely opposite philosophical view from that of Plato. And so
one of the really lovely things about Aristotle's place in our Western tradition is he really
inaugurates this tradition of active critique of one's own teachers and generates this ideal that
we have in the liberal arts tradition of academic debate rather than simply parroting what one has
been taught. So for that reason, I really adore Aristotle's work and Aristotle's life. So now
what I want to do is to turn a bit to the architecture of Aristotelian philosophy, and within
that architecture we'll talk about the architecture of his ethics. We're going to begin with a
discussion of Aristotle's view of the soul. And before we do that, I think we need to talk a little
bit about the term, because even though the Greek term anima is translated as soul, the word soul
has acquired in English enough theological and metaphysical baggage that I think that it's
actually come to be a kind of bad translation of the Greek term anima, which is what Aristotle
is talking about. Now, you don't have to be a brilliant philologist to see that the word anima
is related to the word animal, to the idea of being animated. The anima is that which animates
something, something which gives it life. It's not some immortal thing that's the basis of action
and good and evil. It's not something that travels between lives or that survives the death of the
body or anything like that as far as Aristotle is concerned. When Aristotle uses the word anima,
he simply means the kind of principle or set of processes that makes us different from rocks. What
it is that gives life to something. So we might better translate anima as life principle. On the
other hand, the word soul has become so entrenched in Aristotelian translation that it would be
weird to use a different term. So I'm going to use that word soul, but wherever I use it, you're
going to be conscious of the fact that it's translating the term anima, this notion of that
which animates something. Aristotle wasn't just a philosopher. He was also a mathematician, logician,
and a biologist. And in fact, he undertook biological expeditions where he collected samples of
animals and plants from various places in Greece and wrote about biology. And Aristotle's view of
the soul of the anima is a very biological view. He's worried about what animates things and he
thinks of those in scientific terms. It reflects the fact that Aristotle thinks of human beings
primarily as natural objects, as one sophisticated kind of animal, not as spiritual beings whose
minds are in direct communion with abstract forms as his teacher Plato thought of us. And so Aristotle
argued that the anima or the soul, this principle, has a number of different layers that we can think
of as from the most primitive to the most sophisticated or recent. And you can actually see a lot of
the roots of modern biological thinking in Aristotle's account. I mean, not literally modern, but you
can see the roots. So Aristotle argues that the simplest, the bottom level of the soul is what he
calls the vegetative part of the soul. That's the part that's involved just in growth and nutrition
and the absorption of energy from the environment. And Aristotle argues that plants and animals all
share this vegetative soul. It's a principle of life. Again, don't think of it as a mind of some
kind. Think of it simply as what makes us work. So the fundamental level is this vegetative level that
simply enables us to be living processes. Above that Aristotle argues is an appetitive soul and
a petitive anima. That is the one that gives us appetites for food, for water, sexual appetites and
in general desires. And of course, that Aristotle thought was a level of soul, a level of anima that is
distinctive to animals, but which plants don't share this kind of a petitive soul. But some animals
have an appetitive soul, Aristotle thought, but not a sensory anima, a sensory soul, very primitive
animals, maybe mollusks or things. And the next level of soul that Aristotle recognized was a sensory soul,
the aspect of our life that makes it possible for us to see, hear, smell and so forth. That's a higher level of
organization if you want. And above that Aristotle argued was the locomotive soul, the part that's
responsible for motor control that allows us to move around. That's something that we share with most animals,
but Aristotle pointed out not all animals, some can't move, but most can. And finally, and unique to human
beings, Aristotle argued was the rational soul, the rational anima. And that's the part of the soul, the part of
our principle that enables us to act, that allows us to think, that allows us to use language, that allows us
to reason, that allows us to understand. And Aristotle argued that that is unique to human beings. Now,
whenever we think about Aristotle's moral philosophy and Aristotle's account of what a good life is, which is
where we're going to be spending the next few lectures, we want to think of it in the context of this
understanding of what it is to be a human being. Now, within that broad architecture, I want now to give you
an overview, but just an overview of Aristotle's vision of what human moral life is. And then we'll be working
out the details of that account over the next two lectures. So this will be a kind of broad, a broad brush
painting, and we'll fill in the details over the next few lectures. The central value for Aristotle, the central
value, is, I'm now going to use the Greek term, and then I'm going to talk about it for a minute, eudaimonea. The term
eudaimonea is most often translated into English as happiness. That's a bad translation for some reasons. The reason
that I don't like it is because in English, we often understand happiness to denote a kind of emotion, something
transitory, a way of feeling. So we might ask, are you feeling happy today? No, today I'm sad, but yesterday I was
happy. I was happy 10 minutes ago, now I'm a little down, but I know that in 15 minutes I'll be happy again. All of that
makes sense in English, even if it speaks a kind of up and down roller coaster emotional life. Hey, some of us have
lives like that. You couldn't say that in Greek about eudaimonea. What eudaimonea means is to live well. You, good
daimonea, life, or soul, or spirit, to have a good spirit, to live well. So it's a very global kind of
characterization. The word that I like to translate this, and is often used by Aristotelian scholars, is flourishing, to
flourish, to lead a kind of overall globally successful life, the kind of life one could recommend and endorse and be
proud of at the end of days. That's the central value for Aristotle. And so, eudaimonea is a property not of a
moment, and it's not an experience, but rather an evaluative property of life as a whole. Aristotle and the
Nicomachean ethics is asking the question, what is it to flourish as a human being? What is it to lead a really good
life? What is eudaimonea? And as we're going to see, the bulk of the Nicomachean ethics is devoted to that question. But we're
going to come up on that question slowly, because Aristotle doesn't take for granted that the idea of eudaimonea is the
central ethical notion, the central notion in a meaningful life, whereas we're going to see, beginning late in this
lecture and continuing through next lecture, Aristotle takes it as necessary to argue for that view, taking seriously opposing
accounts of what a good life is. But we'll get there. Now, another really important aspect of Aristotelian ethics, and of
Aristotle's view about what human being is, is Aristotle's idea that goodness is closely tied to function, and that we
understand something when we understand its function. And here you'll see a tiny, faint echo of ideas in the Gita where we
talked about sva-dharma performing one's function in a larger whole. Aristotle's not thinking of the Gita, of course, but it's
worth making that connection sometimes. But Aristotle is going to argue that to be a good thing of a particular kind is always to
perform the function that things of that kind perform well. Let's see what that means. Suppose we were asking, what is it to be a
good knife? Well, we first asked about the function of a knife is. The function of a knife is to cut. So a good knife is a knife
that cuts well, that performs its function well. That's why sharpness is good in knives, not because it's pretty, not because it's hard to
achieve, but because it has to do with the function of knives. What is it to be a good collie? To be a good collie is to herd sheep well.
And so a good collie is one who does that well. Why? Because the function of a collie is to herd sheep. A good cook cooks well, a good
carpenter builds well, a good doctor cures well, and so forth. And so Aristotle's idea is that for any artifact and for any human being, we can
ask, what's the function of that thing? What's the function of that person? What's the function of that animal? And then we can ask what it is to be a
good thing of that kind and answer that question always by appeal to that function. And that's why, beginning in a few minutes and really carrying over into
the next lecture, we're going to be talking about what the function of a human being is, because a central idea for Aristotle is that not only do
kinds of human beings have functions, but human beings too, ought to be for something. And if we ask what we're for, then we can ask what it is to perform that function well, and so
what it is to be a good person, and so what the good for a human being is. So let's talk in a bit more detail now about the structure of Aristotle's account of
Eudaimonea, of happiness or of flourishing, so that we have some context for what's going to come. As I said, Aristotle will argue, and we'll begin that argument soon, that Eudaimonea, that flourishing is the
highest good. The interesting thing about Aristotle's account is the complexity and multi-dimensionality of that account. So I want to give you a sense of how complex it's going to be, and then you'll have a framework within which to put all the
various pieces that we're going to encounter. The first is, well, Aristotle argues that flourishing involves three orthogonal traits, where we can evaluate people on three orthogonal dimensions. The first of those is the
dimension of virtue or excellence. The Greek here is arete, and what it means is the character that makes the thing good of its kind. The virtue of a knife is sharpness. The virtue of a doctor is skill in curing. But we'll be talking about specifically human
virtues, and the virtues are going to turn out to be the enduring states of character that enable us to flourish. Those will be the states of character that we hope to cultivate in order to lead a really good life. That's the first dimension. The second dimension, though, is what Aristotle calls practical
wisdom. The Greek is frenesis. And practical wisdom, we might refer to in, well, not English, but French that's made its way into English as Savoir Faire, the knowledge of how to do things. In particular, practical wisdom for Aristotle, as we're going to see, is skill in
deliberating and making choices and figuring out the way to attain one's goals. It's our virtues, as we'll see, that give us the goals that make our lives worthwhile. But it's not good enough to have good intentions, good goals, good wishes, good desires, and a wonderful character. If you can't bring all of that into productive action, Aristotle argues, you can't really flourish. And so, virtue requires practical
wisdom for its manifestation, a knowledge of actually how to bring about one's ends. But it's possible. It's possible to have virtue and to know how to act on one's decisions, to know what kinds of actions are appropriate, and still fail to act, Aristotle will argue.
Aristotle argues that this happens when we lack the third dimension of character that underlies a good life, that underlies flourishing. That third dimension is what Aristotle calls moral strength. The idea roughly is this. And again, we're going to be talking about this in much more detail over the next couple of lectures. But the idea is this.
That sometimes you know what the right thing is to do, you'll want to do the right thing, you know how to do the right thing, and yet you fail to do it because of overriding desires that you cannot block. Remember, again, the Gita's idea that we need to free ourselves from the grip of desire in order to choose and in order to have genuine freedom. Aristotle's got that idea, too.
The kind of case Aristotle might have in mind is something like this. You might be somebody who is very courageous, who knows how to save lives, who sees somebody who is in distress in the surf, you're a good swimmer, you know how to do that.
But there's somebody selling chocolate ice cream just down the beach, and you really love chocolate ice cream. And even though you know that what you want to do and ought to do is save the drowning child, the pull of the chocolate is just too strong, and moral weakness overcomes you, and you buy the chocolate ice cream and let the kid drown.
I hope this isn't you. But anyway, you can imagine the phenomenon much less dramatically if you're somebody who really wants to lose weight, really knows that the chocolate ice cream is not a good idea, you know how to forego the chocolate ice cream, but somehow the hand reaches out and grabs it.
That's the kind of moral weakness that Aristotle is worried about, and Aristotle will argue that flourishing Eudaimonea therefore requires not only virtue, not only practical wisdom, but also moral strength, which is a three-dimensional account of character that will be very distinctive of Aristotle.
Finally, what we're going to see is that Aristotle will argue that these three dimensions of character provide a context of the possibility for flourishing, but flourishing really requires a larger context. It requires a context in which we have external goods, not only material goods for Aristotle, you know, food, housing, a stable society and so forth.
But more important, Aristotle is going to argue that we need friendship, and so there will be a sustained discussion of friendship in Aristotle's ethics as a central component of the meaningful life.
As I said, we're not going to find in Aristotle's text beautiful poetry, so you're going to have to put that kind of expectation aside if you've developed it after the Gita.
But what you are going to find is some gorgeous, tight, close, careful philosophical argument that represents beauty of a different kind and urges us to read in a slightly different way, a way that's kind of more analytical and to find beauty in the abstract rather than in the beautiful prose.
So, Aristotle is going to begin by talking a bit about virtue, and he does that by asking the question, what is the highest good? As I promised, he's going to argue for each claim.
And so now, prepare to roll up your sleeves and get really textual, because we're going to enter the Nicomachean Ethics. We're going to enter it right at the beginning in Book 1, Chapter 1.
So, Aristotle begins, every art or applied science, and every systematic investigation, and similarly, every action and choice seems to aim at some good. The good, therefore, has been well-defined as that at which all things aim.
So, Aristotle begins almost definitionally, just telling us we're going to think of whatever is good, good life, good dog, good whatever, as that at which something aims.
But what we care about is not just goodness in knives or goodness in dogs, we care about the good, the good for human being, and that's going to be that at which all things aim.
So, Aristotle continues, but it's clear that there is a difference in the ends at which they aim. In some cases, the activity is the end. In others, the end is some product beyond the activity.
In cases where the end lies beyond the action, the product is naturally superior to the activity.
So, this is actually a simple point. Aristotle is pointing out that some of the things we do, we do in order to produce something. I cook in order to produce food.
I build a house in order to have a house, but some things we do just for the activity itself. I play soccer just to play soccer. I play music just to play music.
Where there is a product beyond the activity, the activity is the goal and is more important than the product. After all, if I could have food just by snapping my fingers, maybe I wouldn't cook.
If I could have a house just by snapping my fingers, I wouldn't bother building. So, the point of an activity might be internal, but if it's external, we care more about the point than we do the activity itself.
Aristotle continues, since there are many activities, arts and sciences, the number of ends is correspondingly large. Of medicine, the end is health. Of shipbuilding, of vessel, of strategy, victory, and of household management, wealth.
In many instances, several such pursuits are grouped together under a single capacity.
So, here we see a kind of divergence from a platonic point of view. Aristotle is pointing out there isn't simply one idea of good. There are different goods corresponding to different activities, different kinds of domains.
And sometimes he's going to point out these things are grouped together. Let's look at how they're grouped together.
Aristotle writes, the art of bridal making, for example, that's an important art, and everything else, equestrian, are grouped together under horsemanship.
Horsemanship, in turn, along with every other military action, for Aristotle, of course, horsemanship only made sense in the context of the cavalry. He didn't do dressage.
So, again, horsemanship, in turn, along with every other military action, is grouped together under strategy.
In all these cases, the ends of the master sciences are preferable to the ends of the subordinate sciences, since the latter are pursued for the sake of the former.
So, once again, the point is this. If I could win the war without the cavalry, why bother with the cavalry?
If I could have a great cavalry without hiring bridal makers, I won't have bridal makers.
But the point of bridal making is to get my horses to work, and the point of my horses is to win the war, and the point of winning the war is, well, you get the idea.
So, in cases where we have these hierarchical arrangements, it's the master science, the superordinate science, whose end is the important one, the superior ones, and the others are subordinate to that.
But the question then is this. What's the highest good? Aristotle points out that on pain of infinite regress, this hierarchy can't go on forever.
It can't be that everything is only good for something else. Whatever's at the top of that hierarchy, whatever it is for the sake of which we do everything else, that's going to be the highest good.
That's the one that Aristotle's after. Where we find ourselves now is then halfway through the first major argument in the Nicomachean Ethics.
Aristotle has argued that activities are done for goods, that the goods are the point of the activities, and that many of our activities, much of our life, is organized hierarchically.
It's got to be that there's the highest good, or everything that we do is in the end pointless. There's no answer to the question, why do we live in the first place?
But we don't yet know what that is. We know that there must be such a highest good. In the next lecture, we're going to find out what that highest good is and explore its nature.
So please come back so we can continue the argument. See you next time.
