I'm glad you're back, because we find ourselves right in the middle of a long, complex argument.
Maybe the most famous argument in the Nicomachean Ethics.
We call it the function argument, and we've only looked at the first subpart of the argument
so far, that is, we might call the hierarchy argument.
Remember, the question that we're asking is, what is the highest good for a human being?
And we began with this little hierarchy argument at the end of our last lecture, where Aristotle
pointed out that many of our actions are performed for the sake of some end, and in that case,
the end of the action is more important to us as the goal that's superior to the action
itself.
He also pointed out that our actions, like our sciences or our domains of activity, are
often grouped hierarchically.
When they're grouped hierarchically, it's the superordinate actions, the superordinate
domains, the superordinate goals that are superior to the subordinate goals.
So the example that he used was the example of horsemanship, where bridal making is subordinate
to horsemanship, which is subordinate to the cavalry, subordinate to military strategy,
maybe subordinate to diplomacy, and so forth.
Now Aristotle argued at the very end, if the hierarchy were infinite so that for every
good it was only good for something else, then in a deep sense, all of our actions,
all of our knowledge, all of our lives would be pointless, because there would be no answer
to the question, why are we doing all of this?
So Aristotle concludes, there must be a highest good.
That doesn't get us very far, because we now need to know what is that highest good?
What is it?
Now Aristotle already has argued that the highest good is going to be the good of the
most subordinate science, the master science.
And shortly after the discussion that we canvassed in our last lecture, Aristotle points out
that all of the sciences, all of the arts, all of our enterprises of knowledge are aimed
at human good.
That's why we do things.
We do things in order to benefit ourselves in some way.
And Aristotle argues the good of a group of people is always better than the good of
an individual.
Now, what's the science of collective good?
Well, that's political science, Aristotle argues, the science of governing a group of
people in their own interest.
And so Aristotle argues, politics is the domain that orders and governs all of the other arts
and sciences.
They're all, in the end, subordinate to politics.
So he argues, politics is the master science, and the good at which politics aims, the end
of politics, will end up being the highest good.
But that still doesn't help us very much.
What is that highest good?
Now interestingly, Aristotle cautions us in our investigation of the highest good.
This is a wonderful piece of intellectual humility.
He points out that even though the question, what is the highest good, is a deeply important
question, it's not a question in which we can expect too much precision for several reasons.
One is that human affairs are a messy, irregular affair.
It's a messy domain that we live in.
There's a lot of details, a lot of variation.
Some things might be good for some people, but bad for another.
A good bit of money might be a really good thing for one person, but it might turn another
into a compulsive gambler.
A lot of food might be good for somebody who's starving, but really bad for a glutton.
A glass of wine might be a good thing for one person, but dangerous for an alcoholic.
Or some things are good at one time, and bad at another time, and so forth.
The hard and fast rules might be hard to come by.
The other issue Aristotle points out that leads to the messiness and approximateness
of this domain is that some of the questions might involve answers that are kind of matters
of taste.
Just as we may ask, what is the best color to paint this wall?
Or what is the best picture to hang in this room?
Different people might disagree, not because one's right and one is wrong, but because
there are different matters of taste.
In human affairs, taste is an important thing.
So for this reason, Aristotle argues, knowing about the good for human beings requires experience
and judgment, not just some kind of abstract theoretical knowledge.
And Aristotle has a wonderful remark on this.
Aristotle writes, each man can judge competently the things that he knows.
Therefore, a young man is not equipped to be a student of politics, for he has no experience
in the actions which life demands.
Moreover, since he follows his emotions, his study will be pointless and unprofitable,
whether he is young in years or immature, makes no difference at all.
So Aristotle is arguing here that thinking about the good life is something for mature
people to do, not something for children.
Not because it's hard, but because it's a complex matter that requires judgment, not
knowledge.
And we'll see Aristotle trying to exercise judgment as he goes on.
Now, Aristotle begins with a kind of argument by elimination in trying to figure out what
the highest good is.
He's going to consider a number of reasonable alternative conceptions that were current
in Greece and find reasons to dismiss them before going on to argue for his own position.
He's going to dismiss the idea that pleasure is the highest good, it's going to turn out
to be base, that honor is the highest good because of its fickleness, because money is
the highest good, it will be instrumental, because excellence is the highest good and
so forth.
These are the most obvious accounts, that's why Aristotle considers them, but it's also
why he thinks a deeper investigation is going to be necessary.
So now let's really enter the text and see what happens.
The first possibility that Aristotle considers is that pleasure is the highest good and indeed
many people might think that, that to have a pleasant life is a good thing, but here's
what Aristotle says.
He says, the common run of people and the most vulgar, identify it with pleasure, that
the it here by the way is the highest good, and for that reason are satisfied by a life
of enjoyment.
They betray their utter slavishness in their preference for a life suitable to cattle.
The argument here is really simple.
Pleasure is something that's good even for cattle, even for pigs, for lower animals.
We're looking for something that's distinctive to human beings, just as we have a rational
soul in a way that cattle and pigs don't.
Pleasure is going to be good for us, it's going to have to do with what we are about,
not what they are.
So pleasure is simply too base, too low, too common to be a reasonable answer to what
the highest good is.
Second possibility Aristotle considers is honor.
Cultivated and active men on the other hand, believe the good to be honor, for honor one
might say is the end of political life, but this is lovely.
Aristotle says, this is clearly too superficial an answer, for honor seems to depend on those
who confer it rather than on him who receives it.
Furthermore, men seem to pursue honor to assure themselves of their own worth.
Obviously then, excellence as far as they are concerned is better than honor.
This is really nice.
You could imagine somebody saying, the highest good, the thing that would make my life most
fulfilling, would be a Nobel Prize, or a Congressional Medal of Honor, or election to the Academy
of Arts and Sciences, some honor like that, or a chaired professorship, or something like
that.
And Aristotle answers that no sane person can think that that's really the highest good,
and for two deep reasons.
The first reason is this, that honor depends, as Aristotle says, more on those who confer
it than on those who receive it.
You've got to ask, who's doing the judging?
There are some people from whom you would not want the award.
More deeply, Aristotle points out, the reason we want honor in the first place is to confirm
our idea of our own excellence.
So if all the honor is doing is confirming our idea of excellence, then if honor is good,
excellence is better.
And that leads us to the next possibility, excellence itself.
Aristotle asks, one might consider excellence rather than honor as the end of political
life.
And the politics for Aristotle is the master science.
It continues, however, even excellence proves to be imperfect as an end, for a man might
possibly possess it while asleep, or while being inactive all his life, and while in
addition undergoing the greatest suffering and misfortune, nobody would call the life
of such a man happy, that is, Eudaimonea.
This is really nice.
Suppose you thought that excellence was the highest good, so you thought, for instance,
I don't know, being the best fastball pitcher in baseball would be a fabulous thing to be.
But suppose you were, but you never actually pitched a game.
You might have the excellence, but never manifest it.
And so an unmanifested excellence wouldn't be very good.
That's why Aristotle says, you might possess it while asleep or while being inactive.
Moreover, suppose that you were the best fastball pitcher in baseball, and you even did manifest
it, but the rest of your life was horrible.
You were a drunkard, you became bankrupt, your children became criminals, your dog became
a rabid.
I mean, every bad thing imaginable happened to you.
You wouldn't say, that's a perfect life.
So for that reason, Aristotle says, for these two reasons, excellence can't be the highest
good either.
And then Aristotle considers wealth, and he says, as for the moneymaker, his life is
led under some kind of constraint.
Clearly, wealth is not the good which we are trying to find, for it is only useful.
It is a means to something else.
So once again, when we ask, could wealth be the highest good?
We can always ask the question, why do you want all that money?
And somebody says, so I can have a nice vacation.
Or so I can be charitable.
Or so I can endow a college.
Wealth is always good for something, not good in itself, so it can't be the highest good.
Until Aristotle concludes in this argument from elimination, that the highest good is
neither pleasure nor honor nor excellence nor wealth.
He then considers very briefly Plato's idea that the good may just be an abstract concept,
and that what we're looking for is the good, not necessarily the good for a human being.
And then we can ask, in what way human beings realize it.
But Aristotle disposes of that very quickly, pointing out that there are different goods
for different things.
The good for a knife is not the good for a collie, is not the good for a baseball pitcher.
And for that reason, we can't just look for the good.
If we're looking for the good for a human being, we need to know first what a human
being is, and that brings us back to the function of a human being and the heart of the function
argument.
So we need to figure out what the function of a person is in order to know what it is
that a good person would be.
So we're now going to get very textual again.
Aristotle writes back into the function argument.
The good is evidently something different in different actions in each art.
It's one thing in medicine, another thing in strategy.
What then is the good of each?
Is it not that for the sake of which everything else is done?
That means it's health in the case of medicine, victory in the case of strategy.
Plus if there is someone in for all that we do, this would be the good attainable by
action.
So once again, we're looking for this highest good, the one thing for which everything else
is done, but which is not done for the sake of anything else.
Aristotle continues.
That thing is going to end up being a final thing.
It's going to be the thing for which everything else is done.
Let's look at how Aristotle puts that.
He says, the highest good on the other hand must be something final.
By final here, we mean that which is at the top of a hierarchy not done for the sake of
anything else.
He writes, we call that which is pursued as an end in itself more final than an end which
is pursued for the sake of something else.
What is always chosen as an end in itself and never as a means to something else is called
final in an unqualified sense.
And that of course is what we're looking for.
That thing which is final in an unqualified sense, which is always chosen as an end in
itself and never as a means to anything else.
What could that thing be?
Let's see.
Aristotle is now looking for the thing that's going to fit that bill.
And he's already argued that pleasure doesn't, right?
Honor doesn't fit that bill, excellence doesn't, virtue doesn't.
What does he say?
He says, this description appears to apply to happiness.
Remember, that means eudaimonea, flourishing, above all else.
For we always choose happiness as an end in itself and never for the sake of something
else.
Let me pause on that for a moment.
If you ask somebody, why do you want money?
They might say, if I had plenty of money, I'd be happy.
Why do you want this particular honor?
It would make me happy.
But ask somebody, why do you want to be happy?
That's a dumb question.
I want to be happy in order to, what?
I just want to be happy.
That's it.
That's the final goal.
So Aristotle points out honor, pleasure, intelligence, all the virtues.
We choose partly for themselves.
But we also choose them partly for the sake of happiness because we assume that
through them that we will be happy.
On the other hand, no one chooses happiness for the sake of honor.
Pleasure and the like, nor is a means to anything else at all.
That's the point we just made.
Nobody chooses happiness in order to be rich, but you might choose wealth in order to be
happiness, to be happy.
Nobody chooses happiness for the sake of honor, but you might seek honor in order to be happy.
Happiness is always an end and never merely a means.
Now, there's another dimension that Aristotle examines now along the route to arguing that
happiness, or euda minea, is the highest good.
And that's this interesting dimension of self-sufficiency.
We're going to first read this text, and then we're going to talk about what it might mean.
Aristotle says, we define as self-sufficient.
That which taken by itself makes life something desirable and deficient in nothing.
It's happiness, in our opinion, which fits this description.
Pause for a minute right there.
The idea of self-sufficiency is this.
If something is self-sufficient, then if you've got it, you've got everything.
You don't need to then add something to it to make it good.
So for instance, with wealth, you might ask somebody, is he happy?
And they say, well, he's rich.
But then you might also ask, yeah, but is he also happy?
Because some rich people might be miserable.
Has that person been honored?
Yes.
But is he happy?
Well, maybe not, because he might need more than mere honor to be happy.
But if somebody's happy, you don't then ask, yeah, but is he rich?
Or yeah, but has anybody honored him?
If he's happy, that's enough to make life worth living.
Happiness is self-sufficient in its ability to make life worth living, remembering again
that by happiness, we mean Eudaimonea, this notion of all things considered flourishing
having a complete life.
Aristotle continues, it's happiness in our opinion, which fits this description.
Moreover, happiness is of all things the one most desirable.
And it's not counted as one good thing among many others.
That's the important point, right?
It's not just one thing among others, it's the thing.
Aristotle continues, if it were, it's obvious that the addition of even the least of goods
would make it more desirable.
We see that happiness is something final and self-sufficient and is the end of our actions.
So Aristotle's argument that happiness is the highest good depends on these two ideas.
One is that it's final, it sits at the top of the hierarchy.
The other is that it's self-sufficient, that if you've got happiness, you don't need anything
else.
Whereas every one of these other candidates is only good in order to gain happiness,
and if you had it, you could still ask the question, is that enough?
Now, the next question, though, is what is happiness?
I mean, if we know it's the highest good, we still need to know what it is.
And Aristotle points out that this is a problem.
He says, to call happiness the highest good is perhaps a little trite, and a clearer account
of what it is is still required.
You bet it's a bit trite.
I mean, just to say that happiness is a great thing, you might want to say, yeah, I kind
of knew that.
What is happiness about?
And Aristotle gives us his unique approach to trying to figure out what it is.
He says, this might be a surprise to us.
Perhaps this is best done by first ascertaining the proper function of man.
For just as the goodness and performance of a flute player, a sculptor, or any kind of
expert are thought to reside in his proper function, so the goodness and performance
of man would seem to reside in whatever is his proper function.
So his first argument is that since every kind of person has a function, then a person
as such ought to have a function as well.
And we should be able to ask what that is.
Now Aristotle offers a second little sub-argument.
He says, as an eye, hand, foot, and in general each of the parts evidently has a function,
may one lay it down that man similarly has a function apart from all of these.
So again, this has to do with hierarchies.
If every piece of us has a function, our eyes are good for us to see, our hands are good
for us to do things with, and so forth, then there ought to be some function that we have
that they serve.
Just like bridal making is the horsemanship, the function of the eye or the hand should
be to us.
So whether we ask about kinds of people or parts of people were led to the same conclusion
that there should be a function for a human being as such.
The question is, what is it?
So now we're led to the question, what is the function of a human being?
And that's what Aristotle asks next.
What can this be?
Now he's going to run through a number of possibilities again, and I want you to remember
the discussion of the structure of the Aristotelian soul or anima that we talked about in the
last lecture, because that's what animates terrible pun, this particular argument.
Aristotel says, life seems to belong even to plants.
There's that vegetative anima.
But we are thinking what's peculiar to man.
Let us exclude, therefore, the life of nutrition and growth.
Next, there would be a life of perception.
Remember that?
But it also seems to be shared by the horse, the ox, and every animal.
And of course, remember, we're talking about the function of a human being.
Let's continue.
Aristotle says, there remains then an active life of the element that has a rational principle.
Once again, remember from last lecture, the part of the anima of the soul that's peculiar
to a human being is reason, the rational soul.
That's the thing that's distinctive to us.
And Aristotle says, the function of man is an activity of the soul, which follows or
implies a rational principle.
And the point there is that if we're looking for the function of a thing, we want to look
for the thing that that thing does specifically.
When we figure out what the function of a knife is, we notice that knives are good for
cutting and that better than anything else is for cutting.
When we ask what the function of a border collie is, we say it's great for herding sheep and
better than anything else.
When we ask what the function of a human being is, therefore, we say it's really good at
reasoning and better at reasoning than anything else.
So the function of a human being is to act in accordance with reason.
Now the next question is, can we be a bit more specific?
And we can.
Now Aristotle says, if we say so and so and a good so and so have a function which is
the same in kind, for instance, a liar player and a good liar player, we don't play liars
so much anymore.
We could think of maybe a harpist.
And if any action is well performed, if it is performed in accordance with the appropriate
excellence, human good turns out to be the activity of the soul in accordance with virtue.
Now this is a slightly abstract point, but I want to try to make it a little bit concrete.
Aristotle's point is that the function of a thing is also always the function of a really
excellent example of that thing.
Suppose, for instance, we were considering musicians and you had a pretty bad musician
and a pretty good musician.
You wouldn't want to say the function of a really great musician is to play music beautifully
and the function of a really bad musician is to play music poorly.
Also you'd say of the poor musician, she's not fulfilling the function of a musician,
which is to play music well.
Or if you considered a group of athletes and some of them were training hard and winning
medals and winning games and so forth and a bunch of them were lying around lazy drinking
beer, you wouldn't say the function of these athletes is to excel and to win in competition.
The function of these athletes is to be the people that they beat.
Instead you'd say these people are fulfilling their function, these aren't fulfilling their
function.
And it's for that reason that Aristotle says, if you want to know what the function of a
thing is, don't just look at that thing, look at good things of that kind.
The function of my doll knife is to do what my sharp knife does, not the other way around.
And so we can conclude the function argument with this idea that the human good turns out
to be an activity of the soul in accordance with virtue, in accordance with that which
makes us good beings of our kind.
So let's now summarize the function argument.
We began with the hierarchy argument, this first sub-argument, that goods, that is ends,
things that we care about, are often arranged in a hierarchy.
Some things are good for others, those others are good for even better things, and the higher
ones are more final than the lower ones, that is they are more like the kinds of things
we choose for their own sake, rather than instrumentally.
The highest good is the most final, the thing that we only choose for its own sake.
And there has to be one, otherwise our lives would be completely pointless, and any answer
to a why question, why are you doing that, or what's that good for, would be in the end
completely empty, because there would be no final answer, no reason that we do everything.
That most final end is something that is always chosen as a goal, always chosen as an end,
and never as a means to anything else.
That's really important, that it's the one thing that's non-instrumental.
Moreover, it would be really nice, it would be a wonderful kind of happenstance, if that
final end, that thing which is always chosen as an end and never as a means, were also
self-sufficient in this deep, relevant sense.
That is that if you had it, you'd have everything, you wouldn't need a second end to add to it.
I mean, it's not like that in my kitchen, even though my knives might be really sharp,
I still need pots and pans, knives aren't self-sufficient, but it would be really nice
if we found something that was final, but also self-sufficient.
Then Aristotle argues that happiness, human flourishing, Eudaimonea, is always an end,
never a means to something else.
That other things are chosen for the sake of it, but it's never chosen for the sake
of other things, and moreover, it turns out to be self-sufficient.
So he's argued happiness is the highest good, but then that's only half the argument, right?
We still need to know what happiness is, and that's where the second part of the function
argument came.
Aristotle argued that all kinds of persons have functions, and all the parts of persons
have functions, so A, since kinds of persons have functions, persons per se must have functions,
and B, since the parts of persons have functions, if those are genuine functions, the whole
that comprises them must also have a function, so there's got to be a function of a person.
That's the first point.
Then Aristotle pointed out that the function of a thing is the activity that's peculiar
to that thing, and the activity most peculiar to persons, relying on that argument that
we looked at in our last lecture on the nature of the soul, is thinking or reasoning, and
so the activity most peculiar to persons is acting in accordance with reason, and so that
activity in accordance with reason is the function of a person, but then the question
is more specifically, does that mean any old person?
And Aristotle says absolutely not, because we always find that the function of a thing
of any kind is the function of a thing that is an excellent exemplar of that kind, the
function of a thing which is a really good one, and so the best, since the best person
is the person with the most virtue, the function of a human being is going to be activity,
rational activity in accordance with human virtue, and that's why happiness is activity
in accordance with virtue.
Notice, it's not pleasure, it's not honor, it's not excellence, it's not wealth, none
of those would satisfy these definitions, instead we now have a definition of happiness.
You want to know what it is to be happy?
It's to lead a life of rational activity in accordance with virtue.
But let's remember, we're talking now about Eudaimonea, and Aristotle emphasizes that
this kind of happiness that we're talking about is happiness in a complete life, and
in one of my favorite lines from the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle says, for one swallow does
not make a summer, nor does one day.
And so too, one day does not make a man blessed and happy.
You can never really judge that somebody's happy based on a short period of life, it's
a judgment of a life seen as a whole.
Aristotle even asks in the Nicomachean Ethics whether at the moment of a man's death, we
can ask whether he's happy, and he says, no, you've got to wait, because sometimes project
near and dear to somebody might be ongoing, and might come to not after their death, in
which case you might say of that person, he died believing that he was happy.
But if we look at what happened to his children afterwards, or to the foundations he established,
we couldn't call that a happy life.
So Eudaimonea here is very much an evaluative idea, and a very global idea, not an emotion,
not a mental state, instead it's a comprehensive state of being, one that persists over a very
long time, and one that is even sensitive to things that can happen after our deaths.
To live well in this way, to have Eudaimonea, is to have all of these internal characteristics
of being able to act in accordance with virtue, but because it has to be self-sufficient, there
has to be a host of other internal and external goods present.
In our next lecture, we're going to be examining the nature of these other dimensions of happiness.
We need to ask what virtue is, and what we need besides virtue, in order to fully act
in accordance with virtue, and attain this final and self-sufficient state.
So please stay with us for our final lecture on Aristotle.
