Welcome back to our tour through the ancient world and an examination of a variety of views
about the meaning of life expressed in ancient times.
So far we've visited India and we've visited classical Greece.
And while we've certainly seen some points of contact, it's worth thinking for a moment
about some of the significant differences between the perspectives that we saw developed
in the Bhagavad Gita and the perspective developed by Aristotle.
One of the things that we noticed in the Gita was an emphasis on the importance of individual
choice, existential situations, and the importance of understanding our relationship to the transcendent
as an important dimension of our imminent life.
We also saw this very complex dialectic between freedom and discipline and the need to develop
a discipline which was understood as a kind of detachment, a kind of detachment from our
immediate surroundings and immediate conditions in order to free us for thoughtful action.
Aristotle we saw had a rather different perspective.
Aristotle emphasized not a detachment from our immediate surroundings, but our connections,
our attachments to networks of friends and associates, to possible beneficiaries of virtuous
action, and a set of virtues that we cultivate that are not so much aimed at a relationship
to the transcendent, but at enriching and making possible our life in the temporal world.
Now it's tempting to think about these as two perspectives in competition with one another,
that at this point you might think of yourself as saying, OK, do I want to think of the Gita
as a better key to understanding the meaning of life or the Nicomachean ethics?
My suggestion is that that probably, at least for now, the wrong way to think about these
texts as we examine them.
Rather think about them as providing complementary perspectives.
Each of them tells us something about our existential situation.
Each of them tells us something about what it is to be a human being and about what
we need to reflect on in order to develop a sensible, clear view of our lives and the
ability to make meaningful choices.
The Gita emphasizes the transcendent and the need for a certain kind of individual detachment
in reflection.
The Nicomachean ethics emphasizes that we also live in a social context in which connections
to others are important and in which we need to cultivate certain traits of character and
certain kinds of capacities in order to be able to make the kinds of choices that the
Gita discusses.
Now, today we're going to be moving from classical Greece to the ancient Hebraic tradition of
the Middle East, the biblical tradition.
And it might turn out, as I suggested at the end of our last lecture, that while the classical
Indian and the classical Greek traditions were a bit more familiar to our ordinary way
of thinking than we might have expected, the classical Hebraic tradition might turn out
to be a little bit less familiar.
We've been talking about our relationship to the cosmos.
We've been talking about our relationship to the society.
But in this tradition, one of the big questions will be, what is our relationship to a personal
deity, to a god?
And if you have grown up in a Jewish or a Christian or a Muslim tradition, you might
be used to a certain kind of answer to that that might jar with the text that we're going
to be reading today, the book of Job.
Before we approach Job, though, I want to talk a bit about some of the methods of reading
that we're using and the attitudes that we're taking towards the texts with which we're
interacting.
The Bhagavad Gita and the Nicomachean Ethics are both in important senses, sacred texts
in important traditions in the world.
As I emphasized at the very beginning, the Gita is one of the holiest and most sacred
texts for Hindus and is often referred to as a Hindu Bible.
It's the text that many devout Hindus turn to for spiritual advice and for inspiration.
The Nicomachean Ethics, while it was certainly written as an abstract academic philosophical
text, once it was adopted and commented on by St. Thomas Aquinas in the Catholic scholastic
tradition, became an important sacred text, if indirectly, in Catholicism.
Nonetheless, in reading each of these texts, we bracketed all of that sacredness.
We didn't treat them as though they were religious texts whose interpretation required
us to adopt a religious attitude towards them.
Indeed, I think that the worst thing you can do to a text, especially a good text, is to
treat it as so sacred, so profound, so connected to religious life that you give up the right
to interpret it, that you give up the right to connect it immediately to your own life
and to interact with it on your own.
And for that reason, we've really approached the Bhagavad Gita as a philosophical text
talking about the meaning of life from an Indian perspective.
We've treated the Nicomachean Ethics as Aristotle would have intended it, in fact, as a philosophical
text.
And now when we reach the book of Job, biblical though it may be, we're going to treat it
as a philosophical text that we have the right to address, to interpret and to think about
that has something to say to us.
In each of these cases, in order to gain a complete understanding of the text, we need
to adopt two modes of reading or two modes of understanding.
One mode of reading or understanding is to understand how this text would have figured
in the tradition in which it was placed and how those who read it from within that tradition
appreciate it.
And I think that's important.
But the more profound reading comes, the deeper engagement comes when we ask, what can this
text say to me about my own situation?
What kind of insight can it give me about life that I'm living right now?
And so it's sometimes important to rip the text from that context and to confront it
as a partner in dialogue.
And that's really how I want to think about the book of Job today.
So I'm going to ask you to set aside some of your preconceptions of what's going on
in the Hebrew Bible and the book of Job and to open yourself to reading it that way.
As it turns out, before I came to give this lecture, my mother asked me, what are you
going to be talking about today?
And I said, well, let me start by talking about the book of Job.
And she said, oh, well, that's easy.
I mean, Job is just about how it's important to have absolutely powerful faith in God and
a completely blind faith at that.
That's what Job's about.
I thought to myself, well, that's exactly the reading that I'd like to dislodge.
Sorry, mom.
We're going to be treating Job in a somewhat subtler way.
But you know, it's not just my mother.
As I looked at a number of different contemporary writers writing about Job, I see that almost
everybody thinks about Job as a text about maintaining strong faith in God in the face
of suffering.
And that's a very standard reading of the text.
Again, I'm going to suggest that if we really confront the text and read it closely, we
can come up with a different understanding, one that's going to allow it to engage in
productive dialogue with the other texts that we're reading in this course.
Job itself is a book of very mysterious origins and authorship.
It seems to be very old, probably well-known in its standard form by about the sixth century
before the common era.
For that reason, it's a much older text than either the bug of Ad Gita or the Nicomachean
ethics.
So we're not going in order of composition as we move through this, this set of texts
in the ancient world.
The book is written in a very strange and difficult Hebrew.
It's a very unusual text.
And there are interesting doubts about how it actually was collected.
The central part of the text is extremely poetic and it's written in verse and is what
we might call Job's lament and discourse and dialogue.
But it's framed by an introduction or a preface and a conclusion, a preface chapter that kind
of sets the stage and will be entering that preface in a moment, and then a concluding
section in which all kinds of plot twists get resolved.
Most scholars believe that the preface and the conclusion were added to the text, but
they disagree about whether the preface and conclusion are earlier than the rest of the
text or later than the rest of the text.
It's very shadowy.
There's even some evidence that the text itself may have been translated from an earlier non-Hebrew
text, possibly a Sumerian text because there are parables in that literature that seem
to be parallel.
So we're reading a text that is old and whose origins are very opaque.
Nonetheless, it's been a text that has exerted a great deal of influence on theology in the
Jewish and Christian tradition, but also in the Muslim tradition.
So now let's enter the book of Job together.
The text first introduces us to Job and tells us some really important things about Job.
The first thing that we learn about Job is he is very, very good.
He is very good.
The Bible puts it this way in the book of Job.
Now we're in chapter 1 verse 1.
It says that Job was blameless, upright, fearing God, and turning away from evil.
So this is fairly canned language, but it's language that indicates that we're not talking
about some ordinary guy here, we're talking about a really good person.
That's the first thing.
We then learn that Job was very, very, very rich.
He had seven sons and daughters, so he was also prolific, but he had 7,000 sheep, 3,000
camels, 500 pairs of oxen, 500 female donkeys.
I'm not sure what that's all about, and many servants.
And he's referred to as the greatest of all of the men in the East.
So we can think of Job as a kind of early biblical Warren Buffett, somebody who is phenomenally
wealthy.
And while Warren Buffett probably had fewer camels and donkeys, he makes up for it in
all of the oldier jets and limousines.
We've got the same kind of idea, somebody who's got outsized wealth.
And notice that Job's outsized wealth is here coupled with his outsized virtue.
We're going to be returning to that virtue in a moment, but notice that Job is both
rich and very good, and it's going to be the relationship between those that's in part
going to frame what comes next.
So we get further emphasis of Job's virtue, and Job's kind of over-the-top virtue in
the next passage.
Let me read this to you.
It's kind of lovely.
It says, And it came about when the days of feasting had completed their cycle, so after
some important holidays, Job would send and consecrate them, rising up early in the morning,
and offering a burnt offering according to the number of them all.
Now, of them here, by the way, is referring to his sons and daughters.
Where Job said, Perhaps my sons have sinned and cursed God in their hearts.
This Job did continuously.
That's from chapter one, verse five.
So what's going on here?
We haven't been told that Job committed any sins.
We haven't been told that Job has any evidence that his sons have committed any sins, but
Job just in case is making sure that he makes the relevant offerings.
So this is an emphasis that Job isn't just good.
He's over-the-top good.
We're imagining the best of all possible guys here.
And by the way, the richest.
So what happens?
Well, Satan enters the picture.
Now we are accustomed these days to thinking of Satan as the devil, as the great opponent
of God.
This comes from a lot of much later theology.
But at this point in biblical history, Satan isn't somewhere in hell as an opponent to
God.
He's literally the opponent.
We can think of him as, to use a bad phrase here, the devil's advocate, or the in-house
prosecutor, the heavens bureau of internal affairs, the person who kind of raises problems
and issues in heaven for God.
And Satan raises a question about Job.
The question that he's worried about is, hey, Job is pious, yeah, but he's rich.
And it's really easy to be pious when you're rich.
So Satan puts it this way, talking to God over coffee.
Has Thou not made a hedge about him in his house and all that he has on every side?
So aren't you protecting this guy a bit too much?
Thou has blessed the work of his hands and his possessions have increased in the land.
So you've done a good job by it.
But Satan says, put forth thy hand now and touch all that he has.
He will surely curse thee to thy face.
So Satan is suggesting to God that Job's piety is a kind of quid pro quo.
Things have gone well for Job, so Job's being nice and pious.
But suggesting the piety isn't anything in Job's nature.
It's not a virtue that he's got.
It's just simple gratitude.
It's a deal.
So God doesn't quite believe this.
And now here's where all of your views about God might get destabilized.
God proposes a cruel bet with Satan.
He says, OK, Satan, behold, all that he has is in your power.
Only don't put forth your hand on him.
So he's basically made a deal with Satan.
He said, as long as you don't hurt Job himself, you can mess around with all of his possessions,
his family, whatever you want.
And I'm betting that Job is still going to remain pious, Satan's betting the reverse.
So we're going to see who wins.
So what happens?
Well, a whole slew of disasters happens.
The family's having this big party, and the Sabeans come.
And they steal all of Job's oxen and donkeys, and they kill all of his oxherds.
You've got to watch the Sabeans.
Then, same party, lightning strikes, and all of the sheep and shepherds are killed.
Then, same party, the Haldians come, and they kill all the camels and all the camel tenders.
I mean, this is getting really bad.
But you think the worst has come, a tornado comes, and it wrecks the house where all of
Job's kids are partying.
All of his children are killed.
This is a really bad day, right?
This is your really bad day.
I want you to notice one other very interesting thing about this passage.
We've got tornadoes, but we've also got Sabeans and Haldians.
And the Sabeans and Haldians are being represented as kind of just like tornadoes and lightning.
So there's already a sense in which the Book of Job is representing people, not as free
agents in the world, but as kind of among the kind of random catastrophes or benefits
that can happen.
This is not your kind of standard representation of human agency.
This isn't Aristotle.
This isn't the Gita.
But what does Job do?
Well, he laments the loss of his kids and his camels.
You would too, but he praises God.
And the first 22, it says, through all this, Job did not sin, nor did he blame God.
So, so far, it looks like God's winning the bet.
But Satan would like to kind of up the ante a little bit, push a few more chips to the
center.
And he says, now we're in Book 2, Verses 4 and 5, he says, yes, all that a man has,
he will give for his life, however, God, put forth thy hand now, and touch his bone and
his flesh, he will curse thee to thy face.
So you might think God's going to say, look, I made a deal.
You can have his stuff, but you can't have him.
But no, God's not being very nice to Job.
He says, OK, Satan, you can have Job just so you don't kill him.
No capital punishment here.
So Satan doesn't kill him, but you might wish that he had.
Instead, he gives him boils all over his body, makes him really sick, really disgusting,
and really itchy, and in a lot of pain.
And so what Job does is he goes to sit in the ashes, you can imagine him kind of in
the dump outside of town, because nobody wants to see him.
And he's sitting there scratching himself in the pot shard.
He is not a happy man.
This point, Job's wife makes her only appearance in the text.
There's all kinds of wonderments about why she has such a cameo role, but she does.
But it's not a very nice role.
She comes up to Job sitting in the ashes in the dump with his pot shard and all of his
boils, and you'd think she'd say something nice to him, right?
But of course, she's just lost all of her kids, and she's lost all of her donkeys.
So she says to him, do you still hold fast to your integrity?
Curse God and die.
That's pretty harsh stuff.
But what's she doing?
She's saying, Job, all this self-righteousness that you've had all these years, what good
is it doing you?
What good is it doing you?
Why don't you finally give up all this goofy piety and take care of business?
But Job doesn't respond that way.
What Job does is he laments.
He says, now we're in chapter 3, he says, let the day perish on which I was born.
Why did I not die at birth?
Let the day perish on which I was born.
Why did I not die at birth?
So Job really is unhappy.
You mustn't think that somehow Job is saying, look, I know a lot of bad stuff is happening,
but it's OK.
It's no big deal.
Job thinks it's a really big deal.
Job thinks life is really bad.
But what he doesn't do is to give up his faith.
And that's important.
I want you to also focus, as we read this, on an important fact.
We sometimes portray Job as this kind of constant through the book.
But I'm going to suggest that if we read this carefully, Job is going through some development
as this book goes on.
He's going to be changing his mind a little bit, thinking things through.
At this point, his real problems begin because of friends like Job's who need enemies.
His three friends, Eliphaz Bildab and Zophar, come to visit him.
And Eliphaz begins.
He says, you must have done something to deserve this.
After all, everybody does something wrong.
Bad things never happen to good people, Eliphaz argues.
Why not?
Well, God is just.
And Eliphaz argues that if Job just confesses his sins, whatever they are, and repents, everything's
going to be OK, because God's basically a good guy.
This is the view that we often grow up with.
Right?
If there's a deity, he's a good deity.
If we get punished, there's a reason for it.
And if we repent, everything's going to be OK.
But Job responds very sharply.
Job says, you know, what kind of friend are you, Eliphaz?
I need friends right now.
What I need from my friends is consolation, not rebuke.
And you know what?
You haven't told me what I've done wrong.
You haven't even shown me what to confess or to repent.
Now, there are two really important points here that Job is making.
The first one's a kind of Aristotelian point.
He's asking, what are friends for?
Friends are for consolation and for support, not for rebuke.
This isn't real friendship.
But the second one is that what Eliphaz is doing is a kind of presumption and a kind
of presumption that many people are prone to.
He's presuming to know that somebody else has done something wrong.
He's presuming to be able to solve the problem without having seen it.
And Job's point is right here at the book, misfortune doesn't need to be our fault.
Friendship can just happen.
That's what those bumper stickers are about.
Now, we might ask the question then, is life meaningless?
Job worries about that now and he worries about it in a series of questions.
The first one is, at the first point, he notes that life is pretty bad.
So in the beginning of book seven, Job says, is not man forced to labor on earth?
Were not his days like the days of a hired man?
As a slave who pants for the shade?
And as a hired man who eagerly waits for his wage?
So Job's saying, look, life really is hard.
We work hard.
We hope for a reward.
We don't always get that reward.
Second thing that Job worries about is that life is actually very brief.
I mean, we're born, we die.
And the poetry here is gorgeous.
Job says, my days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle and come to an end without hope.
Remember that my life is but breath.
My eye will not again see good.
The eye of him who sees me will behold me no more.
When a cloud vanishes, it is gone.
So he who has gone down to she old has not come up.
He will not return again to his house, nor will his place know him anymore.
So Job's pointing out, we live only a very short time.
It's a very short time that is full of toil with no reward.
How can something like this be meaningful?
Remember the question we raised at the beginning of this course?
We asked the question, how can life be meaningful if it's so brief in such a vast cosmic order?
The third question Job raises is the question about justice.
It seems that not only is life brief and tough, but unjust.
He writes, what is man that thou dost magnify him and that thou art concerned about him?
He's addressing God here, of course, but thou dost examine him every morning and try him
every moment.
Notice the quick twist, right?
It begins by saying, why do you even care about us?
But then he asks that thou dost examine him every morning and try him every moment.
Why are you giving us so much trouble?
Why won't you just leave me alone, Job is asking?
Note thou never turn thy gaze away from me, nor let me alone until I swallow my spittle?
Have I sinned?
What have I done to thee, O watcher of men, Job asks?
Why hast thou set me as thy target, so that I'm a burden to myself?
Why then dost thou not pardon my transgression and take away my iniquity?
For now I will lie down in the dust, and thou will seek me, but I will not be.
So Job is really challenging God here.
He's saying, what is the big deal here?
What's so important about me that you're causing me all of this trouble?
You're not being very nice.
And you know what?
I'm going to die, and then it's going to be too late for you to repent.
So this is a real strong challenge here.
Job has gone from this kind of boring piety to somebody who's really taking the bull by
the horns and challenging life.
But here Bill Dad comes in.
Bill Dad accuses Job, after hearing this, of charging God with injustice.
And that's blasphemy.
On the one hand, of course, he points out that Eliphaz was right.
Job had to have done something before.
But now it's even worse, because Job is just blasphemed, charging God with injustice, charging
him with creating this meaningless life.
Bill Dad assures Job that God is in fact just, and that everything would be OK if Job only
does his part.
He says in chapter 8, verse 20, God will not reject a man of integrity.
So Bill Dad's idea is that Job's fate is very much in his hands.
Life is fair, and life's a bargain with God.
If you're good, God will be good to you.
If something bad is happening to you, you must have done something you deserve it.
But Job's no fool.
He'll have absolutely none of this.
He argues here in a very subtle argument that justice is exactly the wrong metaphor for
thinking about God, because the parties are so unequal.
God makes the universe.
He made us.
So how can there be justice in between us?
Justice only makes sense, Job argues, if there's a fair judge between two parties with a dispute.
But who's going to be a judge between man and God?
If it's a matter of power, behold, he is the strong one.
If it's a matter of justice, who can summon him?
So that's the first thing.
Justice makes no sense.
But even more, Job says, by any good standards, God is a really unjust guy.
He says, he destroys the guiltless and the wicked.
The earth is given to the wicked.
He covers the faces of the judges.
If it's not he, then who is it?
So Job's saying, look, if you just take a look at the world, you're going to see that
it's full of injustice.
And since God's in charge, the buck stops there.
So at this point, the third friend comes in, Zophar.
Zophar offers a third critique of Job.
He says, look, Job, you're just a human being.
You don't understand anything about God.
Just accept that.
Accept that you don't understand what's going on.
Something happened.
God's in you.
You committed.
You don't know why God is doing this.
But repent.
In Zophar, we have a very traditional reading of this book.
What we have is a defense of blind irrational piety and the idea that we should just surrender
to the will of God.
And you might think that that would be the moral of the story, but it's not.
Job gives Zophar a general reply here.
He says, who are you to talk?
Do you think I'm some kind of idiot?
Your views are just tremendously superficial.
All of you three argue, as though you are God's attorneys.
Are you somehow channeling God?
What are you doing?
What are you even saying to me?
Has God made you his attorneys?
None of these attempts that you've offered, Bill of Dad, Zophar, Eliphaz, make any sense
of calamity.
Calamity makes no sense.
Justice makes no sense.
The real problem that I've got, Job here on the dust heap with the pot shard and the
boils is to try to make sense of my life in the face of the fact that I'm going to die
and my suffering is all about me and it's inevitable and I don't deserve it.
And that's us, right?
That's the point of the book of Job.
Every one of us is leading a brief life aimed at death full of tons of suffering that we
don't deserve and stuck in a universe that does not seem to be organized around us with
a just God who's rewarding every good thing that we do, punishing every unjust thing that
we do, and so forth.
So the question is, what does life mean in that case?
And that's the question Job asked at this point.
And Job puts it this way, now in chapter 14.
He says, man who was born of woman is short-lived and full of turmoil.
Like a flower he comes forth and withers.
He also flees like a shadow and does not remain.
I'd like you to pause and just notice how beautiful the poetry is in this book.
It's absolutely gorgeous.
For there is hope for a tree that when it's cut down that it will sprout again.
But a man dies and lies prostrate.
Man expires and where is he?
So man lies down and does not rise.
Job compares us to trees but says it's even worse for us.
You cut down a tree, it might grow up.
When you die, it's all over.
It makes it a lot harder to see what's going on.
So where does this leave us?
Given a certain normal model of piety, given a certain obvious model of God's justice,
the obvious explanation for Job's predicament, the obvious explanation to any of his friends,
to his wife, to anybody contemporary with him, is that Job must have done something
to deserve this.
That's what his friends say.
And given a sense of a just universe or a just God, that's not a crazy view.
If you think the universe makes sense, then something must have happened to cause Job's
suffering.
But we also know, and the book sets this up, that that analysis is wrong.
Job doesn't deserve it.
He was very good.
He did nothing wrong.
God and the devil made a cruel bet and decided to torment him.
So what is the meaning of all of this?
That's the question we'll try to address in our next lecture.
