It's good to be back with you in Classical China.
In our last lecture, we reviewed the Confucian view of the good life.
We talked a bit about the context and the history of the strange texts, the Anilects,
and introduced these key Confucian concepts of ren or humanity, warmheartedness, li, propriety
or etiquette, ritual, correctness, de, virtu, chow, filiopiety, respect for elders, understanding
one's place in society, tian, this idea of the order or mandate of heaven, and will-way,
the goal of cultivation of effortless, virtuoso action in all things.
We emphasized that for the Confucians, the highest good, the most meaningful life is
one in which we cultivate these characteristics, cultivate personal propriety in a social context,
in a social order that itself reflects a cosmic order, and that this notion of effortlessness
of what I like to think of as virtuosity in human behavior is accomplished through the
mastery of social conventions, a mastery so complete that they become part of us, cut,
polished, ground, so that the meaning of life for the Confucians is found in a kind of social
propriety.
Today we'll be moving to a very different Chinese tradition, the Taoist tradition.
I'm going to begin by talking about the meanings of the word Tao itself.
Then we're going to ask the question, what is the Tao a Tao of?
And discuss what's distinctive about the Taoist account of life as opposed to the Confucian.
But then we're going to get very textual.
We're going to spend a lot of time looking actually at alternate translations of Book
1, Chapter 1 of the Tao to Jing, and talking about the complexity of reading this text
before then spending a bit more time on Chapter 2, so this will be a nice textual day for
us.
I should say that part of my principle in choosing the texts to read with you is I only
choose my favorite texts, ones I really like to read, and this one is really high up on
the list.
The Tao to Jing is traditionally ascribed to a shadowy figure Lao Zhu.
The word Lao Zhu isn't even a name, it means the old master.
Hegeographically he's represented as an older contemporary of Confucius.
However, there's no very clear evidence that he ever actually existed, and there's no clear
sense of who actually wrote the Tao to Jing and over what period it was actually written.
It's a very shadowy text written by a very shadowy author or collection of authors.
Old contemporary scholarship takes it that the Tao to Jing is actually a compilation
of bits and pieces and sayings and chapters from a variety of earlier sources.
There seem to have been several early recensions of the text, but the one that we know and
love was solidified somewhere around the third or second century before the common era.
It comprises 81 chapters of varying length, some are only a few lines long, some a whole
page long, and they're grouped into two books.
The first book begins with the word Tao, which means way.
The second book begins with the word day, which as we've seen means virtue.
So Tao to Jing means really the book whose first volume begins with the word Tao and
whose second volume begins with the word day.
There's actually also a version in which the two books are reversed and what we normally
know as book two comes first, and that one not surprisingly is called the Day Tao Jing,
but we'll be looking at the Tao to Jing.
The Tao to Jing turns out to be the most frequently translated book in the world.
Almost everybody who learns to read and write classical Chinese seems to translate the Tao
to Jing.
There are literally hundreds of them.
One of the things that we're going to see that's so fascinating is the translations
of this text differ vastly.
And that's because the text itself is very open-ended, very complex, and is susceptible
to many different interpretations.
It has been read, for instance, as primarily a religious text.
It's been read as a philosophical text.
It's been read as a political text, and it's even been read as a text on military strategy.
Mao Zedong, for instance, said to have relied heavily on the Tao to Jing in planning the
Long March during the Chinese Revolution.
Taoism is very much a living tradition in China.
There are Taoist monks, Taoist temples, Taoist philosophers working within the tradition.
As we're going to see, it is antagonistic to Confucianism.
The Taoists really took themselves as critics of a Confucian order.
On the other hand, with the Confucian tradition, Taoism shares a certain preoccupation with
this idea of Wu Wei, sometimes translated as inaction, but as I have suggested, effortless
action is a much better translation.
Wu Wei, in this sense, can be thought of as I keep emphasizing as virtuosity, the kind
of fluidity in action, fluidity in life that comes from long practice and accustoming oneself
to acting in a particular way.
But what we're going to see that's so much fun is that the Taoists have a completely
opposite understanding of the cultivation of Wu Wei, of virtuosity.
Whereas for the Confucians, this is a positive thing, building up more and more propriety,
better and better habits, more and more understanding of the classics and of how to behave.
For the Taoists, it's entirely negative, cutting away, shaving away, returning to a natural
state, getting rid of accretions.
And there's an opposite understanding of the relationship between culture and nature.
For the Taoists, culture inhibits our naturalness.
Whereas for the Confucians, as we've seen, it's part of our nature to be cultured and
to become cultured.
And we will also see an opposite understanding of the role of language and conventions.
For the Confucians, these are cultivating, civilizing factors that make us better.
For the Taoists, they just get in the way.
Let's pay attention to this crucial word, Tao, right now.
Pay attention to its root.
The meaning of the word Tao, most simply, is a way.
So it can mean a way to go, that is the way to get from New York to Los Angeles.
It can mean a path.
So I could talk about a Tao as being a path through a forest or a particular road or route.
It could be a way of doing things, my particular way of dancing, or my particular way of composing
a lecture, or my particular way of walking.
So a Tao can be a way that we do things.
And it can also be then a way of life.
So a Tao can be the way I lead my life.
But interestingly, interestingly, a Tao can also mean a discourse, a speech, a discussion,
or it can mean a text.
A Tao can be a poem, or a paragraph, or a sentence.
In this sense, it can be a way of thinking or a way of talking.
And finally, it can also refer to the fundamental nature of reality.
As we might put it, the way things are, the way the universe exists.
And so Tao can have all of these meanings.
And because of that, trying to interpret Taoism and the Tao Te Ching becomes a very complicated
matter.
The second word that we have to worry about is this word, day, that we've encountered
in the Confucian context, meaning virtue.
So it can mean moral virtue.
But it can also mean nature, as in the nature of things.
It can mean excellence.
It can mean purity.
It can mean power.
And it can mean light.
And so it can contrast with darkness.
So day has all of these different meanings as well.
So when we talk about the Tao Te Ching, all of a sudden the meanings of these words become
very complex and very fluid.
So in the Tao Te Ching, what is the Tao a Tao of?
Well primarily it's a Tao of life, a way of life, a way to live.
And the way of life that it is is a life that's lived in harmony with the universe.
For that reason, it's also the Tao of the universe, the fundamental nature of things.
Because the central insight of Taoism is that the right way to live is in harmony with
the way the universe itself is.
But since human life is so concerned with talking and thinking and drawing distinctions,
it's also a Tao of talk and a Tao of thought.
How should we think about things?
How should we describe what we're doing?
The Tao in this sense is all of these things.
The nature of the universe, the way we should live, the way we should think about the nature
of the universe and how to live.
The Taoist account of life is distinctive in several ways.
One I've already mentioned, there's a pairing way that Taoists argue, not a development.
The Confucians argue that we develop more and more culture and become better.
The Taoists that we become better, the more of our culture we strip away and we turn
to nature.
The emphasis then is on nature, not culture.
A second idea in Taoism that's so important is that there's always an emphasis on the
background, not the foreground.
We're always going to find Taoists emphasizing the empty space as opposed to the positive
things that occupy that space.
The goal is a goal not of creating a kind of spontaneity, but of recovering an effortless
spontaneity that we have in us from birth.
There's also always a deep suspicion of language and thought in Taoism and an attempt to return
to a primordial mode of thinking that is prior to and more fundamental than discursive thought.
As we look at chapter one, we're going to encounter a few major themes.
One is a critique of a Confucian idea that we need to get our language just right and
that's going to occur through a kind of emphasis on the variability and relativity of meaning.
An introduction of the idea that there has to be a primordial, non-discursive ground
of experience that makes signs, thought, language, and action possible and noticing
of a special role of desire in generating experience and this emphasis on the negative
space as a ground for the positive.
What I'd like to do with you now is to look at book one and to look at it by looking at
three different translations of book one to, first of all, just give you a sense of the
manifold ways in which this text is read, but also to keep you constantly on guard to
note that we are reading English translations of a text that was composed in classical Chinese
and whose meaning is highly contested so that later on when we settle on a single translation,
you will share with me the suspicion of that translation that one ought to always have of
texts being read in translation.
The three translations we're going to consider are one by Chad Hansen, one by PJ Ivanhoe,
and one by Red Pine.
All translators with very different approaches to the text.
So the first lines of the Dauda Jing read as follows.
I'm going to begin with Ivanhoe's translation.
A way that can be followed is not a constant way.
A name that can be named is not a constant name.
So here the focus is on the relationship between language and ways of being.
Hansen translates it somewhat differently.
He writes, no discourse that can be spoken is a constant discourse.
No name that can be spoken is a constant name.
So here where we have the term Daud translated as way by Ivanhoe, Hansen is emphasizing its
linguistic character translating into discourse.
Red Pine on the other hand says, the way that becomes a way is not the immortal way, keeping
the way language.
The name that becomes a name is not the immortal name.
And here Red Pine we see is emphasizing this notion of permanence and impermanence.
So very different reads for that.
But in each case we have the idea that there's no constant way that things are, no single
way to speak, no single stable meaning that signs have.
Moving to the second lines in chapter one, Ivanhoe writes, nameless it is the beginning
of heaven and earth, named it as the mother of myriad creatures.
Hansen writes, lacking names is the beginning of the universe, having names is the mother
of all things.
And Red Pine again, the maiden of heaven and earth has no name.
The mother of all things has a name.
These are very different reads indeed.
But in each case we're worrying about names, we're worrying about signs.
And in each case we can see that there's an emphasis on the text, that the world is not
primordially signified, that the nature of the universe is not made to be talked about,
and that when we apply names to things we're going beyond the way things are.
For a Taoist, therefore, occluding reality in an important way.
The third part of this opening chapter in Ivanhoe's translation begins, and so always
eliminate desires in order to observe its mysteries.
Always have desires in order to observe its manifestations.
Hansen's read is pretty similar.
He says, therefore, constantly lack desires in order to observe its mysteries.
We have desires in order to view its manifestations.
So Hansen and Ivanhoe are both emphasizing the idea of the relationship between desire
and reality.
If we leave our desires behind and just see reality as it is in a kind of detached way,
we'll actually see reality and observe its mysteries.
But if we want to observe the way that reality manifests itself in objects, in things that
are characterized in conceptual thought, then that's driven by desire.
It's when I want gold that dirt and stones become gold ore.
It's when I'm looking for firewood that this whole world of trees and grasses suddenly
becomes a forest with cuttable trees.
So it's desires that bring about the objects that I care about.
But Red Pine has a very different reading of this.
He writes, thus in innocence we see the beginning, in passion we see the end.
And he's emphasizing a very different idea with which the doubt of Jing is pregnant.
The idea that the world itself is one that's open to us through a kind of innocent primordial
awareness.
But all of that ends and goes away.
And we lose our connection with reality when we allow our passions to take over, when we
allow our desires to take over.
The final part of this chapter, Ivan Ho has, their unity is known as an enigma.
Within this enigma is yet a deeper enigma, the gate of all mysteries.
Hansen, slightly different read.
These two come together and are differently named.
Their unity is known as an enigma.
Within this enigma is yet a deeper enigma, creates mysteries and even deeper mysteries.
In both of these cases, what's being unified?
What's being unified is this primordial, undifferentiated, ineffable nature of reality.
And this world of distinguished things that we name and describe, objects, properties
of objects, things we want, things we don't want, things we take to be good, things we
take to be bad, subject, object.
The point though is that these two things are one and the same, experienced in different
ways.
And it's the unity of the undifferentiated and the differentiated, the unconceptualized
and the conceptualized, that is the greatest mystery and enigma.
Red pine slightly different.
Two different names for one and the same, the Tao, the primordial way of being or the
many things.
The one we call dark, the dark beyond dark, the door to all beginnings.
Here we have Tao and Dei contrasted, Tao as darkness, something unknown, undifferentiated.
Dei, virtue, the way we think about things as light.
So chapter one introduces us to a number of important Taoist themes.
One is that words and names are conventional, they're not constant, their meanings aren't
anchored to reality.
They're things that we make up and they can change.
That there is a kind of primordial ground for the possibility of thinking, this Tao,
this undifferentiated reality, that we can't literally describe but is the basis of our
ability to experience and to describe anything.
The idea that desire, our own human concerns, bring particular entities into a foreground.
Trees step out of a forest, blades of grass out of a lawn in order for us to conceive
of them and to experience them as individual objects.
These are concerns that make them the objects that they are.
Reality doesn't come pre-carved into entities for us.
And finally, that the negative space, this darkness, this Tao, is the ground of the positive
space.
The positive stuff emerges from that and to understand the relationship between that emergent
positive emerge through our conceptual constructions and the primordial is the deepest mystery.
We're going to turn in the moment to chapter two of book one.
And in chapter two of book one, we're going to encounter further Dallas names.
One is going to be the idea of the mutual relativity of things.
We're going to see a discussion of the relativity of values to one another, to good, bad, beautiful,
and ugly.
The mutual dependence of opposites, the idea that we can only characterize something as
having a particular quality if we characterize something else as having the opposite quality,
but also a critique of our habitual tendency to valorize one end of these pairs of opposites,
to always prefer the beautiful over the ugly, the long over the short, and so on.
And finally, in chapter two, we're going to encounter for the first time a Dallas understanding
of the idea of Wu Wei, of spontaneous virtuoso action.
So now what we're going to do is move into chapter two.
And at this point, I will be relying on the translation of red pine.
We're going to set aside this comparison of translations, but you're going to remember
in the background that for every chapter of the Dowda Jing we discuss, we'll be relying
on a single translation, and there are hundreds of others, and that interpretation always lies
behind translation.
So translator, myself, this is something that I always try to bear in mind.
Translation is always interpretation.
There's a great Italian proverb, traditore traditore, translators are traitors.
Whenever we translate a text, we do something to it.
There's no way to avoid that, and then we present the text to a reader as the original
text and the poor reader doesn't know what's going on.
I want you to always know what's going on when you read a translation.
That's why we spent that time on chapter one with those multiple translations.
So chapter two, all the world knows beauty.
But if that becomes beautiful, this becomes ugly.
So when we characterize one thing as something that's beautiful, we're always characterizing
something else as ugly.
Beautiful and ugly are comparative terms.
All the world knows good, but if that becomes good, this becomes bad.
So once again, we like to evaluate things.
This is the good car, this is the bad car, this is the good route to where I'm going,
this is the bad route to where I'm going, this is good restaurant, this is a bad restaurant.
When we do that, though, we are all, we take ourselves, while we take ourselves, to be
identifying an intrinsic property that one of them has, goodness or badness.
The doubt of Jing is emphasizing that all we're doing is comparison, and that comparison
is always relative to our taste.
And so what we do is we project our tastes into first a comparison and then an intrinsic
attribution of value to things in the world, which by themselves, just as things in the
world have no value positive or negative whatsoever.
The text continues, the coexistence of have and have not, the co-production of hard and
easy, the correlation of long and short, the co-dependence of high and low.
Here again, we have a series of extremes.
In each case, we can find ourselves in cognitive circumstances where we see something and say,
that's a tall tree, or that's a long road, or that's a short person, and we instinctively
take ourselves to be noticing some property that that thing has all by itself.
The doubt of Jing here is trying to correct us and to say, first of all, what we're doing
is actually engaged in a comparison, not an intrinsic characterization.
But secondly, that comparison is not of things in the world that have got properties independent
of our concerns, but rather a projection of our own concerns, of our own desires, as we
saw in Book 1, on the world in order to create the dichotomy, which then becomes the fallacious
intrinsic attribution.
So we move from a primordial ground to a this and that with this property and that property
instinctively, and in doing so, we distance ourselves from reality.
Next line is lovely, the correspondence of note and noise.
This is kind of nice.
If you think about listening to music against background noise, so suppose you're out in
the park and you're listening to a concert, but there's also children playing in the background
and dogs barking and cars going, and you are trying to distinguish the notes the band is
playing from the noise, notice what you're doing.
You're listening to this vast array of sound in the world around you, undifferentiated all
coming in, and you are deciding, that's what I'm going to pay attention to.
Now, you think, okay, I heard music and the music was playing against a background of
kids and dogs and cars, but you weren't.
What you were hearing was a vast array of sound and you chose to fasten on the music
as the foreground and the rest as the background.
The doubtaging here is urging you, pay attention to the background.
The background is there too, and part of the world that you live in.
The coordination of first and last is endless.
Thus, the sage performs effortless deeds and teaches wordless lessons.
This coordination, this fact that foreground and background are always co-relative to one
another, that things do not appear to us as objects, things don't appear to us as characterized
unless there's a background against which they appear, that notes don't appear except
against a background of things that aren't notes, even silence, forces us to come to
grips with the fact that we actually are taking a natural world with which we can live in
harmony and reconstructing it as an artificial world with which it's difficult to live in
harmony.
Notice the opposite here to the Confucian view.
So the sage performs effortless deeds and teaches wordless lessons.
Means that the sage, the Taoist ideal person in paying attention to the background as well
as the foreground, gives up the effort of distinguishing foreground from background
and is able therefore to recover a spontaneous engagement with the entire matrix of world
in which he exists rather than only resonating to those small items that he chooses as placed
in the foreground.
Continues, he doesn't start all the things he begins.
He doesn't presume on what he does.
That is, the sage recognizes that many of the actions, the Taoist sage in which he's
involved didn't begin with him.
He is one moment in the history of a very long causal process.
He himself or she herself isn't somehow an object against a background, a self against
a lot of other who initiates actions that are kind of unique, but rather a participant
in a vast array of processes, a nature with which we're in harmony whether we like it
or not.
He doesn't claim what he achieves.
That is, I recognize that when I think there's something I've done, it's actually the recognition
of the fact that that achievement is the consequence of the confluence of a vast causal network
of which I'm only one part.
In this, for instance, you're a member of a team or an organization, and you've got
a piece of a project.
Maybe you're trying to develop a proposal for a client, or maybe you're trying to write
a legal brief with a team of people, and you get to the end and you say, aha, I've done
it.
I've written it.
I've composed it.
And you tend to think that way.
Or you're driving to somebody's house and you say, I got here.
And you say, I've achieved it.
The Dallas is pointing out that when you've done that, you've placed yourself in the foreground
and everybody else in the background.
In the case of writing the brief or preparing the proposal, you've forgotten about all of
your colleagues.
You've forgotten about the library.
You've forgotten about all the textbooks that helped you.
You've forgotten about the teachers who taught you how to do that.
When you drive from here to there and you say, I drove to her house, you forget that somebody
had to build that car, that somebody had to maintain the roads, that other drivers had
to not crash into you.
That achievement isn't something you've accomplished alone, but what you have done is extracted
yourself into a foreground from a background that you've then deprecated.
And by doing that, you've distanced yourself from reality.
And this chapter concludes, and because he makes no claim, that is because he doesn't
claim this kind of primacy, this kind of ontological specialness in the world, he suffers no loss.
That is, he doesn't have to be attached to these things, and so that if things go wrong,
we recognize it's not something that happened to me, it's just the way the world is.
Compare the Stoics on this, and you'll see a really nice resonance.
So we've got a bunch of really nice themes, Taoist themes that come out of chapter two.
We've got this idea of relativity as important as opposed to things having absolute properties,
long and short, good and bad.
The idea that values are all connected to one another, and that they're relative to
our preferences, they're not things that are externally real.
There's no privileged pole in any of these binaries.
When we see something as beautiful, that doesn't mean it's better, it means we like it more.
When we value some food as good and other as bad, it doesn't mean that there's something
special about it, it tells us something about us.
And if we can come to recognize this, we can come to interact with the world through
Wu Wei effortlessly, spontaneously, without calculated thought, without attributing these
abstract properties to other things, and without distinguishing ourselves as special within
that matrix.
So this is a nice beginning into Taoism.
What we've done today is we've talked a bit about the relationship between Taoism and
Confucianism, a bit about this complex issue of the many meanings of Tao, and of what the
Tao is a Tao of, and I hope we're beginning to see what's distinctive about the Taoist
account of life in the book one and two, and that book one, chapters one and two, have helped
us through that.
In our next lecture, we're going to get deeper into the Tao to Jing and explore all of these
themes in much more detail, and I hope you're enjoying this text as much as I am.
