Welcome back to our discussion of this great Chinese classic, The Doubting.
I want to begin by briefly reviewing some of the highlights that we found in chapters
one and two of book one, so that those are fresh in our minds as we begin to work further
into the text.
We introduced this very complex idea of a Tao, of a way, a way of behaving, a way of living,
but also the way that the universe works.
Also, a way of talking, a way of thinking, a way of understanding these things.
I want to remind you that it's going to be important to keep all of these many meanings
of the word Tao in play, all of them in mind as we talk about the Taoist understanding
of life, because if we're using this word in the sense that it's used in the text and
in the way that a Taoist thinker would think about it, all of these meanings are present
at once, not as alternatives, but as a kind of complex of meaning for the term.
That's going to be important for us, but for us, primarily, we're going to be thinking
about what The Doubting says about how we ought to live our lives.
Now, The Doubting, in emphasizing the Tao of life as we've seen, begins with a kind
of critique of the way that words or names as we've seen in the translations function
in the Tao of our lives.
Part of what was going on in that first chapter was emphasizing that we get trapped by our
language in an important way, and in getting trapped by language and by the concepts that
language encodes, we manage to impede our own naturalness.
How do we do that?
We do that because we tend to think of the meanings of our words, the content of our
concepts as fixed, and as we think of those meanings as fixed and the concepts as fixed,
we think of them as somehow reflecting the nature of reality.
This is important for a couple of reasons.
One reason that it's important is because of the Confucian background against which
Taoism is reacting, because the Confucians were so focused on this idea of ritual correctness,
of propriety, of etiquette, and that involves saying the right thing at the right time,
calling each other by the right name, calling things by their right names, and the Taoists
are worried that there aren't any right names, there aren't any right things to say, that
names are flexible tools whose meaning changes with context.
But the second piece of that is that we get trapped by these names, we get trapped by
these concepts into thinking that the reality that we experience through these names and
concepts is reality as it actually is, as opposed to a kind of projection of our own
thinking.
In doing that, we put ourselves out of touch with reality, and if the goal of our lives
is to live in a kind of harmony with reality, to live in a way that reflects our own nature
and the nature of things around us, that's an obstacle, not an achievement.
Finally, the other important piece of this is that by naming things, by describing them,
we pick them out against a background, we pick them out as significant against a background
that we regard as relatively less significant or insignificant.
And in doing that, we tend to experience the world around us as a bunch of discrete objects,
some of which are beautiful, some of which are ugly, some of which are good, some of
which are bad, some of which we like, some of which we don't like, some of which are
us, some of which are other people, and so forth.
We kind of chunk it up, and the Taoist idea when we think about the Tao, the great way
that things are, is that reality doesn't come in chunks.
Reality is a seamless whole, and our lives aren't a single important chunk that looks
at all the other chunks, but are rather parts of those seamless holes.
And so that if we want to act in a sensible way, a fluid way, a way that's spontaneous,
we have to stop that chunking, we have to stop that interaction with the world through
this artificial web of conceptualization.
And finally, we saw in chapter one and in chapter two, this discussion about the importance
of seeing things as relative to one another as opposed to seeing them as absolute, that
so often this reification, this seeing of things as independent objects arises from
this tendency to take terms that are in fact relative, and indeed relative to our own perspectives,
and to see them as absolute descriptions of reality.
Once again, from the Taoist perspective, that's what all of this Confucian cultivation, all
of this cutting, polishing, grinding is about, is about reifying and crystallizing a view
of reality that only gets in the way.
Today, we're going to build on that discussion.
We're going to be focusing today on the Taoist conception of Wu Wei.
Now, as we saw in our discussion of Confucianism several lectures ago, and in our discussion
of Taoism in the last lecture, Confucianism and Taoism share a valorization of Wu Wei.
As I said, sometimes translated as non-action or inaction, but better translated as effortless
or spontaneous action.
This is a really important respect in which these classical Chinese traditions differ very
much from anything that we have seen in the Western tradition, except in this wonderful
echoing of Aristotle's idea that virtuous action is action that we sort of do voluntarily
and joyfully.
That's only a faint echo.
The real issue here is understanding the good life, understanding the meaningful life,
the life that we strive for as a life lived spontaneously, as a life in which we don't
need to explicitly think about, deliberate about, and choose each action we perform.
Again, you might want to contrast this with the perspective of the Bhagavad Gita, in which
the central idea is that at every moment we're choosing, and that we need to be choosing
reflectively, consciously.
The Confucians and Taoists, Chinese perspective in general, agree that that's precisely what
we don't want to be doing.
We don't want to be living a life of deliberation, a life of constant thought, a life of choice,
but rather a life of effortless spontaneity.
The only question, the big question between the Taoists and the Confucians is, what's
the right analysis of that kind of effortless spontaneity, and how do we achieve it?
So today, we're going to be looking at the Taoist negative account of the achievement
of this kind of spontaneity, and how it constitutes a critique of the Confucian positive account.
And what we'll be doing is, looking at that through what the Taoists see as the dangers
of cultivation, and of getting trapped by language.
We'll move from there into a discussion of Taoist ethical and moral theory, and conclude
with a discussion of what action looks like in the context of Wu Wei, in the context of
effortless action.
So we're going to begin by reading together from chapter 3, and once again, we're in
Red Pine's translation, one that I personally enjoy, just because of how it makes the language
sing.
But again, I emphasize there are many good translations, many very different translations
of this text.
So in chapter 3, the text reads, bestowing no honors keeps people from fighting, prizing
no treasures keeps people from stealing, displaying no attractions keeps people from
trouble.
Let's think about that for a minute.
Bestowing no honors keeps people from fighting.
What does that mean?
Well, again, the Taoist is sharing with the Confucian an interest in a peaceful, harmonious,
well-ordered society.
Think about what happens when it's time to give prizes at the end of the year at school,
or when Nobel Prizes are announced from Oslo, or when most valuable player awards are announced
at the end of seasons.
Immediately, somebody's really happy they got that prize, but a whole lot of other people
start complaining and bitching and moaning and talking about how the decision is really
political and why did he get it or why did she get it and what could the judges have
been thinking and the jealousy begins and the suspicion of the process begins and so
forth.
Now, we tend to focus on the winners and those big smiles on the podium and showing
the medal and their statements about how much they love all of us little people who helped
them get that and all that stuff.
What we don't focus on is that background, the fact that every time the award is given,
there's so much dissatisfaction as well.
We need to question the Taoists' suggests, which is it appropriate to focus on and where
the cost-benefit analysis is.
Prizing no treasures keeps people from stealing, again pretty obvious, theft is motivated when
things are seen as especially valuable and important and available only to a few places.
So the positive value of having treasure is often valorized without noticing the negative
content that creates covetousness.
Thus the text says, the rule of the sage empties the mind but fills the stomach, weakens the
will but strengthens the bones.
Some very nice metaphors here.
When we talk about emptying the mind but filling the stomach, the metaphor here is this.
The mind is the part that's doing all the conceptualizing, positing.
This is really good.
That's bad.
I want that.
I need that.
Picking things out against the background.
But the idea of the stomach, the stomach is the metaphor here for naturalness because
it's natural to get hungry when our stomach is empty.
Our stomach kind of drives us through instinct, the mind through calculation.
So when the text says that the rule of the sage empties the mind but fills the stomach,
it means that if you're smart in administration, you get people to stop calculating and thinking
about things but to work spontaneously.
Strengthens the will.
That is, it stops people from striving after these very particular goals, right, identifying
this award as what I'm trying to get.
This prize is what I'm trying to get.
This achievement is what I need to do.
But strengthens the bones, creates a healthier structure.
So here again, we have an emphasis on getting rid of the foreground, toning it down a bit,
paying attention to the background, lower the contrast on life.
It's a nice way to think about it.
It's also suggesting that there are big problems that arise when we fix models of success.
We get envy, we get a monolithic model of excellence that occludes other possibilities.
And it also reflects the idea that there's not one way of doing things.
That person who got the Pulitzer Prize for journalism, well, that doesn't suggest that's
the only way to do journalism.
But the prize emphasizes the only way, and so it misses all of the other ways.
It establishes intuitively, if not explicitly, one dow as constant, as permanent, and occludes
all of the other options.
And that's why we want to empty that mind and fill the stomach to reduce greed and so
forth.
We could see this as a model of living softly, or as I like to think about it, living at
low contrast.
We're next going to turn to Chapter 38.
And in Chapter 38, we're going to be looking at the dowest valuation of effort and of conceptualization
when we go about thinking about moral action.
Because think about this for a minute.
When we hit Aristotle a bit earlier in this course of lectures, we noticed that Aristotle
emphasized that virtue required effort.
It was hard to be good.
We had to strive for it.
We had to cultivate ourselves.
We had to develop virtue.
And happiness required, and virtuous action required, a lot of conceptualization.
It required us to have practical wisdom, skill in deliberation, skill in making the right
choices.
That view is shared in the Confucian account.
That is, becoming a cultivated person with ritual propriety, filial piety, and so forth
requires a great deal of effort, grinding, polishing, and so forth, and a great deal
of thought, understanding those classics, understanding what's to be done.
We're going to see that the dowests are going to reject all of that.
We're also going to see an explicit denigration of Confucian accounts of justice and of ritual.
And there's a beautiful irony in this passage, and I want you to pay attention to the language
and the poetry, because there's a very pretty, ironic account of what happens to societies
as they focus on morality.
And it has a lot to say about contemporary American society, I think.
So we're in chapter 38.
When the way is lost, virtue appears.
When virtue is lost, kindness appears.
When kindness is lost, justice appears.
Let's stop at this point and talk about this for a moment.
What's the way?
That's the dow.
That is just spontaneous behavior in accordance with nature.
When we lose the ability to do that, when we suddenly lose our spontaneity by getting
caught up in our conventions, in our concepts, in our focus on the foreground and ignoring
the background, we need some way to get us to behave.
And what we get is a doctrine of virtue, a doctrine of day, the doctrine of moral obligation
and so forth.
So we study how we should behave.
The Confucian idea is that this is often one thought too many.
I'm going to give you an analogy that comes from a wonderful discussion in Western philosophy.
Suppose that you were sick in the hospital and your friend came to visit you, and you
said, it's so kind of you to come.
And she said, oh, don't worry about it.
I thought about it morally, and I thought that I was obligated to come, and that's what
virtue demanded.
So that's why I came.
One thought too many.
All of a sudden, an act of spontaneous kindness that you would have enjoyed, an act of spontaneous
engagement, a way of being, got replaced with virtue.
And all of a sudden, things aren't quite so beautiful as you thought they were.
When virtue is lost, kindness appears.
Now we're moving down the Confucian hierarchy, right?
When we don't any longer have our virtue, then we have to instruct people to at least
be kind to one another.
They might not be honest.
They might not be following all of their duties, but at least be nice.
But what happens when kindness is lost?
When people stop even being nice to each other, then we need justice.
Then we need the courts.
Then we need somebody to say, all right, if you're not going to be nice to each other,
at least be fair.
So now we've got a hierarchy.
The way, the natural way of being, then virtue, then kindness, then justice.
And notice how much in our society we think of justice as one of those highest virtues,
something exalted.
The Taoist here is putting it way down on the hierarchy.
But what happens when justice is lost?
I'll read to you.
When justice is lost, ritual appears.
And ritual marks the waning of belief and the onset of confusion.
Now of course, having just been paying attention to all of this Confucian doctrine, we see
what the target is here, right?
That if you lose even justice, then what people do is start going ritually through the forms
of behavior.
And there's not even any pretense that there's fairness or equity anymore.
We're just doing what one ought to, behaving comial full.
And at that point, as the text says, we've got the waning of belief and the onset of
confusion.
People are just behaving in particular ways, only because they know that's the way people
behave.
That's the right way to behave.
They're putting the fork on the left and the knife on the right, but they're not worrying
about whether each person has an appropriate share of the food, let alone being nice to
each other, let alone behaving virtuously, let alone behaving spontaneously.
So in this wonderful chapter on morality, we see a kind of negative valuation of effort
in what it takes to be human.
In each of these stages, we see etiquette, propriety requires more effort of us, conscious
effort moment to moment than does justice.
Kindness requires more effort than does kindness.
Kindness requires more effort than cultivated virtue.
Cultivated virtue requires more calculated effort than simply behaving naturally and
humanly.
And so the idea here is that the most effortless kind of behavior, the most spontaneous kind
of behavior is the best.
Effort, cultivation, striving, thinking about what we're doing emerge only as necessities
when we lose our character, when we lose what's really important.
We also find here, more specifically with respect to the kind of confusion context,
a specific denigration of justice and ritual, a specific denigration of the explicit forms
of behavior, forms of social intercourse, and the most ritualized, calcified, specified,
and explicit forms of social interaction.
If we think about justice, the signing of contracts, courtroom procedure, and if we
think about ritual in this highly etiquette, etiquetteized sense of ritual where each kind
of interaction has its own form of language, its own form of behavior, then what we're
thinking about is the most fossilized forms of interpersonal interaction in which we engage,
the most fossilized, the least natural.
Those are often the ones that people valorize as the foundations of our social order.
Confusions, for instance, valorize those.
They see this regularization, this polish, this enforced politeness, this correctness,
and the proceduralization of daily life as what generates stability in society.
This is the foundation of bureaucracy.
It's the foundation of procedural justice, and it's the foundation of high society etiquette.
It does keep everything quiet and keeps the frozen smiles on people's faces.
The Taoist point, though, is that what it freezes is genuine human interaction.
It freezes it out completely, and genuine human interaction and the genuine enjoyment
of our lives absolutely vanishes.
So we have this wonderful sequence.
The highest stage of morality is Tao, harmony with the way of the world, living naturally
and spontaneously.
The next level down, cultivated virtue, at least having internalized moral qualities
that are beneficial.
The next level down, studied kindness, not spontaneously doing what you know to be right
because it's internalized, but asking yourself, what would the nice thing to do be?
The next one down, justice.
This kind of ritualized, fossilized, legalized way of dealing with one another.
So if we can't be nice, at least we don't get into fistfights in public and start wars,
and the evil gets punished and the good gets rewarded.
And when justice falls apart, what we have is ritual.
And the Taoist point is that every one of these steps of denigration, every step in
which we degrade ourselves from a natural state to a totally artificial state, occurs
through a single kind of process, cultivation, cultivation, this positive sense of cultivating
ourselves as social human beings, as conceived in the Confucian framework.
So the idea is, if you begin by people behaving spontaneously with the Tao, and then we ask
ourselves, how can we bottle that?
How can we cultivate it so that we can train it?
What do we do?
We ask, what are people like who behave in this way?
And we catalog a set of virtues, something that Aristotle does, something that Confucius
does.
And so we cultivate those virtues.
Then we might ask ourselves, okay.
Now we know what those virtues are.
What kind of person do you need to be in order to become virtuous?
And we say, you've got to cultivate kindness, right?
That's really important.
You've got to turn people into people who think in this particular way.
And so we cultivate kindness.
And then you might imagine talking to a child about how to be kind, and it moves into be
fair to each other, be nice to each other, and we cultivate justice.
And finally we teach, please and thank you, when we lose all other hope.
But for the Taoist, this is exactly what the Confucian model of cultivation is.
It's a success of destruction of natural life through civilization.
So what we see here is this whole idea that these rigid Confucian concepts destroy our
spontaneous perception and engagement.
They set up these kind of unattainable goals, and we're going to begin now to see how that
emerges through the destructive forces of language and cognition and their particular
role in cultivation of this kind of reflective, goal-driven approach to life as opposed to
a spontaneous, natural version.
So we're going to move back now to chapter 12.
And chapter 12 has a wonderful set of paradoxes, but a wonderful set of paradoxes with a very,
very deep point.
The critique here will be specifically a critique of language, conceptuality, and their role
in cultivation.
So the chapter begins like this.
The five colors make our eyes blind.
The five tones make our ears deaf.
The five flavors make our mouths numb.
Now let's think about that.
What in the world could the Dowda Jing mean when it says that the colors, or is it sometimes
translated, the five colors make our eyes blind, and that the five tones make our ears
deaf?
The five flavors make our mouths numb?
Well, the five tones are the five tones in the Chinese classical scale.
The colors are the colors that we can name, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and so forth.
The five flavors are the classical five basic flavors in Chinese cuisine.
What does that mean that they blind us, deafen us, and numb our mouths?
Just this, that if you conceptualize the color, you conceptualize it discreetly.
So if we name something red, then we tend to see scarlet, crimson, brick red, and so
forth all as the same color.
We see sky blue, indigo, navy blue, all as blue.
And so what we do is we take a very multifarious world towards which we could just open our
eyes and see a wide colored palette, and we restrict it into boxes defined by conceptual
categories, defined by the words and concepts we have.
The five tones enable us to hear maybe a perfect, you know, dominant tone or a perfect tonic,
but they deafen us to the notes in between, to the quarter tones we might hear on an Indian
scale.
And you can hear this yourself.
Many people who grow up listening only to Western classical music when they listen to
Indian music think everything is out of tune, because their ears are tuned to just hear
the five tones, as it were, or the eight tones or the thirteen tones, depending on how you
think about the Western scale.
And so the doubtaging is pointing out that conceptualizing and freezing these categories
doesn't help us to hear, doesn't help us to see, doesn't help us to taste, but rather
breaks a continuous reality into pigeonhole little bits.
And so occludes reality, doesn't reveal it.
Riding and hunting make our minds wild.
Hard to get food to make us break laws.
Again, you can see how that works.
A lot of the things that we encourage are such great things, in fact, just cause trouble.
Thus the rule of the sage puts the stomach over the eyes, thus he picks this over that.
And the idea here, of course, it's the same metaphor.
The right thing to do is take instinct over conceptuality.
Allow yourself to hear, allow yourself to see, allow yourself to taste, and stop the
labeling.
And do your choosing instinctively, not conceptually.
Now let's move into morality more explicitly, and we're going to see a kind of recap of
some of these important discussions that we saw earlier.
In chapter 18, the text says, when the great way disappears, that is when we lose our ability
to harmonize with the Tao, we meet kindness and justice, we've seen that.
We already know how that one goes, but now listen to how it continues.
When reason appears, we meet great deceit.
That is what we need to do in order to get ourselves to be dishonest.
Just to start the conceptualization going.
Dishonesty doesn't come from instinct and natural behavior, it comes from calculation.
When the six relations fail, we meet obedience and love.
That is when our natural relationships to other people fail, we need to tell people how
to behave.
Listen to your father, do what your mother says.
You need to love your grandmother right now.
And of course all of that creates this artificial cramped behavior that's nothing like human
behavior.
And when the country is in chaos, we meet honest officials.
The need for officials in the first place, the need for sheriffs and judges only emerges
when we have chaos.
If things are behaving naturally and orderly, we don't worry about them.
These officials only get their point from trouble.
The background is what we ought to pay attention to.
If we care about our officials, it's because there are problems to solve, not because our
officials are so wonderful.
And so the text admonishes in chapter 19, get rid of wisdom and reason and people will
live 100 times better.
Get rid of kindness and justice and people will once more love and obey.
Get rid of cleverness and profit and thieves will cease to exist.
But these three sayings are not enough.
Hence let this be added.
Wear the undied and hold the uncarved.
Reduce self-interest and limit desires.
Get rid of learning and problems will vanish.
The uncarved and the undied, return to nature, don't try to create new cultivation.
Get rid of those Confucian ideas.
And so the text is urging us that morality is harmed, not helped by sophistication,
cultivation and structure.
Our social structures and our artificial values that they embody induce not human progress,
but decadence and corruption.
And the Taoists argue that the best life is the simple, natural life, not this life
of sophisticated cultivation.
That's why we have such a serious critique of the Confucian view.
And so the Tao Dajing can say, the Tao does nothing, and yet there's nothing it doesn't
do.
In Wu Wei, in effortless spontaneity, we get productive action.
Remember what we learned in the Bhagavad Gita.
Action is always necessary.
Refusing to act is itself an action.
So oftentimes not doing something is exactly the right thing to do.
If we live our lives peacefully and calmly in harmony with nature, we can calm others.
And sometimes the best thing we can do to a life isn't to add more to it, but to cut
away.
Just as sometimes the best thing we can do to a garden isn't to add more bushes and
more trees, but to prune the ones that we have.
And once again, what we see in the Taoist perspective is that it's that negative space,
the place to go back to that's the most significant.
Not the positive stuff that's in front of us, even though the negative space is so hard
to see.
So this concludes our kind of exploration of Wu Wei, spontaneous, effortless action,
and the nature of inaction.
This focus on a kind of self-cultivation by reduction rather than a kind of construction
of an ability to achieve external goals, a discarding of conceptual thought, a valorization
of natural perception.
Stay with us until the next lecture and we'll go even deeper into the Dao De Jing and we'll
see how this idea of Wu Wei works itself out in action.
