It's wonderful to be back with you.
We still find ourselves in Taoist China.
This will be our last lecture on Taoism in China.
And before we begin discussing the Zhuangzi, which will be the text on which we will focus
today.
I'd like to recap and deepen a few big picture themes that have emerged from our last few
lectures on the Daotijing, the kind of big principles of Taoism that we might want to
have in mind as we move into the Zhuangzi.
The first one to recall is that for the Daoists, there's a wonderful emphasis on the negative
rather than the positive.
When a Daoist looks at a landscape, she doesn't see the mountains, she sees the valleys.
When she looks at a photograph, she looks first at the background than the foreground.
And when we think about what it is to attain the kind of life that we would like to lead,
an ideal, deepest, most meaningful life, we don't think in terms of acquiring more and
more, more and more possessions, more and more friends, more and more knowledge, more and
more cultivation or polish rather for the Daoists.
Moral cultivation, personal cultivation, the cultivation of happiness is an essentially
negative process, a stripping away of attachments, a stripping away of even knowledge and conceptualization,
a stripping away of the refinements of society, a stripping away of everything that stands
between us and nature so that we come to something rougher, as we saw in the metaphors
in the Dao De Ching, to pick up the uncarved block or the undied cloth, to find the beauty
and to find the naturalness in a kind of primordial state as opposed to a highly refined state.
A second theme that we examined was an examination of language, an interrogation of language,
because language and with it conceptual thought becomes so much a part of our way of taking
up with the world that we take language and we take our concepts for granted.
We take them for granted in a very deep way as somehow revealing or at least matching
up with reality as it is in itself.
And so we tend to forget that our language is conventional, it's arbitrary, the signs
that we make up, we make up for our own uses due to our own desires and our own interests.
They're not imposed upon us from without by the fundamental nature of reality.
And in as much as our concepts, the ways that we think about things, including the way we
think about our life itself and our relationship to the rest of the world depend so much upon
language that our concepts themselves, our products of convention, products of our interests,
not somehow taken up from reality itself.
Because of this, the Daoists emphasize that language and concepts aren't fixed.
They're conventional, they're variable.
They reflect more about us than they do about anything beyond us.
Now, we have to be careful here.
Some people might be tempted to interpret this as meaning that the Daoists urge that
we give up language, that we give up conceptual thought.
But nothing could be further from the truth.
Remember for instance that the Daoism itself is a text, it's a text full of language, it's
a text that mobilizes concepts, it's a text that involves reasoning.
And it itself is a Dao.
Because as we saw, the word Dao can mean way or fundamental nature of things, but it can
also mean a discourse or a text.
So when we embrace the Dao, we're also embracing discourse, we're also embracing concepts.
But we're embracing those concepts not as somehow fixed, not as given, not as the only
concepts we could possibly mobilize, but rather with the appreciation that they are the tools
that we create to take up with reality.
If we understand them in that way, just as tools, as variable, as non-constant as that
first chapter of the Daoism emphasizes, the Dao that can be spoken isn't a constant Dao.
If we understand them that way, then they don't get in the way.
So Daoism is again about stripping away the superimposition of a kind of rigidity and
permanence to our concepts and our thought.
Now a consequence of this critique of language that we haven't said much about and that's
going to be important to focus on in the text we address today is that for Daoists the conventionality
of language and the recognition that language and concepts aren't fixed in this way leads
to a kind of suspicion about logic and reason.
Because after all, what is logic?
Logic is the science of the relation between concepts or between sentences, the science
of what follows from what.
And what is reason?
Reason is a faculty that engages with concepts above all else.
And my reason that all men are mortal and Lao Tzu is a man, therefore Lao Tzu is mortal.
I'm connecting the concepts of humanity, mortality, and Lao Tzu together in reason in order to
draw the deduction.
So if it turns out that our language is variable, conceptual, and not in any sense fixed, then
logic and reason are similarly going to be merely artificial constructs.
Merely artificial constructs.
They are going to be tools that we make up and that we then are led to take much too
seriously.
Now this critique of logic and reason, notice, involves a very deep paradox and it's a paradox
of which Daoists were very much aware and it's a paradox that I'm going to want you
to try to hold on to for a moment.
The paradox is this.
What I've been developing in a very short compass over the last few minutes is an argument
and it's an argument that we should be suspicious of the probative character of logic.
We should be suspicious of the perfection of reason, the idea that logic and reason
always lead us in the right direction.
So that we might want to put logic and reason aside sometimes, and for the Daoists that
means putting them aside in favor of spontaneous engagement, as you can imagine, or aesthetic
sensibility, or intuition, or even passion.
But how have I convinced you of that to the degree that I have, of course?
Well, I've convinced you through an argument.
That is, I've convinced you using reason.
And that of course is a paradox at the core of Daoism.
Daoism is urging a kind of suspicion of logic and reason, and urging that you should be
suspicious of it for good reasons as the conclusion of a logical argument.
And so Daoism has a kind of deep reflexivity to it.
It applies to itself as well as anything else.
This idea of stripping away, of leaving behind, applies to the Dao, applies to the discourse,
applies to the Daoist texts, the Daoist reasoning themselves as much as anything else.
Now that is deeply paradoxical, because here what we're urging is that in the end, Daoism
gives us good reason to reject good reasons.
Daoism urges us to strip away all accretions, even the accretion of understanding the Dao.
And that paradox is very much the paradox to which the text inverts in that very first
chapter.
There's paradox about the connection between ordinary conventional things, conceptual reality,
and the Dao itself.
Now that paradox is going to come back to us in a few lectures when we return to the
Zen tradition, which is very much inflected by Daoism.
Now if you can hold it in your hands without it running through your fingers like Daoist
water, I'd like you to try to do that, because holding that paradox in your hands is going
to help you understand the critique of language and reason that we'll be seeing today in another
Daoist text, the Zhuangzi.
The final point, the final big point that I want to draw out of the text we've been
looking at so far, and that I want you to hold as we approach the Zhuangzi, is the fact
that Daoism, like Confucianism, involves a real aestheticization of experience and an
aestheticization of philosophical reflection about the meaning of life.
Remember the Confucian idea of making oneself like a gem, polished, cut, ground.
The idea of a ritualized life, a life of perfect propriety, a life of perfect polish as being
a beautiful life, a life in which one functions as a kind of gem in a vast setting that is
constituted by one's society.
Now Daoism rejects that Confucian aesthetic completely, but notice that it doesn't reject
the idea that we want to think about life aesthetically, because Daoism, in valorizing
the bent tree, the un-carved block, the undied cloth, the darkness, water flowing through
rock, is constantly pregnant with aesthetic metaphors, with metaphors of beauty, and
the kind of life that the Daoist is urging us to live, the kind of life that the Daoist
is urging us to live, is a life of a particular kind of beauty.
It's just a beauty of rough naturalism as opposed to a beauty of perfect cultivation
and civilization.
So we still have this aesthetic dimension to life that we're going to find developed
in the Zhuangzi.
So let's turn today to the text that we really care about today.
The text called the Zhuangzi, and it's called that because it's written by somebody, perhaps,
who may have been named Zhuangzi.
Again, this is somebody about whom we know very little.
Though most scholars agree that there was somebody named Zhuangzi, there does seem to
be a fair amount of evidence for that, and he seems to have lived from about 369 to 286
before the common era, so perhaps about 200 years after the Dao-dejing reached its completed
form.
So Daoism was very well established and on its ascendancy when he worked.
The period in which he worked is known in Chinese history as the warring states period,
a period in which there was a great deal of conflict between kingdoms, a great deal of
strife, and so Daoism was kind of in the background of things.
He would have been a contemporary of Mencius, a great Neo-Confucian thinker who developed
Confucian ideas and was probably in dialogue with him, and he was very much a follower
of Daoism.
That's about all we know about him.
The rest is all mystery.
Now the Zhuangzi itself, the text, not the guy, is another one of these accretional texts
that seems to have been built up over time with many people contributing to it.
Almost all sinologists and scholars of philosophy agree that the so-called seven inner chapters
are solo authored chapters.
They seem to have been authored by one person.
We'll call him Zhuangzi, whether or not that was his actual name.
But the remaining 26 chapters that we have, by the way, there are also a number of lost
chapters that we learn about from commentaries, seem to have been written by many different
authors, given stylistic information and references, and seem to have been compiled over about
the next 150 years.
So the full text of the Zhuangzi is completed about 150 years after his death, but the seven
inner chapters seem to be his.
This is by far the longest Daoist classic.
It's a very beautiful text.
It's a text that almost anybody who works in Chinese literature will say, that's my
favorite text.
It's full of beautiful examples, fabulous humor, sometimes some very cryptic, difficult
to understand essays, and some gorgeous poetry.
This is a text you like to have by your bedside table and to dip into.
But I advise you to also have a copy of the Daoist Jing around if you're going to dip
too far, because it's very hard to understand without the background of the Daoist Jing.
Zhuangzi emphasizes a few of the themes that we've come to expect in a Daoist writer.
He emphasizes the importance of spontaneity in life as opposed to cultivation.
He will really develop a suspicion of logic and will see his arguments against the possibility
of using reason to ground our lives.
He likes to ridicule the Confucians, and there's a lot of really nice humor about Confucianism
in this, and especially their emphasis on ritual and propriety and the rigidity of human
relationships.
And in general, he's kind of a fun guy to read.
But I'm going to begin by telling you a common anecdote about Zhuangzi, whether it was true
or not, I can't say, but it's common in all of his biographies, and there's a wonderful
quotation about his reply.
The idea is this.
Zhuangzi, who was apparently a fairly prominent philosophical figure, was offered a great political
post of a small kingdom.
He was offered the post of prime minister, and the post of prime minister was not only
prestigious and powerful, but it also carried with it a very large monetary stipend, a really
good salary.
And Zhuangzi was notorious, we hear in all of his biographies, for being penniless, for
being very poor, for just doing his philosophy and living in a kind of remote hut.
So he gets offered a palace, he gets offered a whole lot of money, and he gets offered
a lot of power in virtue of the respect accorded to him.
So now what I want to do is to read to you what in the Zhuangzi it says was his reply.
A thousand measures of gold is a substantial profit, and prime ministership is an exalted
position indeed.
But haven't you ever heard of the ox offered in the official sacrifice?
He is generously fed for years, and dressed in the finest embroidered fabrics, so that
he may one day be led into the great temple for slaughter.
When that day comes, though he may wish that he was just a little orphan piglet instead,
it is too late.
So scam you, don't defile me.
I'd rather enjoy myself wallowing in the filth than let myself be controlled by some head
of state.
I'd rather remain without official position to the end of my days, enjoying myself whichever
way I wish.
So this illustrates something about Zhuangzi and his approach to life.
He didn't want the ritual, he didn't want the power, in particular he did not want
my rigidly controlled life.
He wanted to be able to lead a life of complete spontaneity.
But now let's turn to one of the most famous passages from chapter two, one of the inner
chapters of the Zhuangzi, something written by Zhuangzi himself, whoever he was.
This is a very famous passage, you've probably heard it in some form before, but let's read
it together for a moment.
Once Zhuangzi dreamed he was a butterfly.
Fluttering about joyfully, just as a butterfly would.
He followed his whims exactly, as he liked, and he knew nothing about Zhuangzi.
Suddenly he awoke, and there he was, the startled Zhuangzi in the flesh.
He did not know whether Zhuangzi had been dreaming he was a butterfly, or a butterfly
was now dreaming it was Zhuangzi.
Surely Zhuangzi and the butterfly count as two distinct entities.
Such is what we call the transformation of one thing into another.
Let me repeat that last piece.
He did not know whether Zhuangzi had been dreaming he was a butterfly, or a butterfly
was now dreaming it was Zhuangzi.
Surely Zhuangzi and the butterfly count as two distinct entities.
Such is what we call the transformation of one thing into another.
What's this beautiful little story about?
Well, for one thing it sets up a very deep conundrum, Zhuangzi awakes from this dream.
Now, is he indeed awake realizing he dreamed he was a butterfly, or is a butterfly gone
to sleep and now dreaming that it's a Chinese philosopher?
How would you go about settling that?
Notice that any evidence you chose from the world around you would beg the question, because
it's all dream evidence if you're really a butterfly.
On the other hand, any evidence the butterfly might have induced for its reality would beg
the same question, because all of that evidence is merely in the dream of Zhuangzi.
So Zhuangzi's point here, it's a very deep and subtle point, is that reason can't possibly
settle this question.
No arguments we could provide could settle it.
There are equal reasons on both sides.
So here we have a very nice story that's developing this Taoist critique of reason.
There's another nice point, what hangs on it?
What makes, what makes, what's the difference here?
And so another deep point is nothing hangs on it at all.
We can lead our lives as Chinese philosophers or as American individuals, or we can lead
our lives as butterflies, just so we flit about as a butterfly would, or flit about
as a Chinese philosopher would.
That's all that counts, whatever reality we're in to behave spontaneously in it, and thinking
about and determining and coming to a conclusion about the fundamental nature of reality just
doesn't matter all that much.
It's beside the point.
It's just mobilizing more concepts instead of acting.
And finally we might say this story illustrates the Taoist point that distinctions, butterflies,
human beings, reality in a dream is in a deep sense just conventional, it's just a projection.
There's a sense in which, and this I think is another very important part of the moral
of this story, that we live in a dream world all of the time.
You don't live in a world in which you have direct contact with reality.
Look out of your window and see a tree.
What are you actually seeing?
You're seeing your own perception of the tree.
The tree itself isn't somehow getting into your mind.
Talk to one of your friends.
Are you actually listening to your friend?
No.
You're listening to the sound that their voice makes.
You're listening to the sound as it's processed by your ear and your brain.
So the world that we live in is already a dream world, and that's also a deep point
that this text is making, that to the degree that we think, that the experience that we
have puts us in direct contact with reality.
We're not paying attention to the fact that it's our experience.
Now, Shuang Zi emphasizes three really important Taoist themes in his work.
The first is one of harmony with the universe, and that's one that we've seen developed in
the Dao De Ching itself, and then we've also seen developed in Stoic philosophy.
Second, a kind of embrace of impermanence, and third, this big critique of Confucian
ritualism.
A fourth theme that he develops is a real emphasis on the appreciation of scale, of trying to
appreciate the relationship between human scale and cosmic scale.
The first of these ideas, this appreciation of kind of spontaneity and spontaneous engagement,
we're going to see in a very famous story of Cook Ding.
The last we'll see in yet another story.
Let's look at the Cook Ding story, which is another very famous passage.
This comes from chapter three of the Inner Chapters.
The Cook was carving up an ox for King Hui of Liang.
Wherever his hands smacked it, wherever his shoulder leaned into it, wherever his foot
braced it, wherever his knee pressed it, the flacking tones of flesh falling from bone
would echo.
The knife would whiz through with its resonant fling, each stroke ringing out a perfect note.
The King said, ah, it is wonderful that skill can reach to such heights.
The Cook put down his knife and said, what I love is the Dao, something that advances
beyond a mere skill.
When I first started cutting up oxen, all I looked at for three years was oxen.
And yet still, I was unable to see all there was to see in an ox.
But now, I encounter it with the spirit, rather than scrutinizing it with my eyes.
Pause on that for a moment.
For three years, I examined oxen.
We can imagine him examining the oxen as an apprentice butcher or an anatomist might,
trying to see what the foreground was, to focus on the details, and missing all of the
background in the context.
But now, his understanding consciousness actually sees that his spirit, and he says, my understanding
consciousness, beholding to its specific purposes, comes to a halt, and thus, the promptings
of the spirit begin to flow.
I depend on heaven's unwrought perforations and strike the larger gaps, following along
the larger hollows.
I go by how they already are, playing them as they lay, so my knife has never had to
cut through the knotted nodes where the warp hits the weave, much less the gnarled joints
of bone.
A good cook changes his blade once a year.
He slices.
An ordinary cook changes his blade once a month.
He hacks.
I have been using the same blade for 19 years, cutting up thousands of oxen, and yet it is
still as sharp as the day it came off the whetstone.
So here we have the idea that if we act spontaneously, and not with calculation, as a virtuoso cook,
just as a virtuoso life, as a virtuoso cook, then everything is easy.
Everything is simple because we follow the natural joints of things.
We cleave nature at its joints as we move through it without effort and with a certain
kind of grace and beauty.
The cook continues, for the joints have spaces within them, and the very edge of the blade
has no thickness at all.
When what has no thickness enters into an empty space, it is vast and open, with more
than enough room for the play of the blade.
Remember that line from the Doubt of Jing, between heaven and earth, how like a bellows,
all that empty space that makes the possibility for action.
Here we have that same metaphor, all that empty space in the joints of the ox, making
room for the cutting.
That is why my knife is still as sharp as if it had just come off the whetstone, even
after 19 years.
Nonetheless, whenever I come to a clustered tangle, realizing that it is difficult to do
anything about it, I instead restrain myself as if terrified, until my seeing comes to
a complete halt.
My activity slows, and the blade moves ever so slightly.
Then all at once, I find the ox already dismembered at my feet, like clumps of soil scattered
on the ground.
Then I wipe off the blade and put it away.
Remember in the Doubt of Jing, never do too much, know when you're finished.
So this story emphasizes a number of important points, this priority of spontaneous, non-conceptual
engagement with reality.
The insight that this spontaneous engagement emerges from cultivation, right?
From a cultivation of skill, from the development of virtuosity.
But it's a cultivation that really involves the peeling away of a certain kind of conceptual
perception, not the addition of more knowledge.
So this really integrates these Taoist and Confucian insights, the insights that there
has to be cultivation.
But the insight that that cultivation is negative.
It's a wonderful story.
I want to tell you another story now.
Also from the inner chapters, this is the story about the death of Zhuangzi's wife.
It's a very surprising story.
When Zhuangzi's wife died, Huizi came to console him.
As for Zhuangzi, he was squatting with his knees out, drumming on a pot and singing.
That's surprising, isn't it?
When you've lived with someone, said Huizi, and brought up children, and grown old together,
to refuse to be wail her death would be bad enough.
For instance, this is a kind of Confucian point.
There are certain mourning rituals, funerial rituals, and Zhuangzi is ignoring those completely.
That's bad enough.
But to drum on a pot and sing, could there be anything more shameful?
And we could imagine that.
I mean, if my spouse died, and my friends came to comfort me, and they found me sitting
in my garden singing, playing music, maybe doing a little dance, they might think I had
lost my mind, or at least that I didn't love her as much as it appeared that I did.
But Zhuangzi replies, not so.
When she first died, do you suppose that I was able not to feel the loss?
I peered back into her beginnings.
There was a time before there was a life.
Not only was there no life, there was a time before there was a shape.
Not only was there no shape, there was a time before there was energy.
Ringled together in the amorphous, something altered, and there was energy.
By alteration in the energy, there was shape.
By alteration in the shape, there was life.
Now, once more altered, she has gone over to death.
This is to be companion to spring and autumn, summer and winter, in the procession of the
four seasons.
When someone is about to lie down and sleep, in the greatest of the mansions, I with my
sobbing knew no better than to bewail her.
The thought came to me that I was being uncomprehending towards destiny, so I stopped.
This is kind of lovely.
If you think about Marcus Aurelius and his approach to death, or if we think about Lucretius,
we begin to see echoes here.
Sure, Zhuangzi's immediate reaction was to mourn, but then thinking about that parallel
between the infinite period after life, the infinite period before life, and the fact
that death is an inevitable part of life, that that's what it is to be born.
If we want somebody to exist, we want them to die, because existence and life without
death isn't even a coherent possibility.
So I stopped.
This is a wonderful emphasis on the power of this kind of Taoist insight to lead to serenity.
He was able to stop because of this insight into the nature of impermanence.
But also note, of course, as a response to Confucian ritualism here, because the Confucian
rituals are something taken for granted in China, and Zhuangzi's pointing out that those
are absolutely pointless.
We also have this wonderful emphasis on scale, how small a life is in the history of the
universe, and how little reason there is to be so attached to one life.
And then, of course, the embrace of impermanence.
Not just noticing impermanence, but embracing impermanence and the fact that we are small
moments in the history of the cosmos.
So I'd like to close with a wonderful dialogue where we get a further critique of Confucius.
We won't have time to say very much about it, but it's going to give a nice sense of
the ways in which the Taoists ridicule the Confucian view.
So this dialogue occurs at a point where Confucius was very old, and the story is that he came
to find Laozi.
So this is a kind of made up story about Confucius trying to find Laozi.
He's asking, telling Laozi, I kept looking for the Tao, and I couldn't find it, right?
Confucius comes looking like a bumbling fool.
Laozi says, where did you seek it?
Confucius replies, I saw it in measures and numbers, and in five years I did not find
it.
Notice he's trying to find meaning of life in measures and numbers, that is words, concepts,
rituals, prescriptions.
And Laozi replies, names are tools for public use.
One should not have too strong preferences between them.
Remember that idea, they're not constant.
Goodwill, that is ren, and duty, that is li, these Confucian ideals, are the grass huts
of the former kings.
They're just temporary things.
You may put up in them for a night, but do not settle in them for too long, and the longer
you are noticed in them, the more will be demanded of you.
That is, if you emphasize these things too much and fossilize them, they're going to
become prisons rather than useful waystations, useful moments in cultivation.
The utmost men of old borrowed right of way through the benevolent, lodged for a night
in the dutiful, to roam in the emptiness, there's all that space again, where one rambles
without a destination, eating the field of the casual and the simple, stand in the orchard
for one can keep all the fruit.
To ramble without a destination is will way, that is spontaneous action.
Don't be thinking about the purpose, don't be thinking about the result, don't be thinking
about the rules, the prescription to the rituals, just be act spontaneously.
To be casual and simple is to be easily nurtured.
To keep all the fruit is to let nothing out from oneself.
So here we have this tremendous attack on Confucian formalism through the method of
this kind of dialogue of ridicule.
And this emphasis that Lee and Ren, that is propriety and humanity are useful, but you
have to think of them as waystations, not as things to fossilize, waystations as you
cultivate yourself.
And there's a powerful emphasis on will way, not the Confucian idea of will way, but the
Taoist idea of will way, a will way of nature, not one of cultivation.
And that we nurture through taking what life offers.
So here we're going to come to the end of our discussion of Taoism.
I'm hoping that you'll join me next time when we make a transition, remaining in Asia, but
returning for a moment to India in order to develop an understanding of the Buddhist tradition.
A tradition that we'll see is critical of the Hindu tradition.
Every bit as much as the Taoist tradition is critical of the Confucian tradition, but
is then going to move into China, fuse with Taoism with surprising and beautiful results.
I look forward to seeing you in the next lecture.
