Greetings. It's nice to be back with you. In our previous lecture, we introduced European
modernity, emphasizing the important themes such as the rise of science and the emphasis
on science as a source of knowledge, the gulf that opened up between science and religion,
and the need for philosophy and public theory in general to follow science. We looked at
Hume's particular role in this whole venture. Hume, as we saw, stands kind of on the cusp
of a classical and a modern period. While he shares with a classical period an emphasis
on the social nature of humanity, he's very much modernist in his emphasis on science
and his mobilization of science to push religion out of the public sphere. Nonetheless, even
in doing that, we saw that he uses classical skeptical arguments as the basis for drawing
this distinction between the public and the private. In that discussion, we focused on
Hume's text, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, which in fact Hume had published
posthumously because he was very worried about the tinge of atheism that animated that text
and what that might do for his reputation. Today, we'll be turning to Hume's best known
and probably his best philosophical text, which was written at the other end of his
life. He wrote the Treatise of Human Nature when he was in his early 20s. It was really
the work of a prodigy. It was a text which unfortunately, into Hume's great sadness,
was largely ignored during his life, and when it wasn't ignored, it was unfortunately ridiculed.
And it stood the test of time and now regarded as one of the great classics of modern philosophy.
In my own view, the language in the treatise is especially gorgeous. I think Hume is one
of the greatest of the Elizabethan writers of English. Nonetheless, the arguments are
often fairly abstract and a bit complex, so we'll sometimes be moving through some difficult
territory today. So bear with me. Today, what we're going to do is to look at how Hume's
naturalism and his emphasis on science generates a very different view of human life from that
we've been used to and of what it is to lead a human life and how Hume's naturalism underlies
his account of what the meaning of human life is. We'll begin with a discussion of Hume's
skepticism and naturalism, how those play together, including a discussion of the distinction
human inherits from Aristotle between nature and second nature. We'll continue to talk
about why the social dimension is for Hume so very important to our social lives, but
also our cognitive lives, emphasizing Hume's distinctive view of the role of the passions
and the imagination and convention, not only in our social intercourse, but also in our
cognitive lives. This will lead us to an understanding of why for Hume, even though
he arrives at these conclusions through a naturalistic understanding of human beings
and human nature, the social dimension is so important to who we are and what gives
our lives meaning. For Hume, we're going to have a very unique account of artificial
virtues and how those artificial virtues tie to natural virtues.
Let's begin by a brief review of Hume's skepticism. Even in our discussion of Buddhism, but also
in many of the discussions we've had throughout this course, we've seen that the obvious places
to look for foundations of human knowledge are reason or the senses, particularly once
with Hume, we push scriptural authority out of the arena. What's left to us? Well, what
we learn from our senses and what we can infer using reason. We saw, for instance, in our
discussion of Buddhist philosophy, how important it was to distinguish those two things. They
were taken for granted as the two sources of knowledge. Hume, however, argues that neither
the reason nor the senses can possibly be justified on their own and can give us confidence
even in the things that we take most for granted, that is, the existence of the external world,
causal connections, or the probative character of reason itself. Hume argues that if we think
carefully about, for instance, the existence of the external world, something we all have
to take for granted, the idea that the trees that grow in our garden are actually real,
that the chair that I sit on actually will support me, that if I take one step forward,
the ground will not disappear before me, that when I speak to somebody else, they actually
exist. In short, the fact that I'm not just dreaming, that reality around me is a concrete
object. Hume says, where could that idea come from? If you think that it comes from your
senses, you're deluding yourself. Because what do our senses give us if we simply focus
on the senses themselves? They give us sensations, visual sensations, auditory sensations. Those
sensations would seem just as real to us if we were asleep, if we were dreaming. There's
no reason in the sensations themselves to think that they're actually caused by external
objects. To figure that out, we would need an argument. We would need to know that sensations
are always caused by external things. But our senses can't tell us that because they
rest with the sensations. And reason can't tell us that either. Reason can't tell us
that because all the reason has to work with is what the senses deliver it, namely sensations.
There is never any contact directly with anything outside of ourselves. Moreover, reason cannot
even justify its own operations. After all, suppose you gave me a rational argument to
believe that my sensations are caused by something external to me. I might still ask you, why
should a rational argument convince me? How would I then justify that? The senses, of
course, can't justify reason. But reason can't do it either, or we'd be arguing in a circle.
So Hume concludes, even for the most obvious fact that we take for granted that there is
a world beyond us, we have no justification in senses or in reason. And Hume makes exactly
the same moves regarding causation and very, very famous arguments. Now, the question then
Hume asks is, should we therefore give up our belief that there's an external world?
Should we give up all of our discussion with other people? Should we decide that we never
have any reason for anything at all? Hume says, no, no, no, no, no. Just as in the case of
religious belief that we examined yesterday, Hume points out behavior, thinking, convictions,
discourse can be reasonable even if it's not rationally justified. Hume argues that
we are set up biologically to believe in the external world. We are set up biologically,
psychologically to believe that causal connections are real, even if we never perceive them.
We are set up biologically, cognitively, to take arguments as convincing. So Hume argues
that if you pay attention to human nature, you see that it's not our reason, not even
our sensory experience that grounds most of our lives, but it's actually these kinds
of biological dispositions that Hume refers to as imagination, our imagination and our
passions, the things that we're naturally forced to do, that we're passive in, that
rely on connecting things in an automatic, psychological way, not a calculating way,
but underlie who we are. You might think that this is profoundly negative, that Hume's
arguing that all we are are these kinds of creatures buffeted about and forced to believe
unreasonable things, but it's actually in Hume's hands very constructive, very affirming.
Hume's pointing out that we are justified in our beliefs, even if we can't provide reasons
for them, because we are the kinds of beings who participate in those kinds of lives. So
if we want to understand human knowledge and human life, Hume argues, first we have to
understand who we are. Now I want to read you a lovely passage in the treatise for Hume
discusses this. Nature, by an obstinate and uncontrollable necessity, has determined
us to judge as well as to breathe and feel. Notice that point, that it's not that we
have good reasons to judge that things are true, it's that nature has just made it part
of us that just as we breathe and we feel without attempting to, without calculating, we judge
that there's an external world, that reasons are good reasons, just naturally. Nor can
we ever forbear viewing certain objects in stronger and fuller light than we can hinder
ourselves from thinking as long as we are awake or seeing surrounding bodies when we
turn our eyes to them in the broad sunshine. So Hume's point is this, you don't need reasons
to believe in reason. You don't need reasons to believe in the external world, just as
you don't need reasons to believe in God. These are things that simply well up out of
what kinds of animals we are. But so far we're just focusing on our internal nature, distinctive
in Hume's account of who we are and what life is like is his emphasis on the social
dimension. Hume argues that our social relations and our social context are important to who
we are for several reasons. One is, it's the source of all of our genuine happiness, that
our real happiness in life comes from our relationships to one another. Hume led a very
happy life, by the way, and when he died in Paris, his obituary referred to him as Le
Bon David, the good David, and argued that he was just the model for a humane social
life. He led a happy life in social relations, and his parties were famous both in Scotland
and in France. Secondly, Hume points out, if we don't have a functioning society, if
our society falls apart, we just don't have the external goods that we need. Remember,
Hume was an Edinburgh man. He was growing up in a city devoted to commerce at the peak
of its financial power, and he noticed that things like fleets of ships, banks, commercial
institutions, shops, all depended on complex networks of associations that relied upon
trust and goodwill to function. And that if you had that trust and goodwill, you had
a society in which people prospered and where you had smiles on people's faces. Moreover,
Hume points out, many of our deepest values and many of our important traits are social
traits. So in this sense, Hume is a more classical guy, not an individualist. He's modernist
very much in his emphasis on science and naturalism and on his public-private distinction. But
for Hume, a society is in composed of independent individuals, as we'll see that it will be
for Kant and Milvery soon. Instead, for Hume as for Aristotle or for Confucius, individuals
are constituted by society. Here's Hume on the topic. Hume writes,
In man alone, the unnatural conjunction of infirmity and of necessity may be observed
in its greatest perfection. It's a lovely piece of irony when he says unnatural, because
of course what he means is natural, but he means surprising, that we are weak physically,
we are not capable of taking care of ourselves individually, but we need a whole lot. Not
only the food which is required from his sustenance flies his search or at least requires his
labor to be produced, but he must be possessed of clothes and lodging to defend him against
the injuries of the weather. So we're the kinds of beings who have a hard time catching
our food, a hard time raising our food, we have to clothe ourselves, we need houses,
we are very needy kinds of creatures. And if you think about the challenge of meeting
all of those needs on your own, it's kind of daunting. Hume continues, it is by society
alone he is able to supply his defects and raise himself up. By society all his infirmities
are compensated, and though in that situation his wants multiply every moment, Hume is noticing
that the more you've got, the more you want and that many of our needs and desires are
socially constructed. Yet his abilities are still more augmented and leave him in every
respect more happy than it is possible for him in his savage and solitary situation ever
to become. So no matter what the problems are with society, Hume points out, we are
a lot better socially. Even though many of our needs are socially constructed, society
even gives us the power to satisfy those. So everything that gives our lives meaning
Hume thinks is social or socially constructed, and that is this participation in this rich
social context. This is a very secular account of the meaning of life, a social secular account
with echoes of Aristotle, with echoes of Confucius, but still there's going to be a
deep modernity to it when we talk about Hume's account of how we realize this and what it
does to us. Hume follows Aristotle but deepens the account in distinguishing between what
we might call nature or original nature and second nature. Both are very important to
Hume in understanding who we are and how we live. We come equipped from birth, biologically
Hume thinks, with a bunch of natural passions, the tendency to get angry when we're injured,
but also natural affection. Hume thinks this is a really important feature of our lives.
We grow up, we're born with a natural affection for our parents, for those who are very close
to us, and a natural tendency as parents to develop affection for our children. Hume's
enough of a scientist to recognize that these kinds of natural endowments are essential
if the species is going to survive biologically. But Hume is deeply influenced by Newton. Hume
is really, you know, he's a contemporary of Newton, he's paying attention to what Newton
is doing, and Hume had the idea that natural affection, like gravitation, is a force of
attraction. And like gravitation, Hume thought, natural affection obeys a sort of inverse
square law. That is, the closer somebody is to us, the more we naturally tend to like
them. We like our parents most of all, and our siblings, our uncles and aunts, we're a
little bit less attached to, and our cousins a little less, second cousins that's getting
a little bit indifferent, and the further people out there are out from us, the less
this natural affection connects us to them. Now Hume thinks, this is actually a potential
problem. Because if you think about what happens to forces, or what forces do, that obey inverse
square laws, they clump things together with big spaces between them. Think about the physical
universe. Gravitation gives us planets, and suns, and solar systems, but vast spaces between
the bodies, and vast spaces between the stars and solar systems. Similarly, Hume thinks,
if you just allow human society to be governed by natural affection, what you're going
to get are tightly knit bands of people passionately devoted to each other, and hostile to, or at
least indifferent to, everybody else. In one place, Hume compares this to what he imagines
the state is for nomadic tribes in the desert, fiercely loyal to each other, but indifferent
to, or hostile to, the welfare of others. And Hume thinks, this is no way to create
a flourishing society. You're not going to get prosperous Edinburgh. You're not going
to get Europe out of these competing kinds of bands. You're going to get gang warfare,
or something like this. And so Hume thinks, if we want to have a flourishing society,
which is the necessary condition of our own flourishing, of human flourishing, we need
to somehow extend the force of these natural attractions. We can't sit tight with this
inverse square law. But fortunately, Hume thinks, we are also born with another natural
faculty, an innate cognitive propensity to use our imagination. And our imagination
allows us to see distinct things as similar to one another, as when, for instance, we
see distinct shades of red, and group them all under red, or we see distinct breeds of
dogs, and imaginatively recognize them as all of a kind, of a kind dog. That's what
our imagination does. It kind of instinctively puts similar things together and allows us
to treat them alike. And again, Hume doesn't think there's a good reason to do that. It's
not reason or sense perception that justifies this, but rather a natural cognitive propensity
with, say, biological roots. And so Hume thinks, the imagination will allow us to see those
who are more distant to us as akin to those who are very close to us, and that will give
rise, as we'll see in a few moments, to a sense of justice, to a sense of charity, and
to other passions directed to those who are farther from us. These passions are what we
need to stitch a whole society together. And they're artificial in one sense. We're not
born with these attitudes. We do these things to ourselves. We construct them in ourselves
individually and collectively. But in another sense, Hume points out, they are very natural.
They're natural in the sense that even though they're not innate, it is part of human nature
to act so as to cultivate them. That's where they constitute a second nature. The raw material,
the primary nature, are innate human emotions. And the product of this kind of imaginative
work and discursive work and social work is the construction of the second nature, the
emotions that actually stitch society together. Here's what Hume says.
A man naturally loves his children better than his nephews. His nephews better than
his cousins. His cousins better than strangers. This is that inverse square law of work. To
certain that no affection of a human mind has both a sufficient force and a proper direction
to counterbalance the love of gain and render men fit members of society by making them
abstain from the possessions of others. But nevelence to strangers is too weak for this
purpose. That is, when we come to strangers or people who are distant from us, greed or
outward hostility will overwhelm any affection that is innate in us. When injustice is so
distant from us as no way to affect our interest, it still displeases us as we consider it
prejudicial to human society. And we naturally sympathize with others in the sentiments they
entertain of us. Thus, self-interest is the original motive for the establishment of justice.
But a sympathy with public interest is the source of the moral approbation which attends
that virtue. That's a really important point to focus on. Hume says it's in our own interests
to extend our natural sympathies so as to construct stable societies that afford to us all of
the goods that societies afford. That's one thing. But notice that that by itself doesn't
make it something that we would regard as good. Only something is useful. Where does
the moral approbation come from? The moral approbation comes from the fact that we really
have a sympathy with public interest because public interest is our own interest.
Now the mechanism. Politicians extend the natural sentiments beyond their original
bounds, but still nature must furnish the materials. So this is the point. Politicians,
that is, by this he doesn't mean candidates for public office, but people who operate
in the public sphere operate to use rhetoric, to use advertising, to use language, to use
persuasion, to get us to extend our sentiments. And so Hume says, as public praise and blame
increase our esteem for justice. Literature, speeches, public discussion and coffee houses.
So private education and instruction contribute to the same effect. For as parents easily
observe that a man is more useful both to himself and others, the greater a degree of
probity and honor he is endowed with. For these reasons they are induced to inculcate
on their children from their earliest infancy, the principles of probity, and teach them
to regard the observance of these rules as worthy and honorable.
Note the wonderful echo here, both of Aristotle and Confucius, of the importance of child
rearing for inculcating these kinds of sensibilities and character that are good for us individually
and good for us collectively. Good for us individually because of what they do for our
reputation and because they enable us to live in a society that affords us happiness and
meaningful lives and good for us collectively because when we are each better people we
are all better people.
And now on this question about naturalness, Hume is very eloquent. He says, when I deny
justice to be a natural virtue, I make use of the word natural only as opposed to artificial.
Mankind is an inventive species and where an invention is obvious and absolutely necessary,
it may properly be said to be natural as anything. That's the point about second nature.
That because it is natural for us to construct artificial things, artifices are natural for
human beings.
And so again now, Hume, while it sounds like he is talking about an elaborate kind of
cultivation, is also asking us to realize our own nature. It's a kind of paradoxical
synthesis of Confucianism and Taoism if you want. With the Confucians he is urging this
careful social cultivation of who we are and a transformation of us from our innate state.
But with the Taoists he is urging that what we really want to do is to recover our original
nature, a nature now seen in a more sophisticated way to include the propensity to social artifice.
It's through these artifices, these extensions of our passions, these extensions of our concerns
and the construction of networks of relationship that society makes us who we are, Hume thinks.
Our sense of justice, our concern for others, our sympathy for the downtrodden, these are
the things that make us valuable. Those are the kinds of people we want to be. But the
construction of us as that kind of person requires these social processes, these collective
processes and also the workings of our own imaginations and natural passions. Note that
reason, that perception plays almost no role in this. All, these are also the things that
make our societies valuable. And notice that for Hume all of these virtues, all of these
characteristics are socially constituted. They make society possible, society in turn
makes them possible. So there's a reciprocal feedback here. This is the dimension that
Hume very much shares with classical theorists such as Aristotle and Confucius, the idea
that the social and the individual are deeply interpenetrating. Hume argues, and this is
most dramatically, that it's not just to our moral lives and our social lives that the
social context is important, but also to our cognitive lives. And this sets Hume apart
from almost everybody else in Europe. The idea that even as thinkers we are not individuals
but as thinkers we're essentially embedded in social contexts. And the reason for this
is that Hume thinks that knowledge, justification, judgment and discourse are primarily social
discursive practices, things that we cannot even begin to conceive of engaging in without
a social context that makes the language and the practices of justification and science
possible. Hume is not enamored of the view that Robinson Crusoe could become a great
scientist or could justify his views to himself. He thinks that requires a seminar, a laboratory,
a public discussion. So Hume is going to argue that the very edifice of modernity requires
a kind of social context because what modernity requires is reason, justification and science.
And science, Hume thinks, is first and foremost a social activity that people do together
and whose standards are socially constructed. Here's a really dramatic passage from Hume
about this. It's absolutely fascinating. Hume writes, there is no algebraist or mathematician
so expert in the science. Now notice that he's chosen mathematics here. The science
that we tend to think of as the one more than any other that a person could prosecute individually
in the privacy of her own study without relying on anybody else. Even that Hume thinks is
impossible. Let me start again. Sorry, I get carried away. There is no algebraist or mathematician
so expert in the science as to place entire confidence in any truth immediately upon his
discovery of it. So you want to imagine now, this mathematician is up in her study late
at night. She proves the theorem she was after. Is she convinced now that she's actually
proven it? Does she feel like she knows it? Hume answers, no. Every time he runs over
his proofs, his confidence increases. So what happens? The mathematician checks the proofs,
checks them again and again. But still more by the approbation of his friends. What do
you do next when you wake up the next morning with these proofs that you're pretty confident
of? You take them into the department, show them to your colleagues, ask them to check
them because you might have made a mistake and is raised to the utmost perfection by
the universal assent and the approbation of the learned world. Even after your friends
in the department have checked them, you submit it to a journal. You ask referees to look
at it. And only when the mathematical public has accepted it do you say, I know this to
be true. So for Hume, even knowledge, even mathematical knowledge is a public phenomenon.
And knowledge in this sense requires the kind of role of our passions and our imagination
because it requires this participation in a public life and in the social life that's
only made possible by our emotional, passionate nature. So for Hume, it's this individual
biological character together with our social character that's undergirded by that biological
character but extended by our social interactions and our social processes that makes it possible
for us to have a cognitive life at all, for us to know anything at all. Our passions
and our emotions, our imagination and our social relations give rise to our actions.
Those are the things that motivate us. But they also give rise to our sense of who we
are, to our sense of morality, to what's important. They motivate our ideologies, they motivate
even our belief as we've seen that the world around us exists. And those Hume points out
are purely biological and social processes, processes that require us, if we're going
to understand who we are and what it is for us to lead a life, to take ourselves seriously
as objects of scientific study, naturalistically, but also to take ourselves seriously as social
animals. So this is modernist in its naturalism. It's modernist in its skepticism. It's modernist
in the way that it cleaves apart the study of what's public from the religious. But it's
still quite classical in its emphasis on the social character of human life and the fundamental
role of the society in forming us. Our next stop in our very next lecture will be the work
of the great German philosopher Immanuel Kant, a philosopher who was deeply influenced
by Hume but who was also a severe critic of Hume. Kant was not a champion of the passions.
Kant was not a champion of the social. He was a champion of reason and a champion of
the individual. And it's Kant who really develops the thesis that reason, rationality, justification
and individual responsibility are central to a meaningful human life and are the foundations
of modernity.
