Welcome back to our exploration of how modernity influences our thinking about the meaning
of life.
In our last few lectures we were talking about the contributions of David Hume, who as we
said stood kind of at the cusp between a classical kind of thinking and modern thinking about
life and about the meaning of life.
Today we're going to focus on the great Prussian philosopher Immanuel Kant and in Kant we really
see that the modern viewpoint, the renaissance, the enlightenment is in full swing and we're
going to recognize these ideas as very much ideas that are the foundations of our own
viewpoints.
That's an interesting figure for many reasons.
The great American philosopher Richard Verdi once said that Kant was the person who professionalized
philosophy and that's true in at least two senses.
In one sense it's true because Kant was the first truly great philosopher in the history
of the western tradition since the fall of Aristotle's Academy to also be actually a
professor of philosophy.
Hume for instance was a diplomat and all of the other philosophers in between the fall
of the Academy and Kant had day jobs doing something else.
They were scientists, they were diplomats, they were lawyers but philosophy was a kind
of gentle person's hobby.
Kant however was a professor of philosophy, was a professor of philosophy at the University
of Königsberg and we're going to see that the talk that Kant gave that we'll be addressing
today fits very much within that context.
The second sense though in which Kant professionalized philosophy and this again is due to Verdi
is that Kant wrote books that were of such enormous importance that nobody since then
could be considered a professional philosopher unless they read and mastered them.
Sort of providing the kind of bar that you have to cross to be considered a respectable
philosopher.
And that's really important too in our profession, in the philosophical profession, we often
for instance distinguish philosophers as pre-Kantian philosophers or post-Kantian philosophers.
Nobody talks about a pre-Humian or post-Humian philosopher or a pre-Marcus Aurelius and post-Marcus
Aurelius philosopher or a pre-Nitja and post-Nitja philosopher but pre-Kantian and post-Kantian
those terms just roll off the tongue.
So Kant is this real watershed in our profession.
The texts that give Kant this preeminence are this trio of critical texts that he wrote
late in his life called the critique of pure reason which was a text on metaphysics and
epistemology, the critique of practical reason which was a text on ethics and the critique
of judgment which was a text on aesthetics.
And in these texts Kant attempted and many would say succeeded in effecting what he called
in the preface to the first critique, the critique of pure reason, a Copernican revolution
in metaphysics.
And that Copernican revolution isn't only important in understanding the structure of
the critical philosophy but also understanding the entire vision that animates Kant's philosophy
and its role in modernity.
Copernicus remember recognized that by following a Ptolemaic model of the nature of the universe
in which the earth was at the center of the universe and the sun and planets and stars
revolved around the earth, found that you couldn't make any sense at all of the motion
of the heavenly bodies by sticking the earth at the center.
Instead he said if you put the sun at the center of the solar system and have the earth
revolve around the sun, the planets revolve around the sun, all of a sudden everything
makes sense.
Kant thought, if you try to understand human thought, human knowledge, human morality and
human aesthetic response by arguing that it all revolves around the objects we experience,
that the structure of our knowledge is determined by external objects that we consider, that
the structure of our morality is determined by regarding external acts and finding moral
value in those acts themselves and moral disvalue, or that our aesthetic judgment is
determined by the nature of the object.
You won't make any sense of it all.
Instead he thought, if we think instead that objects of our knowledge are determined in
their structure and their epistemic access by the nature of our own cognitive faculties,
that morality has to do with our faculty of will, our faculty of judgment, our faculty
of assessment, and that beauty has to do with the nature of human aesthetic response,
then we can understand why we call some things beautiful, some actions good, and why we credit
ourselves with knowing certain things about objects and why we find certain things unknowable.
So what Kant did was to put the human mind, the human will and human sensibility at the
center of the universe, the individual person, and then try to understand how our knowledge
how our morality, how our aesthetics work by focusing on the mind.
So he put the individual at the center and by putting the individual at the center we
end up constructing one of the foundations of the idea of the modern that individuals
are primary.
Individual rights, individual thought, individual knowledge.
Kant also followed Hume in arguing that his project was to circumscribe reason so as to
make room for faith.
Kant argued that there is no way that religion could possibly intrude in the sphere in which
we think, reason, discuss, make moral judgments or understand beauty, that reason belongs
that religion belongs outside of the entire sphere of what we do cognitively together.
So Kant wanted to establish a very firm foundation for the sciences and for public activity,
for collective action and for politics that was independent of faith and in that respect
he very much is following Hume.
The address that we're going to talk about today has the title What is called Enlightenment
and it's Kant's thinking about the European Enlightenment so explicitly about modernity
itself.
Kant is thematizing the modern explicitly in a way that for instance Hume never did.
Kant is aware that some big transformation has happened and is trying to understand it
and to explain it.
And so what Kant is going to be doing is to explain the nature of enlightenment and
why this is important, that the only meaningful human life, what makes our lives worth living
is a particular kind of public life, but it's a public life of reason.
It's a life grounded in rational discourse in a public sphere.
The context for this is complex.
On the one hand, we have Frederick the Great who is then king of Prussia where Kant is living
advancing this great liberalization in which state control is relaxed, more commerce is
allowed, more free press is allowed, more free discussion is allowed, the universities
are set free and so it's in the context of this public relaxation of constraints on discourse
and constraints on action and in the context of the explicit decision to make the universities
autonomous in order to allow them to freely pursue knowledge and to innovate that Kant
is writing.
He's also writing by the way in the context of an interesting development within his
own university and that is that before this philosophy and theology had always been part
of the same faculty.
This was true in Europe from the Middle Ages where philosophy was thought of as a part
of theology, but as Kant is writing, Kant is leading the philosophy faculty into a separation
from theology so that philosophy is explicitly again aligning itself with science and divorcing
itself from discussions of God and that also forms the context for Kant's address, the
text that we're going to read together today.
Kant argues very famously in this address that the motto of the enlightenment, the motto
of awakening, the motto of the meaningful life for human beings is, as he puts it, sapere
alde, in Latin, dare to know.
So Kant is arguing that knowledge and inquiry requires not only intelligence, it requires
courage and that awakening and the activity of leading our lives meaningfully in the context
of awakening is an act of great courage.
We first outline Kant's argument and then we'll move into the text and see how he realizes
it.
Kant argues that what's important about the European enlightenment, what's important
about this kind of dawning of modernity is very much that it allows people to, as he
really puts it, to grow up, to become for the first time in human history, he thinks,
real adults.
That is to realize our natures as actual fully formed human beings.
Kant thematizes this entire issue in terms of the relationship between juvenility, between
being just children, childlike, and being adult.
If you're going to realize your potential, it means that you grow up.
For Kant, the big difference between childhood and adulthood in this deep sense, that is
what we might say, a life of trivial childishness and a life of meaningful adult participation,
is rational autonomy.
The children are heteronymous, their actions, their views are determined by others, their
teachers, their parents, whatever, but to be an adult is to be autonomous and to reason
for oneself.
Kant will argue that this autonomy that is so essential to leading a real human life,
a meaningful human adult life, is always inhibited by authority and he especially identifies
religious authority, here he's really following Hume, and ideological paternalism, even if
it's secular, as the juvenileizing influences from which we seek to emancipate ourselves
in modernity.
But Kant argues that it's not, we can't always blame those from outside of us, our pastors
or ideologues, for our own maturity.
Central to Kant's argument is that we are often complicit in our own juvenileization
and that we are complicit in that through our own cognitive or behavioral laziness.
That's why he thinks it's so important to dare to know.
He argues that the enlightenment doesn't simply liberate us, but it calls upon ourselves
to take that liberty and to assert our own absolute freedom of thought and speech and
our willingness to participate in the public sphere.
And that calling upon us to assert these rights is complementary to the demand on the state
to respect them.
So the guiding theme, as I've said in Kant's entire discussion, is this theme of maturity
versus immaturity.
Let's see how Kant puts the point.
Kant writes, Enlightenment is man's emergence from his self-imposed immaturity.
Look at that, self-imposed immaturity.
Kant is not arguing that somebody else is forcing us to be juvenile, but that we tend
to allow ourselves to be juvenileized.
Immaturity, Kant says, is the inability to use one's own understanding without the guidance
of another.
This immaturity is self-incurred if its cause is not lack of understanding, but lack of
resolution and courage to use it without the guidance of another.
Again, Kant's arguing that we often impose this upon ourselves.
The motto of the Enlightenment is thus, Sapere alde, have the courage to use your own understanding.
Kant argues that immaturity is actually a lot easier than maturity.
It's much easier to be a child.
Kant writes, laziness and cowardice are the reasons why such a large proportion of men
gladly remain immature for life.
Laziness and cowardice.
And now, listen to this lovely prose.
It is so convenient to be immature if I have a book to have understanding in place of me,
a spiritual advisor to have conscience for me, a doctor to judge my diet for me, and
so on.
I need not make any efforts at all.
I need not think so long as I can pay.
Others will soon enough take over the tiresome job for me.
This is really central to Kant's vision of what it is to lead a meaningless life, to
lead a life where we simply give over the responsibility for our own thinking, for our
own lifestyle, for our own religious beliefs to somebody else and simply allow ourselves
to be led by the views of others.
Kant then argues that what authority does, whether it's political authority or ecclesiastical
authority, is to use the excuse of paternalism and our own terror of disorder in society
as well as our own willingness to avoid hard work to keep us immature and obedient.
So now, Kant began with the complicity and now he talks about how social structures take
advantage of that complicity to enforce immaturity.
And again, it's kind of fun prose, Kant writes, having first infatuated their domesticated
animals, that's us by the way, and carefully prevented the docile creatures from daring
to take a single step without the leading strings to which they are tied.
They next show them the danger which threatens them if they try to walk unaided.
So Kant thinks that what happens is you begin by a bit of laziness and then those who are
involved in education or involved in religious life begin to warn you that that's the right
way to behave.
That's the right way to be because if you try to think for yourself, you might make mistakes.
If you try to act for yourself, you might do something wrong.
The world is a dangerous place and authority keeps you safe.
But Kant advises, for enlightenment, all that is needed is freedom.
And the freedom in question is the most innocuous form of all.
Freedom to make public use of one's reason in all matters.
That's it.
For Kant, the foundation of all of this is the freedom to reason, to think, and to talk
publicly in a public sphere to our fellows to participate as citizens.
I hear on all sides the cry, don't argue.
The officer says, don't argue, get on parade.
The tax official, don't argue, pay.
The clergyman, don't argue, believe.
I reply, the public use of man's reason must always be free and it alone can bring about
enlightenment among men.
So Kant's pointing out that there's this dual source of immaturity, of meaninglessness
in modern life that we need to overcome.
The first source is our own laziness and willingness to be guided, willingness to accept paternalism.
But that immaturity on our own, Kant argues, is aided and abetted by authority.
Authority is always willing to take advantage of that immaturity in order to reinforce power
and to keep us docile.
And immaturity then is simply constituted for Kant by the abdication of the responsibility
to think.
And that abdication, once affected, is enforced and maintained by laziness and fear.
Coersion isn't even necessary.
We don't need thought police coming around to our houses to tell us what to believe or
not to believe.
We don't need to be told we're going to be excommunicated for this or beaten for that.
Fear and laziness will do the trick Kant thinks without the police.
That's why we need a certain amount of real courage.
But Kant points out, even though the freedom that we're talking about is the freedom to
think and to speak in public, not all thought and speech is protected like this.
Not all thought and speech ought to be free.
And this is where Kant introduces really for the first time in philosophical thought the
distinction between a clear distinction between the public and the private, a distinction
that we saw Hume beginning to work towards in his discussion of the relationship between
religion and reasonable belief.
But for Kant, there is a very clear distinction between the public and the private sphere
and it's the public sphere in which reason and maturity are realized, not the private
sphere.
On the other hand, Kant's distinction between the public and the private, even though it's
the kind of foundation of our contemporary distinction that's so important to us and
enshrined in the U.S. Constitution in places like the First Amendment, the Second Amendment,
the Fourth Amendment, and the Fifth Amendment, so much the foundation of a lot of our own
thinking.
Kant's distinction is not our distinction, it's the forerunner of our distinction.
Because Kant is going to define the public as the sphere of intellectual discourse in
which we discuss ideas and policies only with regard to whether they're true or false,
appropriate or inappropriate.
For Kant, the public sphere is the sphere of science, philosophy, and politics.
In short, the public sphere is the sphere we enter purely as citizens, but importantly
not as office holders.
For Kant, when I speak as an officer of a university, or when somebody speaks as a
police officer, or when somebody speaks as a lawyer, or as a pastor, that is in a particular
role that they've been chosen for in a particular institution, even if that institution is public,
then they're speaking privately, speaking in a way that may be constrained.
Let's see how Kant works this out.
He says,
By the public use of one's own reason, I mean that use which anyone may make of it as a
man of learning, addressing the entire reading public.
So again, the public use of reason here is identified with scholarship, of course, Kant's
a professor, but in general, identified with public discourse about ideas that matter to
all of us.
What I term the private use of reason is that which a person may make of it in a particular
civil poster office with which he is entrusted.
Now note that this is just not the familiar public-private distinction that we inherit
from people like Locke and Mill that's enshrined in American constitutional law.
By public here, Kant is really clear that he means the discourse in which we engage
qua citizen with other citizens.
The discourse that's involved in active collective participation in discussing ideas and policies.
When Kant thinks about private discourse, he means discourse that's carried out in the
conduct of a particular office or a particular duty, even if that office is public.
That is, discourse that's part of our jobs.
So for instance, private discourse might be restricted for all kinds of reasons.
I'm a teacher.
I'm bound to confidentiality with regard to my students.
So I can't discuss my students' work or my grades with you even if I wanted to.
If you're hired as somebody's lawyer, you are bound by client-lawyer privilege.
There are all kinds of things that you can't talk about.
That's private discourse.
Moreover, if I hire you as a lawyer, I hire you to represent my case, not to represent
the other guy's case.
If a student hires me as a teacher, they hire me to work with them, not to work with somebody
else.
So we can be contractually obligated to engage in certain kinds of speech or to refrain from
certain kinds of speech because of posts that we have as individuals agreed to undertake.
Sometimes we just plain have a job to do, even if it might be a public job.
It might very much require us to do as we are told, even where we disagree with a policy.
So imagine another kind of case.
You're hired by the federal government and you're hired as a civil servant in an agency
that is now forced to execute a policy determined by the administration with which you may not
agree.
Your job as a civil servant isn't to obstruct the policy, it's to execute the policy and
to defend the policy, even if privately you disagree with it.
Now publicly, as a citizen in a town meeting, you might argue against it.
And consargeing your public speech may not be restricted, but your private speech as
an officer may indeed be constrained, and so this is how Kant is distinguishing public
from private.
And he argues that all of these restrictions on private speech and action are legitimate
because they're freely undertaken.
We agree to take the job.
I agree to be a teacher and to maintain confidentiality.
You may agree to be an attorney or to take the job with the federal government.
If you don't want your speech restricted in those ways, you don't take the job, Kant
thinks.
But public discourse must be free.
Kant puts it this way.
But insofar as this were that individual who acts as part of the machine, isn't that wonderful
language Kant's already talking about the government or corporations as machines way
before his time?
But insofar as this were that individual who acts as part of the machine also considers
himself part of a complete Commonwealth, that is insofar as we also think of ourselves
as citizens of a public society who may address a public in the truest sense of the word.
He may indeed argue without harming the affairs in which he is employed in a passive capacity.
That's the point.
You might be compelled to execute a particular policy or to say certain things as a matter
of your duty or as a matter of contract if you're a military officer, a lawyer, a tax
collector, a teacher, even a pastor.
But despite the restrictions on your speech and the restrictions on your behavior in the
private execution of your voluntarily undertaken duties, Kant emphasizes, you still have not
only the right but even the obligation to speak out against even those policies you're
forced to execute so long as you do it in the public sphere.
So as a lawyer, for instance, perhaps you're defending an energy company in some matter
but you actually think the law that is on their favor is a bad law.
You could still publicly campaign for the repeal of the law.
Nothing wrong with that.
Kant even gives us this wonderful example in the domain of religion.
For Kant, religion is really important in all of this for the very reasons that it was
important for him.
Kant sees religion as maybe the most dangerous enemy of maturity.
So he gives us this great example of a clergyman who is accepted the job as pastor of a particular
church.
Now if he's accepted this job and Kant very much thinks of it as a job as pastor of a church,
he's bound to teach the doctrine to the church.
He's signed a contract.
I'm going to be a pastor of this congregational church or this Methodist church.
I'll teach canon law.
I'll teach the doctrine.
So in the pulpit or even in ecclesiastical counseling, he's got to advance the church
doctrine.
But Kant says, let's imagine that he's actually a free-thinking kind of guy and he actually
disagrees with some church doctrine that he's bound to teach.
Then Kant says, he is not only free to but even obligated to speak in public against
those doctrines, maybe to publish articles and learn in journals or to give speeches
to secular audiences about this.
So Kant thinks, even though as a pastor he may have to say certain things, as a public
citizen he is not only permitted to but required to criticize the very doctrines he teaches
from the pulpit.
This is very stern stuff.
This is very stern stuff.
Kant thinks in fact more deeply that nobody can ever be bound to believe anything.
Not even a clergyman, not even a devout member of a religious community can ever give up
the freedom to believe because the freedom to believe for Kant is the essence of enlightenment,
the essence of what it is to lead a genuinely human life.
Can we be bound to believe?
Not even a church or other religious community can obligate its members and future members
to believe, nor can a society.
One age cannot enter into an alliance to put the next age in a position where it would
be impossible for it to extend and correct its knowledge.
Let's stop there for a minute.
Impossible for it to extend or correct its knowledge.
For Kant, what makes our lives meaningful individually, what makes our lives meaningful
as societies, is our ability to extend, to deepen, to correct what we know, to build
on what is bequeathed to us from previous generations and to advance it.
To abrogate that responsibility would be to abrogate genuine human life.
So he says, one age cannot enter into an alliance to put the next age in a position where it
would be impossible for it to extend and correct its knowledge or make any progress in enlightenment.
This would be a crime against human nature, whose original destiny lies precisely in such
progress.
So here Kant is explicitly tying human nature, human destiny and the good life to progress,
intellectual progress, moral progress, political progress.
And that progress presupposes the free use of reason.
For that reason, the abrogation of the free use of reason is the worst thing you can do
to somebody.
But that abrogation can be accomplished both by external authority and by self-imposed
immaturity.
And for Kant, it's the self-imposed immaturity that's always the most dangerous.
Because the mission of a human being for Kant is progress.
That includes intellectual progress and that requires the kind of freedom of thought that
he is demanding here.
So freedom of thought and speech are what are essential to leading a truly human life.
Kant's conclusion is quite dramatic.
He writes,
To renounce enlightenment completely, whether for his own person or even more so for later
generations, means violating and trampling underfoot the sacred rights of mankind.
That's really powerful stuff.
That means to refuse to think freely, to refuse to engage in public discourse.
It isn't just to give up your own prerogative.
It is in doing that to violate everybody else's human rights.
Because we have rights to each other's ideas.
Because it's our ideas that allow goods to be obtained for others.
But something which a people may not even impose on itself can still less be imposed
upon it by a monarch.
And so Kant points out, we can't individually or collectively step back from the obligation
to think freely, to speak freely, and to participate freely in public life.
This is a very characteristically modern European model of what the human good is.
This is the model of human good and of human life and of society that we've inherited in
our own society.
And a model that takes for granted the importance of progress, the importance of freedom, and
the importance in the enterprise of progress and freedom of individuals, of rationality,
and of liberty.
An individualistic, rationalist, libertarian, democratic ideal of the human life.
And Kant comes back to religion at the end in an important way.
He says, I have portrayed religion as the focal point of enlightenment.
First, because that is what our rulers use most often for ideological control.
And secondly, because religious immaturity is the most pernicious and dishonorable variety
of all.
Why the most pernicious and dishonorable?
It's because in religious immaturity we simply give up our right to think deeply for ourselves
about the very most important values in our lives.
And we give up the right to do what we need to do in public to engage in rational discourse.
So this is the very final and most important pillar of European enlightenment.
The meaningful life is not just civil life as it was for human, but it's essentially
secular life.
It's a life led in the absence of religion.
It's a life led with religion being something we do optionally behind closed doors or in
our temple or synagogue or church.
Not something that intrudes into the public.
This secularism, this emphasis on freedom is what constitutes human life.
We are going to see blooming in the next lecture in the thought of John Stuart Mill.
I hope you'll join me for that.
