In this lecture, we're going to conclude our development of a positive characterization
of European modernity, the kind of tradition that underlies a lot of our contemporary societies
and the values with which we grow up.
We began by looking at the foundations of modernity in the views of David Hume, where
we saw the beginnings of the development of a distinction between scientific and religious
knowledge and the development of a kind of skepticism and a kind of foundationalism in
European thought.
In Kant, we refined this.
We began to see the development of a clear public-private distinction and an emphasis
on individual freedom of thought and freedom of speech and of the responsibility of the
individual to free thought and to free speech.
But in Kant, that free thought and free speech was grounded in this notion of a kind of collective
destiny and a collective responsibility of our societies to intellectual progress.
But things have been moving from a more social to a more individualistic conception from
Hume to Kant.
We've been moving from the sentiments to reason.
And in Mill, we are going to see a deep elaboration of the Kantian distinction between the public
and the private into the distinction that we now take for granted, as well as an elaboration
of Kant's idea that it's the individual who matters, an individual thought, individual
speech and individual freedom into an even more individualistic model of what civil society
looks like and a theory of privacy and of individual liberty that we will all recognize
as very much akin to that that undergirds American civil society.
John Stuart Mill is a fascinating human being as well as a fascinating philosopher.
He was the son of an important philosopher, James Mill, who was one of the founders of
the utilitarian movement in England, along with his close friend, Jeremy Bentham.
James Mill actually worked for the East India Company and wrote a very influential and very
strange, I must say, history of British rule in India.
John Stuart Mill, whose work we'll be examining, had a very odd upbringing.
You might say that his childhood was a kind of joint experiment conducted by James Mill
and Jeremy Bentham to produce the ideally educated individual.
He was indeed a prodigy, which helped, but James Mill and Bentham, in order to make
sure that John Stuart Mill got this ideal education, kept him completely isolated from
other children his age, he knew no other children when he was young except his own younger
brothers and sisters.
He was taught Greek from a very early age.
By age three or four, his Greek apparently was really good.
By age six, he had mastered classical Greek, was reading Plato and Herodotus, by age eight
had read the complete works of Aristotle, at which point they began teaching him Latin.
By age ten, he had read all of the Latin classics and was apparently as fluent in Latin and
Greek as any classics professor you could find.
He was also during this time being pumped full of mathematics and the science of the
day and political philosophy, so that by the time John Stuart Mill entered early adolescence,
he had what we would regard as a spectacular university education.
I'm not advising this, though, as a way to raise your children.
By late adolescence, John Stuart Mill suffered a significant breakdown, was depressed and
had kind of precarious mental health through much of his life.
Nonetheless, he accomplished an enormous amount.
He was an ardent social reformer.
He was one of the first major male philosophers, maybe the first, to really defend the rights
of women.
He was an ardent feminist.
He was an advocate of democracy in England and of democracy outside.
He read de Tocqueville's Democracy in America very closely and thought a lot both about
the advantages of democracy and about its dangers.
He was really interested in social reform, economic reform, political reform.
His very best known work is called utilitarianism and it is a passionate defense of utilitarianism,
this idea that an action is good in proportion to the amount of benefit that it does, bad
in proportion to the amount of harm that it does.
This work is one of the foundations of utilitarian theory.
But we're not going to look at utilitarianism.
We're going to look at a work that I find much more interesting.
That is his work on liberty, a very powerfully argued work that really defends a very clear,
articulate sense of individual liberty and does so using extraordinarily lucid arguments.
Let me review with you what some of the central argument is going to be and then we're going
to actually move into the text.
Mill will begin by defending what he calls the harm principle and the limits of the harm
principle.
And as we'll see, that is an idea that it's only harm to others that can limit individual
freedom and liberty.
He's then going to discuss, and here he's going to be following Kant but with some very
interesting twists, the danger of the tyranny of the majority and the consequent obligations
of civil society not only to permit individuality, ideological pluralism and cultural pluralism
but actually to encourage it.
So it's going to go well beyond Kant in that respect.
We're not only going to get a requirement on the state not to suppress individuality
but to actively encourage it.
Mill will defend an absolute freedom of thought and expression and defend it with great clarity.
And in part of that defense, we're going to see his famous dilemma argument in which
he's going to argue that thought and expression should be defended and protected even if it's
false, even if it's pernicious, even if it's dangerous.
And finally we'll conclude with Mill's famous argument for the absolute value of plurality.
That plurality in society, cultural plurality, aesthetic plurality, intellectual plurality,
religious plurality is valuable in itself.
We've got the kind of undergirdings not only of a liberal political order but of the kind
of pluralism that often animates contemporary American political theory.
The conclusion that we're going to see Mill defend, the conclusion that was very dramatic
in the early 19th century, was that human life and meaningful human life in particular
requires a society that does not only permit freedom of thought, as Kant argued, but rather
one that actively facilitates freedom of thought and speech and a society that does not only
tolerate or permit diversity but actually encourages and facilitates genuine diversity
of ways of life and ways of thinking.
So this is a really dramatic refreshing and for its time radical manifesto.
It's a manifesto that's going to suggest that a meaningful life is an individual life
that involves this clear and deliberate exercise of freedom and thought in a society that actually
encourages and facilitates it.
Let's move to Mill's text now.
We're now going to find Mill articulating the harm principle.
This is a principle that has been influential not only in philosophy but very often in law
and in jurisprudence.
Mill writes, the sole end for which mankind are warranted individually or collectively
in interfering with the liberty of any of their number is self-protection.
So let's pause on that for a moment.
Mill is now talking about when and only when it's permissible for a society or for any
individual to interfere with anybody else's freedom of action or thought.
And he says, only for self-protection, not for the good of another.
Let's follow it.
That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of
a civilized community against his will is to prevent harm to others.
His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant.
Let's again pause on that for a moment.
We often think, OK, we have a right to prevent somebody from performing an action that might
harm us or that might harm somebody else.
But surely, if somebody threatens to harm themselves, maybe to make themselves ill or
to commit suicide or to damage their own financial prospects spectacularly, to do something that
we regard as seriously self-destructive, that we ought to be able to prevent them from doing
that as well.
And Mill argues that we cannot, that the only purpose for which power can be rightfully
exercised over any member of a civilized community against his will is to prevent harm to others.
His own good, either physical or moral, Mill argues, is not a sufficient warrant.
Mill continues, he cannot rightfully be compelled either to do or forbear because it will be
better for him to do so, because it would make him happier, because in the opinions
of others to do so would be wise or even right.
These are good reasons for remonstrating with him or reasoning with him, but not for compelling
him.
This is very, very powerful stuff, and it's stuff that is extraordinarily rich.
Mill is arguing that if we encounter somebody who is doing something that we think is stupid,
self-destructive, or conduced to his own misery, it's right for us to argue with him.
It's right for us to try to persuade him not to do so, but we have no justification
on those grounds alone for compelling him to act or not to act.
To justify that, Mill writes, the conduct from which it is desired to deter him must
be calculated to produce evil to someone else.
He emphasizes, the only part of the conduct of anyone for which he is amenable to society
is that which concerns others.
Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.
Let's repeat that.
That sentence is kind of the hallmark of the final development of modernity, complete individualist
libertarianism.
Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.
That's very deep, very powerful.
Let's note a few things here.
His harm principle, which we're seeing in Mill, is going to strike us as remarkably familiar.
It's very close to our own somewhat libertarian American conception of individual freedom.
But as long as I'm not infringing on anybody else's rights, I have the right to be let alone.
It looks like our right to privacy.
And so what it's doing, what Mill is doing, is taking const extinction between the public
and private, and creating much stronger protection for the private, and a much clearer and much
larger zone of privacy.
For Kant, the public sphere was the sphere in which we engaged collectively as citizens,
and everything else more or less was private.
For Mill, everything is private that doesn't affect the welfare of others.
And that's an enormous zone of our lives.
But also notice this, and I think this is a respect in which Mill is moving deeper into
modernity than Kant did.
For Kant, as we saw at the end of the last lecture, the reason for the strong protection
of individual freedom and liberty, and of this public-private distinction, was because
of our collective social obligation to make progress.
But Mill is not talking about the destiny of society, collective obligation, progress.
He's talking only about the individual.
This is a superbly individualist construction of privacy and liberty, and a continued move
following Kant away from any kind of paternalism, again, going much further than Kant did.
But Mill does, as did Kant, limit the scope of this restriction, so the harm principle
is not unlimited.
For instance, it doesn't imply Mill argues to children or to the incompetent.
As parents, we can still keep our children from harming themselves.
Or if we find somebody who is genuinely mentally incompetent, crazy, or whatever, then again,
the harm principle doesn't apply.
We need to protect them from harm to self because they're not making reason choices.
Notice that reason is still at the center of here.
If one is mature, if one is rational, the harm principle applies.
And that, of course, we're deriving straight from Kant, whose centered reason is what makes
our lives worth living.
Mill was sometimes even more controversial about this.
And remember, he was the son of a colonial administrator.
This is a more controversial remark.
He says,
Despotism and its dictatorship is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians,
provided the end is their improvement and the means justified by actually affecting
that end.
So Mill is saying that if you're in a colonial administration over barbarians, and we can
imagine who those were for Mill, that it's perfectly okay to be dictatorial so long as
what you're doing is not acting in your own interest, but acting in theirs.
Liberty, he writes, has a principle that has no application until they are capable of
free and open discussion.
Until then, there is nothing for them but implicit obedience to an Akbar or a Charlemagne.
And of course, in mentioning Akbar, the mogul emperor in India, Mill is very self-consciously
defending British rule in India.
This is certainly one of the more embarrassing parts of un-liberty, but there it is.
Now Mill, like Kant, was worried about the tyranny of the majority.
But Mill articulates that worry in a much more focused way and makes much stronger stuff
out of it.
Let's follow Mill on this because he's really more worried about the tyranny of the majority
than he is about the tyranny of individuals or the tyranny of the law.
Just as Kant was more worried about self-imposed immaturity than he was about externally-imposed
immaturity.
Mill writes, when society itself is the tyrant, its means of tyrannizing are not restricted
to the acts of political functionaries.
Society practice a social tyranny more formidable than many kinds of political oppression, since
it leaves fewer means of escape, penetrating more deeply into the details of life and enslaving
the soul itself.
Mill might have been writing about junior high or high school, this notion of social
tyranny, and we get it through the advertising, we get it through politics, but we get it
through this sense that there's a social expectation that we believe, think, or behave in certain
ways.
Mill writes, there is a limit to the legitimate interference of collective opinion with individual
independence.
And to find that limit and maintain it is as indispensable to a good condition of human
affairs as protection against political despotism.
This is really strong, because what Mill is recognizing is the insidiousness of social
pressure, the fact that social pressure constrains and cramps individual liberty, not just as
explicit legal pressure or censorship might, but even more so.
It does it more to a greater degree because there's nothing to challenge, there's no escape,
and it's not explicit, so we don't have a way of arguing against it.
And it's an evil, a social evil that reduces our individual liberty in very subtle but
nonetheless coercive ways.
And so it suggests to Mill that a well-ordered society, a society that enables flourishing,
a society that enables us to lead truly meaningful lives, must take measures to mitigate this
kind of social tyranny or social pressure.
For that reason, it's important that in order to assure flourishing lives for a citizenry,
it's not enough to just let people alone.
A government that just leaves people alone would be a government that leaves them to
the mercy of social tyranny, of social pressure.
For that reason, Mill thinks, conditions for individuality don't just emerge by accident,
they have to be actively encouraged by government.
So this is not a call for a laissez-faire libertarian government.
It's a call for an activist government that moves against monopoly of the public space
by social tyrannies and majorities, so this is kind of radical.
So Mill is arguing here that there's a kind of social obligation, a collective political
obligation to generate individuality, and the place where this really enters the American
tradition is with the work of John Dewey and his thought about American education, arguing
that the educational system has an obligation to generate free-thinking individuals, not
just people who know lots of stuff, and certainly not people who accept common wisdom.
And that idea in Dewey is coming straight out of John Stuart Mill, so there's a lot
of influence here in American society from Mill.
And of course, Mill also defends an absolute freedom of speech and thought in the public
sphere, and he gives us a very extended, very passionate defense.
It's gorgeous.
We don't have time to work through all of it here, but I really recommend that after
you hear this lecture, you pick up a copy of UnLiberty.
It's a stirring and beautiful text, and you'll enjoy reading it.
What I want to do now is to articulate one of the central pieces of that argument and
one that I think is extraordinarily profound and strikes some people as very surprising
when they hear it.
We call it the dilemma argument.
Mill begins with an interesting dilemma.
He points out that some speech is true and some speech is false.
Sometimes we articulate things that we know to be true, or might argue, for instance,
that the earth is round.
But there are also flat earthers out there who argue ferociously that the earth is flat.
Some people argue and defend evolutionary theory, some defend creationism.
One of those positions is surely false, one of those positions may well be true.
Moreover, he points out, some speech, some ideas, some thoughts or ideologies are beneficial,
and some are in fact harmful.
Now, the question is, should we be able to restrict any of it?
Mill points out that many people think that while we would never want to suppress true
speech, true ideas, or beneficial ideas, it would be okay to suppress ideas we know to
be false or we know to be dangerous.
And indeed, many societies today restrict speech publication ideas because they don't
want ideas that they regard as false or ideas that they regard as dangerous or subversive
to be expressed.
Mill argues that both of those are dangerous.
He argues that, of course, ideas are either true or false.
If they're true or beneficial, right, this kind of former end of the dilemma, then if
we suppress them, believing that they're false or believing that they're harmful, we are going
to slow progress, we're going to prevent discovery, we're going to slow down science, and we're
going to deprive people of access to the truth.
And Mill offers many examples of this.
Of course, the most famous one would be the persecution of Galileo, the church taking
a belief which it believed to be false and believed to be harmful, which ended up being
true and beneficial and suppressed it, and we saw the horrible consequences.
But Mill offers a number of examples of these, and with a little bit of imagination, you
can come up with quite a few.
But the interesting piece is the other side of the dilemma.
Why shouldn't we suppress speech which is false and harmful?
Well, Mill points two things out.
One of course is we might be wrong, that is, we might seriously believe, genuinely believe
that a view is false or that it's harmful and it's not, and we might suppress it in
which case we end up with the Galileo situation.
But more importantly, even if the view is harmful or false, by simply suppressing it,
we deprive ourselves of the opportunity to refute it rationally by argument.
That is, people who may have believed it are kind of bullied politically or socially into
not asserting it, not thinking about it, not articulating it, not defending it.
But beating people into ideological submission, Mill pointed out, does not eliminate the belief.
It does not get the not to believe it, it just gets them to be quiet about it.
As he puts it, it drives these beliefs underground.
And when they're driven underground, they're immune to refutation.
We can't find them, we can't argue against them, we can't refute them.
And so Mill imagines we get this kind of underground economy of cancerous beliefs and views and
arguments that build on themselves because people only hear that stuff.
They never hear refutation.
And the reason that they do not hear refutation is because the views have been suppressed.
And when that happens, Mill says, these views cause even more harm.
Because if you kept them in the daylight, if you didn't persecute them, then in the
clear light of day, under rational examination, under open political discussion, the views
would simply be refuted and they would die off on their own accord.
And so Mill says, when we confront this dilemma, when we confront this dilemma, we should realize
that whether we believe a view is true and beneficial or that we believe that the view
is false and detrimental, there is no argument for suppression, only an argument for putting
it out in the public domain for argument, discourse, defense, or critique.
Now, Mill also points out that there's another reason for absolute freedom of speech.
That was the kind of the dilemma argument.
The second big argument, though, is his argument for the absolute value of pluralism and plurality
in society.
And I think that this was an argument that was way ahead of its time.
We live in an era now where people are fond of talking about pluralistic diverse societies
and the value of diversity.
That wasn't true in the 19th century.
And it's worth remembering that we pick up this discourse about diversity very much from
John Stuart Mill.
So we're looking at the roots of a lot of our own ideology.
Mill points out that it's often hard to know of a bunch of rival ideas, rival perspectives,
which one is true, which one is most beneficial.
And even if we think we know which one is, he points out that our ideas, our thinking,
our ideology, and our approaches are always improved through debate.
By refuting somebody else, we get a clearer idea of what we ourselves think and why.
And they get a clearer idea of why they're wrong and of why our views might be right.
Or, of course, we might find out, surprisingly, that we're wrong and improve our ideas by
taking on upward ideas from others.
And at many times, Mill points out different views, different traditions, especially he
points out religious traditions or aesthetic traditions or traditions in food or lifestyle
might be better for different people.
There might be subparts of society who do really well as Catholics and subparts that
do really well as Jews, subparts who do really well as Buddhists.
Subparts who do really well, not religious at all.
Some people like modern art.
Some people like classical art.
And there's no reason to impose a uniformity when variety actually benefits more people.
And so Mill argues that society offers a lot more options to its citizens, but also a lot
more ideological ferment, hence a lot more stuff going on, a lot more free song, if we've
got pluralism.
And these are the things that generate happiness.
The opportunity to lead your life and to engage in conversation over ideas that you
want to have access to.
But also the opportunity to engage with people who are different from you, to eat food that's
different from you, to observe art that you're not familiar with.
These are all sources of happiness.
And Mill argues, if we're looking for human flourishing, even if I seriously and deeply
believe that the music that I like best is best, that the literature that I like best
is best, that the religious tradition to which I belong is best, to impose that on others
does them no favors, does me no favors, and does my society no favors.
The domain of individual liberty for Mill is vast because only by making it vast can
we allow individuals to flourish.
So in Mill's thought, we see this tremendous importance of individuality, of individualism.
It's not obvious if you just begin to think about it pre-reflectively why the cultivation
of individualism, why the cultivation of individuality and diversity is a good thing.
It needs defense.
That's a central insight of Mill's.
That you can't just say, hey, it's good to be individuals, it's good to be different.
You need a reason for that.
And indeed, Mill noted, and we can note in our present society, that there are many
people who see diversity and individuality as a bad thing.
It promotes, some people think, disunity.
It doesn't promote unity in society.
It might promote conflict, and it also might allow people to choose lifestyles or views
that we might think of as harmful to them or to societies at large.
But Mill points out that this kind of individualism and pluralism, in fact, promotes progress.
Because it's the rare individuals, it's the individuals whose creativity emerges from
that who are creative enough, progressive enough to break through social stagnation and
to allow genuine social progress.
Mill also argues that it makes for better citizens.
He writes, he who lets the world choose his plan of life.
Note the echo of Kant here, right?
It's very self-conscious.
He who lets the world choose his plan of life lives a life of ape-like imitation.
Worse than juvenile, ape-like, we're going down the phylogenetic scale.
He who chooses a plan of life for himself uses all his faculties.
And so Mill argues we're just plain better people when we exercise that kind of choice,
we're more mature, we're more developed.
More over Mill points out originality is what leads to material progress.
So even if you just care about more goods and more material progress in society, you
need originality.
And originality only comes from pluralism and individuality.
So this is a plurality argument.
We've seen that for Mill coercion and criticism makes sense only when we're criticizing things
that we believe to be wrong, but coercion and criticism are very different things.
It's one thing to criticize a view, it's another thing to coerce somebody from holding that
view.
There's a difference between harm and offense.
We might be offended by somebody's view, that's a reason to criticize.
Only if that person is harming others can we coerce them to abandon the view or the
behavior.
Only harm or personal incompetence justifies coercion at all for Mill.
This distinction between self-regarding acts, that is acts that don't affect anybody else
and other regarding acts, acts that affect others and may harm them, ends up replacing
conscious distinction between public and private.
So nowadays in American society and jurisprudence, we think of other regarding acts as the ones
where the law's got some say, but self-regarding acts as being within the zone of privacy that
was recognized, for instance, in Griswold versus Connecticut, the Supreme Court decision
which decriminalized the use of contraceptives in Connecticut as a violation of individual
behavior on the grounds that there was a zone of privacy that protected these things.
And that, of course, is also the basis of the Roe versus Wayholding.
But note that for Mill, this doesn't mean we can't criticize.
Speech is always free, even critical speech, even speech we don't want to hear.
And for Mill, offense is never a harm.
Things I say may offend you, but offense doesn't harm you.
You've got to be willing to be offended if you want to be part of a free society, Mill
thinks.
And of course, for this reason, Mill would be a real opponent of policies that prohibit
so-called hate speech.
He has a really nice example.
It's the example of a corn merchant.
We might say in a public discourse, corn merchants are thieves.
We need to control and to regulate the corn market.
That's free speech.
But we can't stand outside a corn merchant's house with an enraged mob with torches and
say, corn merchants are thieves, we've got to do something about corn merchants.
That's inciting particular harm as opposed to public speech.
Merely offensive speech, Mill argues, has to be protected.
And so Mill is defending the importance of individuality and liberty in modernity.
And what we see in Mill, as I said, is this kind of final flowering of this individualism
and libertarianism that really runs through the modern viewpoint.
From Hume to Mill, we evolve a much deeper secularism, a much deeper individualism, and
a much stronger public-private distinction.
Mill is following Kant in developing that public-private distinction, but he's giving
us the most modern, contemporary expression of the view that our lives and the lives of
our fellows are meaningful when and only when we are self-expressive three individuals
and meaningful for precisely that reason, not because of our social context, but because
of who we are as individuals.
So this is the first purely individualistic doctrine of the meaning of life that we've
seen.
And Mill provides us, therefore, with the strongest defense you could ever want of the connection
between a meaningful life and a liberal social order.
This has been an articulation of what modernity is all about.
If you join me in the next lecture, we're going to begin looking at post-modernity and
looking at the kind of critiques of modernity that developed almost immediately in the 19th
century, beginning with a kind of conservative critique in the work of Tolstoy and getting
more and more radical as we go, because what we're going to see is that this championing
of the role of the individuality, the reliance on reason, gets questioned.
The liberal social order is not something we can easily take for granted.
It's an articulation that itself can be problematized.
So in the next lectures, we're going to be examining a kind of critical take on the modernism
we've developed over the last four.
Please join me for that.
