Nice to see you again.
Our last few lectures took us to the foundations of European modernity, and I'm guessing
that was a fairly familiar space.
But what we're going to do now is to destabilize that space a little bit.
We're going to begin to look at critical evaluations of the modernism that most of
us take for granted.
Today we're going to focus on the critique developed by the great Russian novelist and
philosopher Lev Tolstoy.
Most of us, of course, think of Tolstoy.
He was born in 1828, died in 1910 as a great novelist, and of course he was a great novelist.
He wrote War and Peace, Anna Karenina, and so forth.
But he was also a very important social reformer and political activist in Russia.
He was a religious reformer.
He was indeed even a supporter of anarchism.
And a lot of Tolstoy's political and moral thought was in fact influential on the great
Indian leader, Mohandas Gandhi, whose work will address later, and through Gandhi on
the great American political leader and philosopher Martin Luther King.
So in our own culture, we owe a lot of ideas that are current to Tolstoy.
Luther was radical in that he was one of the first Russian landowners to provide education
to his serfs, and near his death moved to liberate them.
And he tried very hard to make the Christianity of his time less ritualistic and more humanistic.
Late in his life, very late in his life, he resolved to become an ascetic wanderer on
the model of the Buddha and left home but died very shortly afterwards.
Even Tolstoy's novels are intensely philosophical, and we will be reading one of his novels,
a very short novel, The Death of Ivan Ilyich, which I think is especially philosophical.
I also think it's especially beautiful.
But why are we reading a Tolstoy novel now?
Well, it's because Tolstoy was, above all, intensely concerned about the dangers of
modernity for human life and spiritual life.
In particular, Tolstoy thought that secularization, which as we have seen, is a centerpiece of
European modernity, and the mass society that results from secularization coupled with capitalism
lead to a meaningless life.
He thought that they evacuated all sense of value, everything that was worthwhile from
life.
In The Death of Ivan Ilyich, Tolstoy takes as his theme the importance of coming back
to what he regards as a pre-modern value, spiritual values, including an awareness of
death, a value on important, deep human relationships, and above all, a connection to nature as opposed
to a connection to an artificial society.
Tolstoy thought and argues implicitly in The Death of Ivan Ilyich that a life that's
led in a secular world that's governed entirely by social conventions and laws, like human
imagines, a life that is governed by our collective social energy, or governed by reason, even,
and public discourse, like those imagined by Kant and Mill, thinks that such a life,
this kind of secular life with religion pushed off to the side, lived in this public sphere,
is absolutely hopeless and that at death it leaves us completely empty and feeling as
though we've wasted our lives.
So for Tolstoy, Ivan Ilyich, who we're going to encounter in the last moments of his life,
is indeed all of us.
Tolstoy wants us to pay attention to Ivan Ilyich's life because Tolstoy thinks that
that's the life that most of us lead and that his death is the death that we are most in
danger of dying.
Tolstoy's prose in this novel, as in all of his novels, is absolutely beautiful.
So I'm going to do a fair amount of reading the text with you and talking through the
philosophical ideas in the text.
I'm hoping that after this you run out and buy it because it's a really absolutely lovely
little novel.
So let's begin by asking what Ivan Ilyich's death meant to those around us and Tolstoy
opens with a lovely scene involving Ivan Ilyich's colleagues, people with whom he'd been on
very close terms and who had known that he was ill and their conjectures on Ivan Ilyich's
death.
Ivan Ilyich, by the way, was a judge at the time of his death, so his colleagues are other
colleagues in the law and the judiciary.
Tolstoy writes, his post had been kept open for him, but there had been conjectures that
in case of his death, Alexeyev might receive his appointment and that either Vinikov or
Stabel would succeed Alexeyev.
So on receiving the news of Ivan Ilyich's death, the first thought of each of the gentlemen
in that private room was of the changes and promotions it might occasion among themselves
or their acquaintances.
So what's going on here?
Ivan Ilyich has died.
What does this death mean to the friends and colleagues who were so close to him?
Well, we're beginning with his friends.
What it means to them, of course, is there's a vacancy and we've got to start thinking
in the shop about who's going to fill that vacancy.
But of course it means a bit more than that, Tolstoy writes.
The mere fact of the death of a near acquaintance aroused as usual in all who heard of it,
the complacent feeling that it is he who is dead, not I.
This is a very important philosophical moment in this text.
Which of us, when we've heard that somebody else died, thought, wow, I dodged a bullet,
he's dead, not me, it's sad, I'm worried about it, but I've got to go on living.
And so we push the thought of our own death away when we encounter the deaths of others.
Recall Shantideva on this, how much of our life is spent pushing the thought of our own
death away.
Tolstoy continues.
But the more intimate of Iliich's acquaintances, his so-called friends, could not help thinking
that they would now have to fulfill the very tiresome demands of propriety by attending
the funeral service and paying a visit of condolence to the widow.
We might be embarrassed by this, but it's certainly familiar.
The idea that we think, damn, I've got other things to do, I've got a life to lead, and
now this person's died, it's so inconvenient, I've got to go to a funeral, I've got to make
a condolence call.
So one of the things that death does to us is to force us to think for a moment about
our own death and suppress it, and the other to develop this kind of annoyed view that
somebody had the temerity to die and screw up our lives right now.
So this is what Tolstoy's suggesting that death often in modern society means to the
friends.
But how about to Yvonne Iliich's wife, who after all is much closer to him.
We're now in a conversation between Yvonne Iliich's wife and one of these friends.
And she says, he suffered terribly in the last few days.
He screamed unceasingly, not for minutes, but for hours.
It wasn't a good death, by the way.
For the last three days, he screamed unceasingly.
Now listen, it was unendurable.
I cannot understand how I bore it.
You could hear him three rooms off.
Oh, what I have suffered.
Listen to Yvonne Iliich's wife.
Yvonne Iliich has just died this horrible death, and she's told us how painful it was
for him and how much he suffered.
But it moves immediately to how much I suffered, how much she could not bear.
Tolstoy's emphasizing here the idea that when somebody else dies, we immediately focus
not on them, but we personalize it.
What does it mean to me?
How do I feel now?
We focus on our own mourning, our own upset.
And for Tolstoy, this is just an indication of the kind of alienation from each other
that death brings into focus, an alienation that he thinks is born of the secular modernity.
Tolstoy now asks, what does his death mean to all of us, taking it through the soliloquy
of one of Yvonne Iliich's friends?
He writes, three days of frightful suffering and death.
Why, that might suddenly, at any time, happen to me, he thought.
And for a moment, he felt terrified, but he did not know how.
The customary reflection that once occurred to him that this had happened to Yvonne Iliich
and not to him, and that it should not and could not happen to him, and to think that
it could would be yielding to depression, which he ought not to do.
After this reflection, Peter Yvanovich thought we assured death was an accident natural to
Yvonne Iliich, but certainly not to himself.
Once again, Tolstoy eloquently paints for us what happens when we contemplate the death
of another.
We immediately realize that it was he who died, not me.
We immediately decide that thinking about our own death, however natural it might be
now, would be depressing.
Push it aside, think about other things, better to lead our lives in ignorance of our own
mortality than to focus on that depressing fact.
This all sounds pretty real, right?
I'm sure Shanti Davis worry that this is our natural condition.
Death appears to be a really big thing to us, but to those who remain behind Yvonne Iliich's
friends, for instance, it's just a reshuffling.
One person is gone, other people take the jobs.
It's a set of rituals and social obligations.
The dead person, Yvonne Iliich in this case, slips out of consciousness.
Nobody's thinking about him.
We think about our own grief and about whether or not this death means anything to us.
And finally, we deny that that death has any relationship to ourselves.
Death becomes abstract.
This depersonalization of death, this abstraction of death, is very much how we often deal with
our own mortality and with the mortality of others.
That's Tolstoy's point.
The depersonalization and abstraction is an inevitable consequence of a secularism and
a modernity.
So who is Yvonne Iliich, whose death we're talking about?
Well, Tolstoy points out to us, he's all of us.
He writes, Yvonne Iliich's life had been most simple and most ordinary and therefore
most terrible.
This is an indictment, not a celebration of modernity.
This is not Hume or Mill.
This is a very different view.
Tolstoy tells us that Yvonne Iliich had a kind of model career.
When he died as a judge at the age of 45, he'd done very well for himself.
He joined the civil service after graduating from law school.
He got a good post as an aide to a governor of a province.
Tolstoy explains to us, he was a very decent man.
He was proper.
He was absolutely scrupulous in his duties, nothing corrupt about him.
He was honest.
He was well respected.
We're told that he was a man of great personal decorum and a man of good cheer.
We're also told he had a really nice wife and good children.
Like so many of us, Yvonne Iliich, we find out in the novel, has some financial troubles
and there's some marital squabbling.
But after a while, he gets a big promotion to this judgeship and then the financial troubles
go away.
Everybody's happy.
He buys a really nice house that Yvonne Iliich thinks is really spiffy, but it's a kind
of McMansion.
It's just like everybody else's house.
All the houses that are owned and decorated by the upper middle classes in Russia, Tolstoy
tells us, look about the same and Yvonne Iliich is like that, a Russian McMansion.
But nonetheless, he has a happy life.
We're told he throws good parties.
People really enjoy them and look for invitations.
He holds bridge nights with his good friends.
He enjoys lots of food and drink.
He has a very satisfying job as a judge.
He does it well.
It's not just an imagination and he enjoys doing it well.
He's very well respected socially.
He has a lot of material comfort.
He's an upper middle class kind of guy.
The kids are doing great in school.
This is a really good life.
This is the modern life.
This is the life Tolstoy thinks to which most of us aspire.
A really good house, a really good job, a nice wife, good kids who are doing well, a
fulfilling job, lots of respect, all that good stuff.
But then Yvonne Iliich gets sick.
And as soon as he gets sick, we start worrying.
First Yvonne Iliich is thinking about his own death, realizing that it might be serious.
And he begins to contemplate what that means.
And notice how abstract things get.
Yvonne Iliich writes.
Now Yvonne Iliich's voice, when I am not, what will there be?
There will be nothing.
And then where shall I be when I am no more?
Can this be dying?
No, I don't want to.
It's impossible that all men have been doomed to suffer this awful horror.
What does this mean?
Yvonne Iliich is suddenly realizing at this stage of his death that he, of his illness,
that he might die.
And the first thing he does is to deny it.
He says, it can't be so.
Death is just too bad.
This can't be something that we have been sentenced to.
And then he considers this wonderful syllogism.
And this is a beautiful exposition by Tolstoy of how we managed to abstract death and depersonalize
it.
Tolstoy writes.
The syllogism he had learned in logic.
Chaius is a man.
Men are mortal.
Therefore, Chaius is mortal.
What always seemed correct to him is applied to Chaius.
But certainly not as applied to himself.
That Chaius, man in the abstract, was mortal, was perfectly correct.
But he was not Chaius, not an abstract man, but a creature quite, quite separate from
all others.
He had been little Vanya with a mama and a papa.
What did Chaius know of the smell of that striped ball Vanya had been so fond of?
Had Chaius been in love like that?
Could Chaius preside at a session as he did?
Chaius really was mortal, and it was right for him to die.
But for me, little Vanya, Yvonne Ilyich, with all my thoughts and emotions, it's all together
a different matter.
So Tolstoy points out, we are quite happy understanding that death happens to everybody.
We're quite happy with an abstract understanding of immortality.
But we always fail to see that we fall under that abstraction, that death happens to us
too.
Because depersonalization, the Tolstoy sees as part of secularization.
But unfortunately for Yvonne Ilyich, his illness is far too concrete.
It can't be all made abstract.
We learn that he starts having trouble sleeping.
The doctors come, he's given opium for the pain, and to help him sleep, he's giving
injections of morphine, but even this doesn't relieve the pain.
We're told that he has a special diet prepared for him at doctors' orders.
And for a while that's a little bit better.
But eventually the foods become really distasteful and disgusting to him.
He loses his appetite, and you know, he's going downhill.
And Tolstoy really emphasizes the concreteness of all of this.
For his excretions also, special arrangements had to be made.
And this was a torment to him every time, a torment from the uncleanliness, the unseemliness,
and the smell, and from knowing that another person had to take part in it.
Let's pause on this for a moment.
This I think, even though it seems like a kind of earthy moment, is for Tolstoy a philosophically
very significant moment in the novel.
What's upsetting to Yvonne Ilyich is his embodiment, and the fact that he has to be as a physical
person, you know, who actually excretes smelly stuff, involved with another person.
If somebody has to come and clean them up, and take the bedpan out, and all of that.
And so for Yvonne Ilyich, what happens at this kind of moment, having to do with food,
with excretion, with physical care, brings the concreteness of his life, brings the concreteness
of his illness, brings the concreteness of his death, really home to roost.
And that's why it's so upsetting.
It forces him to confront that kind of reality.
So where are we at this point in the text?
What we find is that we've got a very nice guy.
There's nothing wrong with Yvonne Ilyich.
He's a very good, very ordinary person with a good, ordinary middle-class life.
He's doing all the right things in life, and he's confronting his own mortality in the
way that each of us will someday have to confront our own mortality.
He tries to do it by abstraction and by denial, through the syllogism, through thinking that
death is a perfectly general thing, through denying that it could possibly be true that
he's really dying.
But life and death, as Tolstoy points out, turn out to be rather concrete.
They're realities that we can't abstract away, that we can't depersonalize.
Moreover, Yvonne Ilyich is turning out to be rather alone in all of this.
It's just something else that Tolstoy emphasizes about the nature of death.
While we might live among colleagues, we might live among family, eventually we die alone.
Tolstoy points out that especially in this kind of secularized life, people begin to
move away from us as we're dying.
They visit less often.
They spend less time with us at that time, and Yvonne Ilyich is getting rather lonely.
In fact, Tolstoy points out, by this time, when we get to this stage of the novel and
the stage of the illness, Yvonne Ilyich's family is actually getting bored.
The kids don't like having a dying father around.
The wife doesn't like having her social life disrupted.
There's a lot of inconvenience.
There have to be special physical arrangements made.
Rooms have to be readjusted.
Doctors are going in and out.
And we're in a time before universal health care, it's getting expensive.
And the wife is worried about the money rolling out to pay for medicines, to pay for doctors
and so forth.
So everybody in the family is really feeling like this is a grand annoyance.
This is again part of the loneliness of death.
For Yvonne Ilyich, what's happening is this unique and incomprehensible tragedy that affects
him and him alone.
To his family, it's just one more annoyance.
Can't we get it over with?
Can't we just lead normal lives?
And again, as we read the novel and experience all of this, there's a sense maybe of a kind
of compassion or a sense of even contempt for his family and his friends.
But there's more of a sense of embarrassment, I think.
And the sense of embarrassment comes from the fact that probably each of us at some
point has reacted, even if we didn't like to admit it, to a death or an illness in exactly
this way.
But at this point Tolstoy introduces a new character into the novel, who turns out to
be a significant one.
I'm going to read with you.
But just through this most unpleasant matter, that is the matter of toileting, Yvonne Ilyich
obtained comfort.
Gerasim, the butler's assistant, always came in to carry the things out.
Gerasim was a clean, fresh, peasant lad, always cheerful and bright.
At first the sight of him in his clean clothes, engaged on that disgusting task, embarrassed
Yvonne Ilyich.
So what happened?
We have this kind of sweet, clean, fresh, peasant guy coming in and helping Yvonne Ilyich
with his bedpan and cleaning him up and so forth.
And Yvonne Ilyich's first reaction to this interaction is serious embarrassment.
He doesn't want this boy to see him in this situation and to deal with these functions.
And you know, you can understand the embarrassment.
But things continue.
Gerasim turns out to be an uncommonly kind lad.
So let's see how Tolstoy puts this.
He says, Gerasim went up to him, grasped his master with his strong arms, deftly but gently,
lifted him, supported him with one, and with the other, drew up his trousers.
Thank you.
How easily and well you do it all.
That's the voice of Yvonne Ilyich, of course.
Gerasim smiled again and turned to leave the room.
But Yvonne Ilyich felt his presence such a comfort that he did not want him to go.
And then Tolstoy describes how he had Gerasim stay and hold his legs up so that he'd feel
more comfortable, massage him a little bit, talk to him a little bit.
And Gerasim actually provided some concrete, personal, tender human comfort.
And Gerasim, we find out, had this wonderful effect on Yvonne Ilyich.
We're told that, you know, Gerasim did it all easily, willingly, Tolstoy writes, simply
and with a good nature that touched Yvonne Ilyich, health, strength, and vitality in
other people were offensive to him.
But Gerasim's strength and vitality did not mortify but soothed him.
There's something about Gerasim that can provide some comfort.
And what we're seeing is possible, is that Gerasim in a very unpretentious, very natural,
human way, not out of obligation, not out of some social convention, but just naturally
and spontaneously engages at this personal level with Yvonne Ilyich.
Operating in the private sphere gives a certain kind of comfort.
And Gerasim is honest in a way that others are not.
Yvonne Ilyich saw Tolstoy tells us that nobody else really felt for him.
Nobody else really had serious, deep compassion for him in his illness and impending death.
For one reason, nobody even wanted to grasp his position.
Nobody really understood what he was going through.
And that because it was so annoying or so depressing or so terrifying that everybody
distanced themselves, it was only Gerasim who recognized and pitied him.
Here's how Tolstoy puts it in Gerasim's mouth now.
So we hear Gerasim, the butler's boy talking.
If you weren't sick, it would be another matter.
But as it is, why should I grudge a little trouble?
Gerasim alone did not lie.
Everything showed that he alone understood the facts of the case and did not consider
it necessary to disguise them.
Once he even said straight out, this is an important moment in the novel and an important
philosophical moment for Tolstoy.
This is the voice of Gerasim, the butler's boy.
We shall all of us die.
So why should I grudge a little trouble?
He did not think his work burdens him because he was doing it for a dying man and hoped
that someone would do the same for him when his time came.
So Gerasim is an interesting character in all of this.
Gerasim understands the inevitability of death and the meaningfulness of death, not just
in the abstract, but also in this very concrete sense.
What does Gerasim represent in this case?
Well, part of Gerasim's role is to represent the peasant for Tolstoy because Tolstoy,
we have to face it, was a kind of peasant romantic.
He really thought there was a special deep kind of wisdom in the Russian peasant to
which modern Russians really needed to tap into, this kind of depth and understanding
of nature that was absent from the upper classes.
There is part of that.
But there is a deeper point.
Gerasim takes his own death seriously.
He says we all of us die.
He speaks in the first person.
When Yvon Ilyich thought about death, he thought about it in the third person, Kyos is mortal.
He abstracted it from himself.
When his friends thought about death, they thought about it as something that happened
to Yvon Ilyich, but can't possibly happen to them.
But Gerasim talks about death in the first person and he's the only person in the novel
who's doing that.
He says we all of us die.
And Tolstoy's point here is that only somebody who takes their own death seriously can be
honest with somebody else about death.
So that if we want to be able to encounter other people in their mortality and to be
able to understand the nature of their lives and to engage in meaningful interactions with
them, even for their own benefit, but for ours as well, taking our own mortality and
our own death seriously is an important prerequisite.
The other point here that of course follows from this and is the real punch is that only
if you're honest about death can you live a healthy, happy life.
That's really central to all of this.
Remember all these facts about Gerasim.
He's clean, he's happy, he's healthy, he's cheerful, he's able to be a comfort.
That's because of his honesty about his own life and his own death.
And this is a theme that we saw developed in Chantideva, of course.
This isn't a modern theme.
It's a way pre-modern theme.
Chantideva argued that what makes our lives miserable, what causes us to live in fear
on happiness and vice, is not just the fear of death, but pushing death to the periphery
of our understanding and of our experience.
But if we're happy with death and can accept death on our own mortality, the fear disappears.
Now we find ourselves very close to Yvonne Iliac's death and we have the question asked,
what if his life wasn't the real thing?
Tolstoy writes, all that had seemed joys, now melted before his sight and turned into
something trivial and often nasty, that as Yvonne Iliac is reviewing his life and everything
that seemed like it was wonderful, the house, the kids, the wife, the promotion, suddenly
seemed really trivial because now he's really confronting his mortality.
Death is important.
The rest of this stuff pales.
And what that means is he's finding himself at the end of a life thinking that everything
that happened in it was trivial and often nasty.
Tolstoy continues, and the further he departed from childhood and the nearer he came to the
present, the more worthless and doubtful were the joys.
It is as if I had been going downhill while I imagined I was going up.
And that is really what it was.
I was going up in public opinion, but to the same extent, life was ebbing away from me
and now it is all done and there is only death.
Yvonne Iliac has suddenly recognized that he's frittered his life away on the trivial,
on the public sphere, on a conventional life, an ordinary life, a life that was lived thoughtlessly,
a life where he wasn't confronting his own choices and he wasn't confronting the structure
of his own existence.
Then what does it mean?
It can't be that life is so senseless and horrible.
But of course that's the problem.
If we lead a life in which we abstract ourselves so much and pay so little attention to the
concrete reality of our existence and our immortality, how senseless and horrible life
is what we might be left with.
Might it have all been false?
That night the question suddenly occurred to him, what if my whole life has been wrong?
And having to ask yourself that on your deathbed, Tolstoy's point is that we may all be in exactly
that position if we don't move to lead a more authentic, meaningful life now.
It occurred to him that what had appeared perfectly impossible before, namely that he
had not spent his life as he should have done, might after all be true.
His professional duties and the whole arrangement of his life and of his family and all his social
and official interests might all have been false.
But if that is so, and if I am leaving this life with the consciousness that I have lost
all that was given to me and it is impossible to rectify it, what then?
That's the terrible possibility with which Tolstoy wants to confront us, the consequence
of the modern secular life.
And now at the moment of his death, Yvon Ilyich has a revelation.
At that very moment Yvon Ilyich fell through and caught sight of the light and it was revealed
to him that though his life had not been what it should have been, this could still be rectified.
He asked himself, what is the right thing?
He was sorry for his family.
He must act so as not to hurt them.
He sought his former accustomed fear of death and did not find it.
Where is it?
What is death?
There was no fear because there was no death.
In place of death, there was light.
Tolstoy is telling us here that our lives are indeed aimed at death and that's something
that we need to confront.
Not only do we all die, but we're all dying every minute from the moment of our birth.
That's what structures our lives.
And the most important moment of our lives might be that final one, the one where we
need to ask whether it was all worthwhile.
Our ordinary conventions, the conventions of modernity Tolstoy thinks, and our ordinary
consciousness that pushes death to the side conceals that fact.
Tolstoy is challenging us with the idea that that is in fact a dishonest, inauthentic
way to live, even if it's the normal way to live.
Social propriety, the ordinary conversational customs and our habits and our etiquette conspires
in this effort to hide mortality from us.
We then find ourselves focusing, as Yvonne Iliac says, on the meaningless, on the trivial,
on the nasty.
And we forget that meaning may well emerge at the end and come back to get us.
Tolstoy urges that only a return to the natural, an appreciation of our biological nature and
our place in the world as concrete individuals can help us.
If that happens, he points out, our mortality and the recognition of our own mortality can
inspire compassion, as we find in Yvonne Iliac at the end, for others and for ourselves.
That can lead us to an honest life and a meaningful life.
So in Tolstoy what we see is a curiously pre-modern response to modernity.
A conservative response, arguing that all of this modernism and secularism and individualism
may not be such a good idea.
In our next lecture we'll continue developing the critique of modernity, but with a very
radical, post-modern critique in the voice of Friedrich Nietzsche.
Please stay with me for that.
