Greetings and welcome back.
In our last lecture, we began to examine critiques of modernity.
In Tolstoy, as we saw, we had a very conservative critique of modernity, a critique that was
based upon ideas that we saw coming straight out of the classical traditions we examined
before.
Today, things will be very different.
We'll be looking at the philosophy of the great German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche.
And we can think about Nietzsche as the person who launched the movement called postmodernism,
who really attacks modernity not from a classical perspective, but from a perspective beyond
modernity itself.
Nietzsche lived a very short life.
He was born in 1844 and died in 1900.
But in reality, his life was shorter than that because he spent the last 12 years in
a psychiatric hospital almost completely catatonic after a major catastrophic breakdown.
But he was a real prodigy and accomplished an enormous amount before the time of his
breakdown.
He was appointed to his chair in Philology at the University of Basel at the age of 24,
which makes him still the youngest person ever appointed to a chair in a European university.
It's just an astonishing achievement.
As I said earlier, Nietzsche was the initiator of this movement we call postmodernity in
philosophy.
And we can think about postmodernity in a very specific sense.
Oftentimes, that term is bandied about to mean anything very contemporary, very modern
or very hip.
But when we pay attention to what Nietzsche was up to and what his followers took from
him, we can really see postmodernity as a very specific kind of response to the themes
that we saw articulated in modernism.
Modernism valorizes the integrity and the transparency of the individual.
As individuals, we are single units.
We know ourselves and we're the foundations of society.
Postmodernity attacks that and questions that.
It questions the idea that we really can know who we are and that the individual really
is sovereign.
In modernity, we valorize the idea of progress, that philosophy, science, economics, politics
are on a constant progressive march with each generation improving on what the previous
generation did.
Postmodernity rejects the idea of sustained progress and rejects the idea that human history
is progressive.
In modernity, we valorized liberty and democracy and the equality of human beings.
Postmodernity questions whether liberal democracy is a self-evidently good thing and whether
we should be thinking of individuals necessarily as equal in relevant senses.
Finally, in modernity, we saw a valorization of science and reason as the foundation of
human knowledge, of society and of progress and of religion as something that was an
interesting human option.
In postmodernity, we will be questioning the idea that reason and science really are foundational,
that we should take those for granted as the grounds of our human life and of our public
life and we will see Nietzsche also criticizing the idea that religion or spirituality is
a legitimate option even in private.
So we can really see postmodernity not simply as what comes next but very much as a critique
of the very ideas that are central to European modernism.
We'll see that Nietzsche's text poses special challenges to us as readers as well.
Throughout this course, we have been examining texts that are written in a variety of styles
and call upon us to read in a variety of different ways.
Nietzsche gives us yet a new style.
Nietzsche wrote in aphorisms, sometimes in poetry, sometimes offering cryptics, sardonic
or ironic arguments.
Often the arguments are highly implicit and in the background.
Nietzsche challenges the reader not just to understand what he said but to think about
what he's saying and to reconstruct the arguments that lie behind it.
So when we read Nietzsche, we're going to have to read with a great deal of reflectiveness.
Only because of that, there are many, many interpretations abroad of Nietzsche's thought.
I'll of course be offering one.
It's the one that I like.
But you should be aware that I'm reading Nietzsche in a particular way and other scholars might
read Nietzsche very differently.
The particular text that we're going to address is called Twilight of the Idols.
And it's the last book that Nietzsche saw into print before his descent into madness.
So in one sense, we can see it as the most mature work that Nietzsche composed.
But we can also see it more importantly as what I think of as the first clear cannon
shot in the battle of post-modernity against modernity.
The first place where a philosopher sets up the idols of modernity, the central theses
of modernity as the targets of philosophical attack.
But once again, while in Tolstoy, we saw really a pre-modern response to modernity,
in Nietzsche it's going to look very, very different.
Nietzsche would have seen Tolstoy as a sloppy sentimental romantic.
In Nietzsche, prepare for more bracing, robust stuff.
I want to return to the title of the text.
The title is Twilight of the Idols, or How to Philosophize with a Hammer.
That subtitle is really important as well.
When Nietzsche talks about the idols in Twilight of the Idols, what he means are philosophical
ideas or principles that we simply tend to take for granted in the history of philosophy,
in the history of ideas.
And then once we take them for granted, we think of philosophical reflection as having
the task of just explicating and developing these ideas and not of questioning them.
So we think of philosophy as trying to understand what the individual subject is, trying to
understand what moral virtue is, trying to understand the nature of God, or trying to
understand how we should articulate personal liberty, rather than questioning whether these
are the right concepts to operate with in the first place.
For Nietzsche, the idols that he really cares about are these assumptions of modernity that
we've been examining in the last few lectures.
But the hammer metaphor is important as well.
He calls this How to Philosophize with a Hammer.
And when he thinks about philosophizing with a hammer, he thinks about the approach to
these idols as having two steps.
We've got the hammer in our hand.
First we tap the idol and discover that it's hollow.
And then we reach back with the hammer and smash it.
So Nietzsche is arguing that he is demonstrating the hollowness of many of the ideas we take
for granted in modernity and then smashing them.
What remains after all this smashing?
Well, Hannah Arendt put it beautifully.
Hannah Arendt was another postmodernist who was deeply influenced by Nietzsche.
She said, we'd be stride a landscape littered with the rubble of broken narratives.
Littered with the rubble of broken narratives.
So Nietzsche thinks that when you finish smashing these idols, you end up with an empty space
with just the trash left behind from previous philosophical activity.
But it's a space in which we're free to create and in which we are invited to novelty, creativity,
and authenticity.
A central theme of Nietzsche's is this idea of creativity and authenticity.
That we should lead our lives as works of literature.
As great novels in which we are protagonists.
Novels that we want to leave behind is worth living.
And Nietzsche challenges us to aestheticize our lives and to lead a life worthy of consideration.
So it's a real challenge to authenticity.
In the present lecture, we're going to be selecting a few particular chapters and a
few passages within those chapters for our focus.
All of the passages in this lecture are going to be in the hammer mode.
We're going to be tapping and then smashing.
The reconstruction, the account, the positive account of what a life ought to look like
after the destruction we will address in the next lecture.
The sections we'll be focusing on today are those called maxims and arrows, the problem
of Socrates, reason and philosophy, and how the real world becomes a myth.
So we're going to begin with some maxims and arrows.
Nietzsche opens this section with what he calls questions of conscience.
And again, that title is one that bears attention.
When Nietzsche approaches us, he really asks us to pay attention to our conscience.
Are we leading our lives in good faith?
Are we leading lives that we could endorse, that we could recommend, and that we would
regard as lives worth living?
And so he really asks us to interrogate ourselves.
He's focusing, that is, on the need for authenticity.
That is, leading the life of which we really are the authors.
Not a life that somebody else has prescribed for us.
Not a life that we've sort of taken up on the template of somebody else's lives.
Not even a life that we derive from a theory that we like.
Not a life that arises from a self-creative act where we sit down and say, this is who
I want to be, and we enact it.
And that's a life in which we take responsibility for the decisions that we make, that we don't
make decisions and then pawn them off on somebody else.
The same act can be authentic or inauthentic, Nietzsche points out.
Self-deception is a really easy thing.
It's easy to think that we're leading an authentic life when, in fact, the values that
we've adopted are values we took from somebody else or values that we found from an abstract
theory.
And for Nietzsche, this ability that we have to take on the values of others or the projects
of others or a sense of normalcy in society, all things, by the way, that we saw Tolstoy
and Mill noted, are the greatest dangers to authenticity.
If we are going to live as artists and that our lives are going to be works of art, then
we must safeguard our own creativity and not simply become derivative of those around
us.
So, let's now enter the text.
When Nietzsche writes these maxims and arrows at number two, he writes, even the bravest
of us rarely has the courage for what he really knows.
Even the bravest of us rarely has the courage for what he really knows.
Here we have that real call to authenticity.
The idea that we often have knowledge that we can't face, that we know that we are a
person of a certain kind and we try to deny that, that we know what the right thing is
to do or the thing that we'd like to do, and it's so scary or so challenging that we tell
ourselves that maybe it's rash, maybe we should do something else.
But Nietzsche continues on this theme of knowledge.
This is very subtle.
He says, once and for all, there is a great deal I do not want to know.
Wisdom sets bounds even to knowledge.
This is a real postmodern turn.
Notice that in modernity, we were really valorizing knowledge as a central human value.
That's what Kant thought life was all about.
That's what Mill thought life was all about.
Nietzsche is arguing, there's a lot I don't want to know.
I mean, for instance, I really don't want to know what color your underwear are, and
you probably don't want to know what color mine are.
That's stuff we don't want to know.
There's confidential information we don't want to know.
There's information that would just clutter up our lives.
I don't want to memorize the phone book for Washington, D.C., and neither do you.
So Nietzsche is arguing that knowledge might be an interesting thing, but to valorize it
as always a good thing is just plain foolish.
Nietzsche continues now on this notion of being natural.
He writes, it is by being natural that one best recovers from one's unnaturalness, from
one's spirituality.
Now, there is a kind of echo of Taoism here in this emphasis on naturalism, but noticed
there's a bit of humor in this too, even though Nietzsche would never acknowledge it.
Nietzsche talks here about recovering from one's spirituality, because he argues that
the spiritual, thinking religiously, is a kind of decadence, that it takes us out of
the natural world into the supernatural.
And Nietzsche thinks of us first and foremost as animals, natural beings in the world who
can make something of our lives, and he thinks that when we move into the spiritual realm,
into the religious realm, we deny that naturalness.
We deprecate the world that we live in, and so we're involved in a kind of self-deprecation
not worthy of an artist.
You don't start out by saying that you're second rate.
Nietzsche continues this suspicion of God when he asks, which is it?
Is man only God's mistake, or God only man's mistake?
This is only an aphorism, but it's a very complete, very deep rejection of religion.
Nietzsche sees religion here as a retreat from facing up to reality, something that's
unnatural.
After all, if there's a God, then theodicy, the problem of evil, is absolutely unmistakable.
The problem of theodicy is absolutely unavoidable.
When he asks, is man only God's mistake, he's pointing out that we are terribly imperfect,
and we do a whole lot of bad stuff, you would have to blame our creator for that, since
he, on the grounds of religion, is omnipotent, omniscient, and omnibenevolent.
So if there's a God, the God is deeply problematic.
But if there isn't one, and it's just our mistake to posit a God, then backtrack on
the mistake and jettison the God.
Either way, Nietzsche thinks there's no virtue in positing a God.
Nietzsche now turns to thinking more directly about the meaning of life.
He asks the question, if we possess our why of life, we can put up with any how.
Man does not strive after happiness, only the Englishman does that.
As I said, Nietzsche is often rye, often humorous, often sardonic.
But what's the point of this?
If we really have a sense of what our life is about, we can put up with anything.
But most importantly, is this worry about happiness.
When Nietzsche says man does not strive after happiness, what he means is we don't want
to think that there's one single good, one highest good as Aristotle thought, or even
a highest good as Mill thought or as Kant thought, to locate one single value as what
all life is about is to flatten life, to make all lives the same, and to destroy all creativity.
And if there's no creativity, no freedom, no ability to create, why bother living?
So if we possess our why of life, that is something that animates us, we can put up
with any how.
But if there's some single value that we take to animate everything, it makes life look
just flat.
Nietzsche continues this theme in the next passage where he says, I mistrust all systematizers
and avoid them.
The will to a system is a lack of integrity.
The will to a system is a lack of integrity.
Even if it's a system we construct for ourselves, that is Nietzsche thinks the real life of
integrity, of authenticity, a genuine life, is a life lived creatively.
If we establish a system that's going to regulate our lives, we've done just what Kant warned
us against when he warned us against having a pastor to form our values for us, having
a doctor to formulate our diet for us, and so on, giving our responsibility for our lives
over to someone else.
Here Nietzsche is pointing out that it's bad enough to give responsibility to your life
to someone else.
It's even worse to give responsibility for your life to an abstract system.
Even if it's a system you created, retain the responsibility, retain the authenticity,
retain the freedom to act, retain the appreciation of plurality, diversity, and spontaneity.
Simplifying life is always dangerous.
Nietzsche sums up these maxims and arrows with a wonderful, direct challenge to the reader.
He writes, you run on ahead, do you do so as a herdsman, or is an exception?
A third possibility would be as a deserter, first question of conscience.
So this is a question of conscience.
Nietzsche is asking you, when you go on ahead, when you take yourself seriously and leave
others behind, are you actually doing it just as a herdsman?
Do you want to bring others along with you?
And so effectively reduce yourself to a servant of others?
Or do you treat yourself as an exception, a real individual, somebody who actually has
something to say?
There is a third possibility that you've just given up on your responsibilities, that you're
a deserter pretending that you're an exception.
That's a question of conscience.
That forces us to pay attention to our motivations.
Are we being true to ourselves?
Are we just serving others?
Nietzsche sees that as a deprecation.
Are we just reducing ourselves to other people's goals?
Or are we shameful deserters?
Then he asks, are you genuine or only an actor, a representative?
Or that itself which is represented?
That is, are you really authentic?
Are you making believe?
Are you acting your life out, say as we might imagine, Yvonne Iliac, acting somebody's life
out?
Are you a representative for someone else, just taking on their values?
Or are you something represented, that is, other people are following you?
Or finally, you are no more than an imitation of an actor.
If you lead your life without taking responsibility for it, you're not even an actor, because
a real actor is an artist.
You're just somebody pretending to be an actor.
That's the second question of conscience.
These get you deep.
Then Nietzsche asks, are you one who looks on, or sets to work?
Or who looks away and turns aside?
Third question of conscience.
That is, are you a spectator on your own life, or are you really engaged in it?
Or are you disavowing your life, looking away and effectively leaving yourself abandoned?
That's the third question of conscience.
Are you really engaged in your own life?
Hard question to ask, but if you're not engaged in your own life, Nietzsche thinks, you've
got a meaningless life.
If you're just a spectator on your own life, forget it.
Then Nietzsche asks, do you want to accompany or go on ahead?
Or go off alone?
One must know what one wants and that one wants.
Fourth question of conscience.
That is here, Nietzsche is asking the question, do you really just want to be along with others?
A member of a herd, a member of a group, allowing other people to make the decisions?
Or are you willing to go on ahead?
Are you willing to be alone?
Are you willing to take responsibility for your own desires and your own plans?
This is a question of conscience.
That's the fourth.
So for Nietzsche, these four questions of conscience are the questions we have to address
in determining whether our lives are genuinely meaningful.
I want to turn to another part of Twilight, the problem of Socrates.
We should ask ourselves, why does Nietzsche pick on poor old Socrates?
Why is he a problem?
Well, the answer is simple.
Nietzsche thinks that Socrates has become an idol of philosophy, the beginning of the
Western philosophical tradition, because we see Socrates as somebody who valorizes reason
and who really uses the power of reason to understand reality.
So for Nietzsche, Socrates represents this triumph of the idea of the supremacy of reason.
And Socrates in the end becomes a touchstone for modernity, because Socrates in demonstrating
this power of reason allows modern philosophers like Hume and Kant and so forth to see what
they're doing as continuous with a classical European tradition, but nonetheless as progressive
because reason is taken to be progressive.
And all of these are ideas Nietzsche regards as idolatrous, ideas needing the tap and the
smash.
So let's look at Nietzsche on Socrates.
Nietzsche writes, the irreverent notion that the great sages are declining types first
dawned on me in regard to just the case in which learned and unlearned prejudice is most
strongly opposed to it.
I recognize, writes Nietzsche, the dissolution of Greece.
Value judgments concerning life for or against can in the last resort never be true.
They possess value only as symptoms.
One must reach out and try to grasp this astonishing finesse that the value of life cannot be estimated.
Want to repeat that last line?
One must reach out and try to grasp this astonishing finesse that the value of life cannot be estimated.
What's Nietzsche saying here?
Well, he's saying first that the philosophy of the past and he includes everything from
classical Greece to modernity is decadent, that it's a retreat from actually living
life, from being creative and engaging with the world to abstract every thought that means
absolutely nothing.
It just spins out theories, spins out models and tries to get other people to give up their
authenticity by accepting them.
He's saying that by accepting anyone's valuation of life, whether it's Aristotle's or Marcus
Aurelius' or Kant's, one is declining one's own responsibility to evaluate one's own life
and to lead the life according to one's own conscience.
He's also saying that we have to accept the fact that we can't come to know the meaning
or value of life.
Reason won't get us there.
We need to lead our lives.
We need to lead them creatively, but to think that somehow reason is going to lead us in
doing that and that reason is going to ground that leading of a life is as crazy as thinking
that abstract reason and theory is going to ground and make possible the painting of a
beautiful picture or the creation of a beautiful statue or the writing of a beautiful novel.
If our lives are art, then we have to put reason aside, not rely upon it.
Nietzsche continues on the problem of Socrates.
He writes,
With Socrates, Greek taste undergoes a change in favor of dialectics.
What is really happening when that happens?
It is above all the defeat of a nobler taste.
With dialectics, the rabble gets on top.
Before Socrates, the dialectical manner was repudiated in good society.
It was considered a form of bad manners.
Presentation of one's reason was regarded with mistrust.
Honest things, like honest men, do not carry their reasons exposed.
Here we see more modern idols under attack.
In the first passage we looked at in this discussion, we were attacking the idea of
the philosophical tradition as progressive.
But in this one, it's reason and argument being attacked directly as the keys to understanding.
Nietzsche is arguing,
Reasoning is just ugly.
You reason when you know you're not quite right and you need to persuade somebody.
This gives up on the aesthetic approach to life.
There's also something you should note here, though, that's really cute.
That's this.
Nietzsche is actually using reason to do his work.
He's offering you a rational argument against the use of reason.
And so there's some real irony at work here.
And it's also worth taking a moment to think about the resonances that Nietzsche's got
to some surprising folks.
The Book of Job, the Dowda Jing, and Dogen.
In each of these cases, we saw a deep suspicion of reason as a ground for developing a meaningful
life and for understanding our own existence.
Now Nietzsche really goes after reason and the language becomes a bit stronger.
He writes, by the way, now we're moving to the section of reason and philosophy.
He writes,
All that philosophers have handled for millennia has been conceptual mummies.
That is, we're focusing only on dead ideas, things we should have left behind long ago.
Nothing actual has escaped from their hands alive.
They kill, they stuff when they worship.
These conceptual idolaters, these senses which are so immoral as well, it is they which deceive
us about the real world.
Moral escape from sense deception, from becoming, from history, be a philosopher, be a mummy,
and away above all with the body, refuted, impossible even, notwithstanding it is impudent
enough to behave as if it actually existed.
What's the point of all of this?
Nietzsche, in arguing that philosophy creates mummies, that it stuffs reality and leaves
it behind, is focusing on this idolatry of reason.
And the idolatry of reason leads, he thinks, in philosophy to deprecating our senses, to
deprecating our passions, to deprecating our bodies, to deprecating the real world,
in favor of abstract ideas and thoughts and abstract principles.
When we do that, he thinks, we deprecate life itself, and life is where we are.
And so we abandon the authentic values, the authentic life that we actually lead.
And secondly, he points out, that we involve ourselves in actually denying the importance
of our own embodiment, something terribly irrational, because first and foremost, we
are animals.
This turns up again in Nietzsche's very deep concern with philosophical realism, as opposed
to philosophical idealism.
And Nietzsche's got a beautiful diagnosis of the philosophical retreat from reality,
that he thinks we find ourselves in, starting with Greek philosophy, and especially ending
up with modernity.
And he takes us through a set of steps for denying the world, and for leaving our lives
abandoned, leaving our lives in a way that has to be completely inauthentic.
He writes, first proposition, the grounds on which this world has been designated as
apparent, establish rather its reality.
Another kind of reality is absolutely indemonstrable.
And as he's pointing out, as soon as somebody thinks that our senses are deceptive, that
we shouldn't pay so much attention to the imminent, the concrete, the temporary, the
fleeting, then they want to project themselves into another reality, a permanent reality,
a spiritual reality, a reality that's transcendent.
And he says, that is not even demonstrable.
That's not a finding of a deeper reality somewhere else.
That's an abandonment of ourselves and our own reality.
Second proposition, the characteristics which have been assigned to the real being of things
are the characteristics of non-being, of nothingness.
That is, when we then go to characterize this transcendent, ultimate reality, talk about
it as permanent, talk about it as divine, talk about it as significant or eternal, we find
that those characteristics don't characterize anything real at all.
And what we've done is to valorize nothingness and to abandon real somethings, including
ourselves and those around us.
Third proposition, to talk about another world than this is quite pointless, providing that
an instinct for slandering, disparaging and accusing life is not within us.
That is Nietzsche thinks that the moment we talk about a transcendent reality that we
care about more than this one, all we've done is to disparage the world in which we in fact
live and to disparage our own lives.
That's to be inauthentic.
That's to not take responsibility for who we are or for how we're living.
Third proposition, to divide the world into a real and an apparent world, whether in the
manner of Christianity, for which Nietzsche of course has complete loathing, or of Kant,
who he loaves even more, is only a suggestion of decadence, a symptom of declining life,
that the decadence consists precisely in denying the reality of the world that we live in, of
failing to live authentically.
So what's Nietzsche saying here?
He's arguing that the desire to find some greater reality than the one we actually live
in, to locate real life, real value, real significance, outside of the life that we
inhabit, the life that we create and the world in which we have to function, is simply irrational.
We don't have any reason to go beyond this world, any evidence of the non-existence of
this world, or any evidence of the existence of a greater reality.
Moreover, and more importantly though, for Nietzsche it's cowardly.
It's life denying and it's decadent.
It's a way of not taking responsibility for who we are or for how we live.
It's a way of taking the lives that we lead and treating them as second-rate trash in
preference to something else.
And so finally, in the end, it is inauthentic, it's self-repudiating.
We leave ourselves in the lurch.
For in Nietzsche then, we see an attack on any account of the meaning of life that aims
at any transcendent locus.
And that's many of the accounts we've seen thus far in these lectures, including ancient
and modern.
Nietzsche challenges us to create our own meaning, to create our own lives, their own significance,
and to find that meaning and significance in the world that we in fact inhabit.
In our next lecture, we're going to examine how Nietzsche sees that done, the positive
side of Twilight of the Idols.
I hope you'll join me for that.
