It is hard to imagine two philosophers more different from one another than Friedrich
Nietzsche and Mohandas Gandhi.
And it's hard to imagine two views of the meaning of life and of the nature of existence
more different from one another than those articulated by Nietzsche and Gandhi.
Nonetheless, in the present lecture we move from Nietzsche to Gandhi, and in doing so
we're going to discover some surprising commonalities.
Nietzsche and Gandhi were both thoroughgoing critics of modernity.
Each of them believed that modernity itself makes a meaningful life impossible in important
ways, and each of them believes that a thorough rejection of modernity is necessary if we
believe that life is going to be truly meaningful.
Gandhi's own critique of modernity is very complex, reflecting his own complex life.
He was indeed one of the most extraordinary individuals who lived in the 20th century.
His life took him from India, where he was born, to the United Kingdom, where he was
educated, to South Africa, where he began his career, and back to India.
From each of these sources, Gandhi picked up ideas, picked up theories, picked up techniques,
and he wove them together in an extraordinarily complex, multicultural, and even cosmopolitan
vision of what human life is and ought to be.
In India, his roots lie both in the Hindu and Jain traditions.
He was raised in a devout Hindu family, but a family that also boasted Jain relatives
and many Jain friends.
We haven't talked about Jainism in these lectures, but it was a religion that developed
in India at about the same time as Buddhism, and had an even stronger emphasis than did
Buddhism on non-violence, on non-harming.
The Sanskrit term for this is ahimsa, non-harming.
Religious Jains often wear face masks, so as not to accidentally inhale small insects.
Jain monks and nuns, you will always see walking with a broom to sweep the ground in front
of them in order to prevent accidentally treading on a small animal.
So Jainism has a very, very deep commitment to non-harming of anybody, of any kind of
creature.
So Gandhi absorbed this idea of ahimsa from Jainism, but he also studied the Gita very
carefully, and from the Gita, he developed a deep commitment to the idea of svadharma,
of one's own duty, and of the importance of leading a life guided by one's svadharma,
and of leading that life guided by the three yogas, the three disciplines that we have
studied, namely karma yoga, the yoga of action, jnana yoga, the yoga of knowledge, and bhakti
yoga, the yoga of devotion.
But Gandhi also, while in England, encountered the work of the American philosopher Henry
David Thoreau, and was taken by his idea of civil disobedience, of the way in which duty
could lead one to disobey laws that one regards as immoral, and the need to disobey those
laws in a public, representational way, in a way in which one's action is not simply
a refusal to obey, but a public refusal to obey that symbolizes the immorality of the
law one is protesting.
Gandhi also corresponded extensively with Tolstoy, and from Tolstoy, he developed his
deep distrust of modernity as fundamentally soul-destroying, as a kind of secularism that
took all that was spiritual and worthwhile out of human life.
But one of the ideas that animates Gandhi's thought more than any other is a deep sense
of justice, a sense of the importance of human rights, and of the obligation of a nation
to respect the rights of its citizens, for rule to be based upon the consent of the governed.
That he learned in Britain when he studied the law, and it's from a British sense of
civil justice that Gandhi derives much of his sense of what was wrong with British rule
in India.
That is what led him to his deep confrontation with colonialism, despite the fact that he
developed these ideas at the center of colonial power.
So in Gandhi, we see a kind of integration of pre-modern ideas and post-modern critiques.
What we are going to be examining in Gandhi will be his challenge, his challenge to modernity,
that it makes meaningful life impossible, and Gandhi's challenge to each of us that
we've got to confront modernity, not to live within it, but to roll it back and to develop
a very different social order and very different lives in confrontation with that modernity.
Before we can really address Gandhi's thought, we need to talk a bit about the historical
background of the development of his thought.
The British, of course, ruled India for a very long time, and most of us know of Gandhi
in the context of his struggle for independence from Great Britain in the mid-20th century.
But before 1857, India was not ruled directly by the British crown, but bizarrely by the
British East India Company.
In fact, we can think about the conquest of India over the 18th and early 19th centuries
as an unusual example of the conquest of a subcontinent by a private corporation.
And the East India Company basically, as a private corporation, held a charter to administer
India, a charter given to it by the crown.
And the East India Company was a fairly rapacious and authoritarian ruler for India.
It was designed to extract the most possible wealth from India for its stockholders, and
it worked to do that.
It did that by hiring a number of local armies, subverting a number of local Indian kingdoms
and republics, and bending them effectively to its will through a combination of corruption
and coercion.
In 1857, a rebellion swept Northern India and nearly dislodged company rule.
In Britain, it's called the Mutiny of 1857, but in India, it's generally characterized
as the Great Rebellion, or the Rebellion of 1857.
As I say, it very nearly succeeded.
And the response in Britain to the near end of British rule in India in 1857 was to remove
authority from the East India Company and to impose direct colonial rule by the crown.
So true colonialism, that is, crown colonialism, has its origin in the response to the 1857
rebellion.
But British legal colonial rule was not a whole lot better than company rule.
It became increasingly rapacious, increasingly authoritarian, increasingly racist, and increasingly
intent on the maximum extraction of wealth from the Indian subcontinent in order to enrich
Great Britain.
And areas of India that had been previously very wealthy and prosperous like Bengal ended
up in terrible famines.
Crops that used to be very productive were replaced with crops that were more economically
advantageous to British planters and so forth, and India really declined dramatically during
this rule.
One of the ways that the British crown maintained its rule was to construct divisions in India
along caste lines and religious lines, reinforcing pre-existing but rather subtle distinctions
and turning them into hard legal distinctions with differences in interest on either side
of those distinctions.
So it was very much a rule of divide and conquer.
And it distinguished Muslims from Hindus, upper caste Hindus, from lower caste Hindus.
It distinguished people on linguistic lines and so forth, giving them different degrees
of citizenship, different kinds of rights, and different kinds of interests in order
to prevent the development of Indian unity.
This reached its apex in the partition of Bengal between predominantly Hindu West Bengal
and predominantly Muslim East Bengal in 1905, which in turn led to the major agitation
in India that eventually resulted in Indian independence.
But this British Raj, this British rule, while it deliberately introduced a very complex
identity politics to India, really trying to create micro-identities pitting Indians
against one another in order to maintain British sovereignty, it had a paradoxical effect.
Because Bengal partition so highlighted and so clearly manifested this strategy, and the
reaction across India was so aggressively hostile that the British had the paradoxical effect
of beginning to create, for the first time since the fall of Ashoka's great empire in
the first century of the common era, a shared Indian sense of national identity across India.
And it was that shared sense of Indian national identity that was inevitably going to make
independence possible.
Now one of the manifestations of this sense of identity was a tremendous intellectual
and religious renaissance in India.
It had its roots in Bengal, but it really swept India with other roots in the Punjab
as well.
And the Indian renaissance generated a resurgence of interest in Indian philosophy and religion.
There was a recovery of the study of texts that hadn't been studied for a long time,
a recovery of religious traditions, and the Gita was a real beneficiary for this because
while the Gita had been studied by elites for a long time, it suddenly entered popular
culture in a whole new way in the context of the renaissance.
Some of the main figures who were important in this intellectual and religious renaissance
and this development of national identity were people like Sri Ramakrishna who established
the Ramakrishna mission in Calcutta and whose students Swami Vivekananda very famously
came to the world parliament of religions in Chicago and really spread consciousness
of Hinduism around the world, but also dramatically reawakened Hindu consciousness in India.
And the great first political and then religious leader Sri Aurobindo, Aurobindo Ghosh who like
Gandhi was educated in England, returned to India initially as an educator then as a political
revolutionary and finally lived most of his life as a cultural and religious leader.
The writings of all of these people combined to create a tremendous intellectual ferment
and it was this ferment and this revival of interest in Hinduism that made Gandhi's writing
and Gandhi's political activity possible.
But who was Gandhi himself?
He was born to a merchant caste in Gujarat in 1869, his father was a fairly well respected
merchant in their town.
He was a very good student and earned a scholarship to study law in England and was admitted to
the bar in England as a barrister, as a lawyer.
His first big job was in South Africa, which was then again under British colonial rule
as was India, and he traveled to South Africa to begin his practice of law.
And it was in South Africa that this famous incident occurred that people say galvanized
Gandhi's political sensibility and moral sensibility for the first time.
Gandhi is a fairly prosperous lawyer, had a first class ticket in a South African train
and late at night a white South African wanted his birth, wanted his compartment and ordered
that Gandhi be thrown off the train because Gandhi was Indian and did not have the right
to a first class ticket.
The conductor threw Gandhi and his luggage off the train in a fairly remote station in
the middle of the night and this tremendous act of personal injustice galvanized Gandhi's
sense of the injustice of the racial laws in South Africa.
Gandhi mobilized a massive civil disobedience movement modeled on Thoreau's ideas but motivated
by British senses of justice and also motivated by giant senses of ahimsa, of non-harming,
and led this huge civil disobedience movement to liberalize race laws in South Africa.
And he in fact achieved a fair amount of success.
Some of the race laws were repealed and liberalized, others of course were not.
But Gandhi in the course of doing this gained the attention of Indians in India as a potential
leader against the kind of racism that was manifested in colonialism in India.
And in 1916 the Indian National Congress invited Gandhi to return to India to help lead Congress's
fight against British colonial rule.
Shortly after Gandhi's return to India in the beginning of his activity in the Congress
party, one of the most terrible events in the history of British rule occurred in India.
This was the massacre of over 1,000 unarmed civilians in Jolly and Wallabag in Amritsar
by Major Reginald Dyer in the British Army who were trying to put down peaceful protest.
This galvanized the Quit India movement and really mobilized the Congress party from a
party that was involved in trying to advance Indian interests to a party that was fully
aimed at getting the British out of India.
And it committed Gandhi once and for all to achieving not a better life for Indians within
a British rule, but rather independence.
Gandhi was shortly after that elected president of the Congress party.
He was of course very active in the Indian independence movement, spent a great deal
of that time in jail, led many prominent civil disobedience marches, many prominent movements.
In the end, Gandhi felt that his efforts were to some extent a failure because Gandhi,
while he succeeded in leading a movement to get Britain out of India, failed to prevent
the partition of India into India and Pakistan and the horrible violence that attended that
partition.
Shortly after independence in 1948, Gandhi was assassinated by Hindu fundamentalists
who regarded him as too conciliatory to Muslims.
This is a brief sketch of Gandhi's life, but now let's return to Gandhi's philosophical
roots.
As I said, he was born in a devout Hindu family and many of his ideas derive from a reading
of the Gita.
And many of his ideas also derive from the giant friends and relatives who impressed
him both with a giant idea of Ahimsa and on the Jainian emphasis on perspectivalism.
The idea that no single individual has a complete grasp of the truth and so that we must always
act on our own conception of the truth but hold ourselves open to the fact that others
may understand some things better than we do and so that we can never act with violence
or coercion because we might be trampling a perspective that actually is more valid
than our own.
From Tolstoy, from a long correspondence, he inherited an emphasis on personal spiritual
development as essential to human life and a powerful critique of industrialism and modernity.
From the British, a sense of justice, from Thoreau, the importance of civil disobedience,
and from Sri Aurobindo, the sense that Indian national identity was important and that a
renaissance in India had to be an ideological renaissance, not just a political renaissance,
that what was called foreign striving for Indian independence wasn't just winning self-rule
on a political level but a tremendous revolution in Indian culture.
Gandhi thought that this could be achieved through a union of the idea of Svaadharma
and Ahimsa.
Let's recall the idea of Svaadharma as it's developed in Bhagavad Gita.
It's the idea that in virtue of our particular role in society, we each have a particular
duty and that a meaningful life involves our discharge of that particular duty.
Gandhi took that up but gave it a real political twist, twisted it into the idea that our Svaadharma
derives from our political circumstances and that it's our political circumstances that
really entail our duties and that those duties are public political duties.
Ahimsa, that he inherits from the Jains, is the idea that one should never harm another,
that harm is always wrong.
And in fact, Gandhi diagnoses the primary disease of modernity in terms of Ahimsa.
He thinks that modernity is inconsistent with it, that modernity is harmful to individuals
and that modernity makes it necessary for individuals in leading their lives to lead
those lives in ways that harm others.
And this idea of modernity as intrinsically harmful owes a great deal to his correspondence
with Tolstoy.
Gandhi also argued following Thoreau that the only way to confront modernity isn't simply
to move away from it, isn't simply to reject it but to confront it publicly and representationally
through civil disobedience.
So he argued that civil disobedience is always legitimate when we are confronting an unjust
law or an unjust order because our Svaadharma in that circumstance consists in an obligation,
not just to not comply with but to defy and to defy publicly and representationally the
unjust social order with which we disagree.
Moreover, that opposition Gandhi thought had to always be nonviolent.
From Great Britain, Gandhi of course inherited the Lockean idea that legitimacy of government
depends on the consent of the governed, that society is a kind of contract for mutual benefit
and that society is only legitimate in so far as it represents the role of law.
He also read Mill very carefully and he endorsed Mill's view that speech and thought had to
be free.
So in a lot of ways Gandhi is a beautiful British subject.
He endorses the liberal democratic ideals, the rule of law and the fundamental freedoms
that Mill does.
But Gandhi thought there were two things wrong with these.
First, they're systematically neglected in India.
But moreover, Gandhi thought that in Britain these things became the foundation of industrial
capitalism and that industrial capitalism was intrinsically harmful to almost everyone
who came in contact with it and so that they had to be reinterpreted if they were to be
consistent with Ahimsa.
Tolstoy and Thoreau were the people who pushed Gandhi in this direction because it was their
idea that everyone should benefit from social arrangements, that when we talk about government
being legitimized by the consent of the governed and by the benefits that it presents to the
governed, that means that it can't be an institution that allows some to benefit and others to
suffer and that permits a harm of the many by the few, which is what Gandhi thought that
modernity ended up doing through its articulation in capitalism.
Gandhi came back to India in the midst of the Indian Renaissance, in the midst of this
kind of social ferment and this renaissance of ideas of Indian national identity.
Sri Aurobindo was championing this idea that India was a nation and that it was a nation
grounded in spiritual values and this idea of Aurobindo that Indian nationality was fundamentally
spiritual became the foundation for the anti-British movement and Gandhi absorbed that immediately.
But the narrative for Gandhi of Indian spirituality is both philosophical and religious.
It's aimed at the future, but it's aimed at grounding the future in an Indian past that
reaches back to the Gita.
And so Gandhi's critique of modernity and of British rule is not just a political critique,
it's a very deep cultural critique.
Now one of the central constructs in Gandhi's sense of what a meaningful life is, is the
idea of Sacha Graha.
Sacha Graha is a Sanskrit compound that can be read in one of two ways.
We can see it as a compound of Sacha and Graha, which would mean holding on to the truth,
seizing the truth, really grasping and understanding it.
But it can also be a compound of Sacha and Agraha, Agraha means insistence.
So then Sacha Graha means insistence on the truth.
And Gandhi read it in both ways, that Sacha Graha means a commitment to determining what
the truth is and once having determined it and insistence on making it prevail.
This means that for Gandhi, it's extraordinarily important to determine what's right, to get
very clear about why it's so, and to insist on making it so.
This is a realization of the ideals of the Gita, of the world of Jnana Yoga, in getting
clear about the nature of reality, and then Karma Yoga, acting so as to realize the understanding
that we've achieved.
Moreover Gandhi thought, Sacha Graha must be performed publicly, actively, and non-violently.
Seizing the truth and insisting on it has to be something that educates others and enables
them to see the truth, enables them to grasp the truth, enables them to act on the truth.
And he follows Thoreau in suggesting that this always invites resistance and punishment,
and that one should accept the resistance one achieves, and one should accept the resistance
one receives, and the punishment one receives, and call attention to it.
Because that courageous calling of attention to the injustice of the oppressor is what
educates others to really see the oppression as unjust and to see one's own actions as
genuinely representational and genuinely authentic.
And in fact, sometimes Gandhi's Sacha Grahas had absolutely tragic results as when the
great Indian leader Lajpat Rai was beaten to death by British troops leading a protest
against the appointment of the Simon Commission, a commission of British parliamentarians to
design Indian rule.
So Gandhi's Sacha Graha, even though it sometimes characterizes as such, is not passive resistance
at all.
It's a very active resistance, it's very difficult, and it's sometimes very dangerous.
The second important construct in Gandhi's political idea is that of Swaraj, literally
meaning self-rule.
And again, this is an ambiguous term.
Swaraj can mean something political, that is, it can mean Indian political self-rule
and Aurobindo certainly understood it that way.
But it could also mean personal Swaraj, self-mastery, ruling oneself, something that comes out of
the Gita but also out of Tolstoy.
Gandhi's brilliant insight was that these are mutually entailing, that you can't have
political Swaraj without personal Swaraj.
He asked, what use would it be to throw the British out of India if we become British
in the process?
So he argued that one has to achieve personal Swaraj, personal self-mastery, before one
can engage in political action and so that it's personal Swaraj that is the fundamental
idea.
Swaraj and Sacha Graha are very tightly connected.
Sacha Graha is the vehicle for obtaining political Swaraj, but personal Swaraj is the
necessary condition of genuine Sacha Graha.
You can't grasp the truth without first ruling yourself.
That's what yoga is about.
So what is Gandhi's critique of modernity?
Gandhi sees, along with Hume, Kant and Mill, that modernity is built on the foundation
of individualism and that individualism involves an individual right to do whatever he or she
might want to do to advance her own good so long as it doesn't directly harm others.
And Gandhi saw that this individualism is the foundation in terms of capitalism, the
individual right to acquire property, the individual right to invest one's properties
one sees fit, the individual right to hire others to work for one, and the individual
right to sell one's labor to someone else.
And Gandhi saw that capitalism inevitably entails industrialism, the growth of very large
industrial complexes and hence of a laboring class, and that it involves secularism, that
as we've seen, God and religion will eventually be pushed out of the public sphere into the
private sphere and that transcendent values will cease to animate public life.
Gandhi saw that colonialism, the colonialism of his time and the poverty in India as well
as the poverty in England and the oppression of colonial subjects as well as laborers by
industrial groups was a natural outcome of all of this, that it flowed naturally from
the kind of industrialism that individualist capitalism gave rise to.
And he thought that this was true because individualism, Gandhi thought, inevitably leads to greed
and greed leads to todyism and that leads to complicity in all kinds of authoritarian
relationships.
He saw that capitalism is just intrinsically licensed by liberalism, that liberalism encourages
this kind of capitalist development.
But also that capitalism inevitably leads to the exploitation of workers, to the exploitation
of land and resources, and to the concentration of wealth in the hands of the capitalists
and eventually in the 19th century to colonial expropriation of wealth from countries such
as India and its import to Great Britain.
Industrialism he thought was the natural outgrowth and then industrialism inevitably demanded
colonialism, the dehumanization of vast parts of the population and the reduction of people
to poverty in order to retain the labor markets that capitalism required.
And finally he thought secularism, the abandonment of religion and public life, inevitably has
the effect of eliminating moral critique since most moral critique arises from religious
roots.
This is a very, very broad critique of modern life.
Gandhi's urging us to a serious swaraj, a serious kind of self-rule that resists all
of these modern ideas of liberality, individualism, capitalism and so forth.
For Gandhi this also involved a commitment to Swadeshi or local production and the use
of local products and local government and a distrust of large-scale government, large-scale
industry and large-scale production.
Because Gandhi thought that these inevitably required large authoritarian structures and
large authoritarian structures that would disregard the benefit of local people and
use up much of the world's resources in things like marketing and transportation of goods
instead of the production of goods.
So Gandhi thinks that a meaningful life has to be a life not only led individually in
this sense but led very locally.
So this is a critique of large national governments as well.
Gandhi acknowledges that if we sacrifice all of this, if we sacrifice big industries,
the capitalist order, large governments and so forth, we are going to be sacrificing
many of the benefits of modernity.
Gandhi acknowledges that this kind of critique of modernity involves an implicit rejection
of a lot of technology, of a lot of medical development, of a lot of law, all of which
emerges from the technical and scientific advances that modernity makes possible.
So if we say, gee, but you'd be giving up on everything that industry and that an economic
order can afford us, wealth, productivity and so forth, Gandhi says absolutely.
But Gandhi argued that given the goals of genuine human life, it's better to do without
all of those benefits, better to do without those benefits and lead a really human life
than to have all of the material benefits and to lose the human soul, to lose what
makes our lives worth living in the first place.
Gandhi argued that it's the rejection of modernity that would give us true civilization as opposed
to modern civilization, which Gandhi thought wasn't civilized at all, is a rejection of
everything that civilization should offer human beings.
Very few of Gandhi's followers in India or anybody else ever followed him that far.
That is, very few Gandhians actually suggested we should eliminate national governments and
replace them with local governments, that we should eliminate all large-scale industries
and production and replace them with small-scale production, that we should eliminate most
of liberal democracy and replace it with local village governance.
But most Gandhians, both in India and elsewhere, do see this as an ideal.
And they see this Gandhian ideal of a life that rejects the benefits of modernity in
order to avoid the terrible harms that modernity causes, the harms to working class, the harms
to colonial subjects, and Gandhi thinks even the harms to capitalists, the harms that lead
capitalists to organize their lives focused on acquisition, focused on greed, focused on
acts that are inevitably going to harm and oppress others and so to deny their own humanity.
Any Gandhian see this as a real ideal that if only we could achieve would be a really
wonderful thing.
For now, I want you to understand that this critique, A, is very multicultural.
We've seen ideas here that have come from Tolstoy, from Thoreau, from the Bhagavad Gita,
from Jainism, stirred together in this kind of creative cosmopolitan synthesis by Gandhi.
So it's an unusual critique in that respect.
But secondly, I want you to really understand how deep this critique is.
I said at the end of our last lecture on Nietzsche that Nietzsche was radical, but Gandhi is
more radical.
Gandhi is actually asking us to give up a great number of the material benefits, legal
benefits, political, economic benefits that modernity gives us because, he argues, modernity
itself is fundamentally evil and that we buy these benefits at the cost of a truly meaningful
life.
In our next lecture, we'll look at the positive end of Gandhi's message, how we can lead
a meaningful life in resistance to modernity.
