Welcome back.
In these next two lectures, we're going to be turning to a very different intellectual
and philosophical tradition and a very different account of the meaning of life.
We'll be addressing Native American traditions.
Now, when we address Native American culture and Native American traditions,
particularly in the contemporary, social, cultural and political landscape
in the wake of tremendous genocide against Native American people,
we have to tread very, very lightly.
For one thing, we have to be careful not to treat all Native American cultures
as though they are the same.
North America contained hundreds of Native American cultures
before the coming of Europeans and still contains in its home
two hundreds of Native American traditions.
And we can't pretend to be representing all of them.
The particular text that we'll be looking at is from a very particular tradition,
namely that of the Lakota Sioux.
These traditions included many different languages, many different kinds of beliefs,
many philosophical perspectives, until very recently, all of these traditions were oral.
They did not include written texts.
And not all of the Native American traditions are even available to people
outside of the tribal cultures.
This, of course, is because some of these spiritual traditions,
some of these philosophical traditions are regarded as private,
are regarded as available to the inside people, but not made public.
And even those of us who are privileged to be able to read in English,
published work from particular cultures in which people have chosen
to make their philosophical beliefs and arguments available.
We don't have the oral tradition that underlies these.
And given that so many of these texts arise from oral traditions
and are addressed primarily to people who are steeped in those cultures and oral traditions,
we have to be aware of the fact that in our reading and our interpretation,
we may unconsciously be distorting those traditions.
So I think we need to read with a great deal of delicacy,
a great deal of respect, and a great deal of care.
The two principal texts that we have available to us as readers of English
that represent Native American philosophical views are both those of Lakota Sioux.
One is the great text by Black Elk called Black Elk Speaks.
The second, the one that we'll be discussing today, is by John Fire Leimdeer.
And it is called Leimdeer, Seeker of Visions.
I'm really quite taken by Leimdeer's work.
It's very philosophically systematic in a way that Black Elk is focused more on ritual,
more on religious practice, and remarkably eloquent.
And I hope you're going to enjoy working through parts of that text with me.
And I hope especially that you will enjoy some of Leimdeer's beautiful prose.
In some respects, we're going to see that Leimdeer shares insights
with some of the other critics of modernity whose work we've examined.
In particular, along with Nietzsche, we're going to see that he's a real critic
of mass-produced people, as Nietzsche referred to them as herd animals.
Leimdeer will sometimes use fairly similar metaphors, actually.
He's really worried about the ability of modern culture
to dumb down, to homogenize, and to alienate people from their own real existence.
Leimdeer also shares part of Tolstoy's critique.
We saw that Tolstoy had this deep insight that modern mass culture
is connected in very deep ways to a valorization of consumption
and a particular kind of lifestyle taken as normative,
a middle-class lifestyle.
Tolstoy saw that this kind of consumerism and this kind of focus on normalcy,
on living as people ought to live, is ruinous to our spiritual lives,
and in a deep way, alienates us from interpersonal relations
and alienates us, therefore, from what makes life worth living.
Leimdeer will share that insight as well.
Gandhi argued that modern life alienates us further from our moral values,
that modernity forces us to lead lives in which we're complicit
in harms and social structures that we can't possibly endorse,
and that it's necessary if we're going to save ourselves from this kind of alienation,
to rebel against modernity and to construct an alternative.
We'll see that Leimdeer agrees with that as well.
But Leimdeer goes a bit deeper.
Leimdeer connects modernity and the mass culture that it generates
to an alienation not just from other people, not just from moral values,
but from ourselves, from our own nature, and from the world of nature that we inhabit.
So Leimdeer's critique goes very deeply.
He argues that modernity is poisonous, not just because it alienates us from other people
and from the lives we want to lead, but because it makes us strangers to ourselves.
And Leimdeer adds one further insight to this critique.
That is, Leimdeer focuses on an aspect of modernity that might have escaped some of these others,
that was one that Mill was hinting at, and that is the totalizing character of modernity.
Leimdeer points out that when we accept the values of contemporary modern life,
they assume a kind of universality that makes it impossible for us to even see alternatives.
We end up adopting a regime of ideology, of morality, of taking up with life,
and a conception of normalcy that takes over our way of seeing the world.
And as a consequence, we end up not only leading a life that's unreflective,
self-alienated, and eventually empty and meaningless.
That's not all. More deeply, not only do we lead such a life, but within that life,
we don't even see that there are alternatives. We don't even take seriously the possibility
that there are alternative values that might give us or others meaningful lives to lead.
As a consequence, Leimdeer thinks, modernity doesn't only construct a prison for us,
but it's a prison without any windows. It's a prison that we can't even see out of an
imagine alternative to. And it generates in us a very deep amnesia about freedom,
and that deep amnesia, that forgetting what it is to be free,
forgetting what it is to lead a meaningful life, ends up making us accept our imprisonment
and adopt it willingly to construct our own prisons and to be complicit in our own confinement.
As I said, we're going to be working through Leimdeer's text, and I'm going to do as much
as possible of this through Leimdeer's own words. Leimdeer lived from about 1903, we're not sure
of his exact birth date, to about 1976. And he was a really interesting person. He grew up on a
Lakota Sioux Reservation on the Rosebud Reservation, and his early life was quite wild. He rode in
the rodeo. He was apparently somewhat fond of drinking, womanizing, and was often on the wrong
side of the law, and led a fairly rowdy youth. But at some point, as he recalls it after a fair
amount of wildness, he accidentally stumbled into the home of another Lakota Sioux, an elderly woman
who was keeper of the Lakota Peace Pipe, the pipe that was, according to legend, according to tradition,
handed down from the very beginning of the Lakota Nation. And she told him,
I've been waiting for you. And thus began his apprenticeship, thus began his apprenticeship,
and his subsequent career as a very eminent Sioux medicine man and speaker for Native American
people. As I said, his book, which was published in 1972, Leimdeer's Seeker of Visions, is, I believe,
the most eloquent statement of Native American philosophy available in English.
The context in which the Lakota seek the meaning of life is a very large context. It's not only the
social world, as we might have seen for Aristotle or Confucius. It's this large context of the natural
world. All of the texts we've been reading so far have been emphasizing that in order to lead a
meaningful life, we need somehow to connect our small finite lives to a much larger context.
Almost always, though, either a universal context, as we've seen in the Gita, the Book of Job,
or for the Stoics, or a social context, as we've seen for Aristotle, for Gandhi, for the Confucians.
The Lakota emphasize something kind of in between. That is the context of nature. And that context
embodies a sense, again, shared with nature, that first and foremost, human beings are animals,
living among animals in a natural ecosystem, including animals and plants. And that our community,
thus, transcends the human community in very fundamental and very important ways.
Taking this seriously entails developing a kind of reverence for other animals, not just as beautiful,
not just as elegant, not just as cute, but in some sense as our peers, as members of our culture,
who have obligations to us and to whom we have obligations, with whom we are in social relations.
And it also entails developing a respect and a care for the environment that sustains not only us,
but the other animals and plants who are members of our relevant moral community.
It also, of course, entails developing a very deep, internalized sense of temporality, of time.
And that's because the natural world is marked by so many temporal cycles, cycles of day and night,
cycles of the month, of the moon, annual cycles, cycles of seasons, reproductive cycles, and so forth.
And so we'll see that in the Lakota tradition, this awareness of temporality and of connectedness
to the natural world plays a very, very important role. Another issue that we'll see
as very important for the Lakota is the nature of symbols and the pervasiveness of the symbolic.
Lamedere sees the world as defined by its symbolic character and sees that symbolism
as absolutely central to the meaning of life. And we're going to begin by talking about the
nature of those symbols and the nature of interpretation of those symbols. Moving from
there, we'll talk about the ubiquity of those symbols. We'll talk a little bit about names
as symbols and finally the role of symbols in ritual. But let's begin by talking about the
nature of symbols themselves and their connection to meaning. Way back at the very beginning of
this course in the first lecture, we talked about the many meanings of the word meaning.
And we noted that one of them is the one we've been focusing on that is significance in this
greater sense. But a second one was the notion of the symbolic, where a word means something.
The word bachelor means unmarried man. The word J means me. The word sun refers to that thing in
the sky. And so far, that notion of meaning, the symbolic, has not figured it all in our
discussions. But that notion of meaning is the one that is central, as we will see, to Lakota
to the Lakota, as lame, dear will emphasize, life as a whole, our entire lives are permeated with
symbols, things that actually mean something in this linguistic sense. And part of the meaning
of life is the meaning of those symbols. And part of what makes our lives meaningful is that our
lives themselves can be seen as symbols, as symbolic. For that reason, our life in nature
is meaningful, because the nature of which we are a part is meaningful. Notice, just saying that
we need to live our lives naturally means nothing if nature itself isn't meaningful. And the
meaningfulness of nature, the meaningfulness of nature, lame, dear will emphasize, consists in
its symbolic character. lame, dear himself puts the point so eloquently like this. He says,
from birth to death, we Indians are enfolded in symbols, as in a blanket. Let's turn to one of
his favorite examples. lame, dear, making this wonderful description of an ordinary object says,
it doesn't seem to have a message, that old pot pointing to a cooking pot now. And I guess you
don't give it a thought, except the soup smells good and reminds you that you're hungry. But I'm
an Indian. I think about ordinary common things like this pot. The bubbling water comes from the
rain cloud. It represents the sky. Pause on that for a moment. It represents the sky. The water
itself is symbolic of the cloud, not just caused by it, but it represents it. When I see the water,
the clouds come to mind, just as when I say the word cloud, though clouds come to mind.
The fire comes from the sun, which warms us all, men, animals, trees. The meat stands for.
The four legged creatures are animal brothers who gave of themselves that we should live.
Once again, it's representational, not just causal. The steam is living breath. It was water.
Now it goes up to the sky, becomes a cloud again. These things are sacred. That's a really important
point. Each of these commonplace things, the water in the pot, the steam, the heat, is a symbol that
calls to our mind something sacred, something greater to us. So for the Native American speaker,
simply looking at the pot is to look at a host of symbols that remind us that we live in this
vast sacred order. Lame, dear, continues. Looking at this pot full of good soup, I'm thinking how,
in this simple manner, Wakantanka, the great spirit, takes care of me. We, Sue, spend a lot of time
thinking about everyday things, which in our minds are mixed up with the spiritual. We see in the
world around us many symbols that teach us the meaning of life. That's it. These symbols around
us are actually language, the language of the universe, teaching the meaning of life.
You, now he's talking to non-Native Americans, we see a lot that you no longer notice. You could
notice it if you wanted to, but you are usually too busy. We Indians live in a world of symbols and
images where the spiritual and commonplace are one. What to you seems commonplace to us appears
wondrous through symbolism. Notice that by understanding and living in the world as a world
full of symbols, the world becomes wondrous because the world itself becomes saturated with
representation of the sacred. Every possible thing, even an old cooking pot, becomes something
potentially sacred. Lame, dear, continues. This is funny because we don't even have a word for
symbolism, yet we are all wrapped up in it. You have the word, but that is all. There's a lot here.
There's a stinging indictment of the modern way of seeing the world.
Lame, dear, is pointing out that if we simply understand the world in this symbolic dimension,
this affects a kind of transfiguration of the commonplace, the ordinary, the everyday, the
trivial, into a sacred world through the symbolic activity. He's also pointing out to us the absolute
ubiquity of symbolization, that it's every place, and that it's totally natural. We don't have to
make it up. All we have to do is open our eyes and observe, and that by observing these symbols
and taking them seriously, we develop a much deeper connection to the natural world. And that
connection is a connection to a sacred natural world that is imminent in which we dwell and that
gives our lives meaning. He's also emphasizing the importance of developing the skill of noticing
and also attend to how spontaneously he sees the world that way. That wasn't a study,
careful reflection about a pot. That was a spontaneous articulation of how the world appears
when it's seen this way. Now, Lame, dear, points out that there's also a human world of symbols,
and as natural animals, that's part of the natural world too. He points to names and to rituals,
that when we name ourselves or name our children, we're establishing symbols. And he's pointing
out that this isn't the model for symbols. It's not as though we begin with names and begin with
linguistic words, and then we extrapolate from that to find things like cooking pots or steam
to be symbolic. Instead, human names, human language is just one instance among thousands
of the symbolic, that the symbolic is a much grander affair, a much more natural affair than
just something that we instantiate. So, Lame, dear, says words too are symbols and convey great powers
especially names. We receive great gifts from the source of a name. It links us to nature,
to the animal nations. It gives power. And in discussing names, Lame, dear, contrasts the names
that Native American people use in which the significance of the name is very clear, very
public and well known to everybody. And he contrasts these with the names that non-Native people use,
names like Jay or Bob or Sam, which even though they in fact do have meanings and have lexical
roots in Greek or Hebrew that have got meanings, most of us don't even know the meanings of our
own names. And so the names themselves, even though they are potentially symbolic and potentially
link ourselves to something greater, are eviscerated of all of their significance.
Now, a beautiful discussion that Lame, dear, enters with regard again to symbolism and a link
to the sacred is this discussion of the Native American Sundance. The Sundance is an extraordinary
ritual. It involves a day-long dance in hot sun in which the dancers have leather thongs
literally sewing through their chests so that they're bound by their skin and attached to a pole
and they dance around and around this pole for hours with a bone whistle between their teeth
whistling. They are allowed no food, no drink, no rest. Their chests are bleeding. It's extraordinarily
exhausting, extraordinarily painful. And by the end of the dance, the leather thongs pull free
and blood rushes down their chests. They're these big wounds. It's a very painful ritual.
Many people have looked at this and seen it as horrible, as barbaric, as masochistic, as a crazy
ritual. But Lame, dear, emphasizes that this ritual is in fact a deep symbolic sacrifice. It's a
sacrifice of one's self, a sacrifice of one's body, of one's sensations, of one's endurance.
And that's important, he argues, because we are the only things that we in fact have to sacrifice.
Everything else already belongs to the rest of the universe. Sacrificing possessions is to
sacrifice something that comes and goes. To sacrifice ourselves, though, is serious. Connect this,
if you will, to the insight in the Bhagavad Gita, the insight that Bhakta Yoga, the yoga of devotion,
is necessary in order for our lives to really be lived in a meaningful unity with the universe.
But here, what we see is this ritual, not only is reinforcing a vision of unity of the universe
through devotion, but also establishing myself, not myself, but the self of the person in this ritual
as a symbol, him or herself. The dancer himself becomes a symbol of his own devotion. And it's
the symbol with which others interact. It makes our own lives representational. That is, it makes
our lives meaningful. Now, lame deer continues this with a wonderful contrast of Native American
symbols with what he sees as the symbols of modernity. And this will get to a very deep issue
about the structure of lame deer's critique of modernity. Let's follow his thinking.
Lame deer says, to our way of thinking, that is the Native American way, the Indian symbol is the
circle, the hoop. Nature wants things to be round. The bodies of human beings and animals have no
corners. With us, the circle stands for the togetherness of people who sit with one another
around the campfire. So again, we're thinking about the circle, not only as
resembling and describing the character of nature, the being without corners, but it also
stands for or represents the idea that people sit in a circle around a campfire. So it's a
representational symbol. He continues, the nation was in itself only part of the universe,
it's self-circular. Again, when we look at the universe in the skies, we see this kind of celestial
spheres as the Greeks would have put it. The sky looks like a great circle above us. The planets
and the stars move in circular motion and made of the earth, which is round, again circles,
of the sun, which is round, of the stars, which are round, the moon, the horizon and the rainbow,
circles within circles within circles, with no beginning and no end. To us, says lame deer,
this is beautiful and fitting, symbol and reality at the same time, expressing the harmony of life
and nature. Again, notice that symbol and reality at the same time. It's very important for this
conception of meaningfulness in symbols, that symbols and reality don't stand apart from one
another. Often when we think about symbols, we think immediately of the distinction between the
symbol and that to which it refers. So, the name J is different from the person J. The word sun
doesn't give you sunburn, like the real sun does. So, we really focus on the distinction
between symbol and reality. But, if on the other hand, we see with lame deer, the idea that the
universe itself is already saturated with the symbolic and that that symbolic is natural to it,
not imposed from outside by our conceptual activity, but part of nature, then we see that
there's no distance between symbol and reality. Each reality is a symbol. Each symbol is perfectly
real and sometimes things are even self-symbolic, like the circle, which symbolizes itself as well
as other things. Lame deer continues, our circle is timeless, flowing. It is new life emerging
from death, life winning out over death. Now, he draws the contrast. The white man symbol is the
square. Square is his house, his office buildings, with square walls that separate people from one
another. These all have corners and sharp edges, points in time, white man's time, with appointments,
time clocks, and rush hours. That's what the corners mean to me. Let's focus on that for a minute.
You might think that what lame deer was about to say is that while the Native Americans have
a world rich with symbols, non-native people, European people, live in a world that's devoid of
the symbolic. That would be interesting. He's gone one step deeper though. What lame deer is
really suggesting here is not that our world is devoid of the symbolic, but that it's full of
symbols. They're just the wrong symbols. They're symbols of really unfortunate things. Squares,
for him, are symbols of separation. They're symbols of sharp edges. They're symbols of seeing the
world as punctate, points in time, with appointments, time clocks, rush hours, instead of continuous
and flowing, as he suggested the circle is. Now, this is deep because what it means is not that
we simply fail to live in a symbolic order, but that we live in a symbolic order, that A,
we don't recognize to be symbolic, and so it gets to work on us subconsciously without reflection,
without conscious interpretation, and B, it's symbolic of exactly what deprives ourselves
of our humanity, of our connection to nature, and eventually even of our connection
to each other, to the things that we value. As he concludes, you become a prisoner inside
those boxes, that is those office buildings and those houses. So, lame deer is emphasizing
the pervasiveness of symbol, even in the life that we lead, even if we don't notice them,
but he's also emphasizing the view that a really meaningful life is the organic life,
the life that's in unity with nature, the life that's represented by the circle,
as opposed to the artificial square life. This is the depth, the deep part of lame
deer's critique of European modernity. It should feel somewhat familiar, a critique in terms of
alienation, a critique in terms of the power of modernity to alienate us from what we actually
value most, even reflectively, but it's also somewhat new because of this symbolic nature,
this emphasis on representation, and this emphasis on nature itself as being the object
from which we are alienated. So, the idea is we're surrounded simply by the wrong symbols,
and even though we don't notice them, we end up responding to these symbols. That's central,
the central point to take away from lame deer's understanding of what the universe is like
and of what is wrong with modernity. What's wrong with modernity is not that it fails to be meaningful,
not at all. It is meaningful, it is symbolic, it is representational. What's wrong with modernity,
as far as lame deer is concerned, is that it means the wrong things. When we pay attention to what,
in fact, gives our lives meaning as we live them, they're not the values that we would
reflectively endorse. They're not the values that we would hope to endorse. They're rather
these values that keep us prisoners, that keep us square. In our next lecture, what we're going to do
is to examine how lame deer suggests we respond to this critique, what lame deer thinks that a
meaningful life looks like, and how we can lead a life that's enfolded in more positive symbols.
But that's going to require, first, a deeper understanding of the nature of the alienation,
and that's where we're going to begin.
