Well, here we are together for the last time in this series of lectures.
And this is a lecture in which we would hope to be able to tie up all the loose ends, draw
everything together, and come to a wonderful grand conclusion regarding the nature of the
meaning of life.
That might be a bit much to hope for though.
Because while it's tempting to try to draw everything that we've said together over this
course into one big happy unified picture showing how everybody somehow agrees and each theory
is somehow like the others, that might be a nice dream, but it would really be fallacious.
But perhaps more than anything else, we've encountered a great deal of diversity.
True, there are analogies, but we must pay attention to the diversity.
Often one is led to find superficial similarities and to overemphasize those and therefore to
lose a lot of the texture and detail that's bequeathed to us by the textual traditions
that we've been examining.
So for instance, we might be tempted to say, ah, the Gita, Buddhism, they both come out
of India and they both arise in India at roughly the same kind of era.
So they must somehow agree, there must be some common Indian identity.
But that would be wrong, even though they're both concerned in some sense with release
or with salvation or with finding a meaning of life, they're both concerned with big questions.
In the context of the Gita, we're talking about a union with a transcendent deified reality.
That's what we're talking about and we're talking about cultivating a particular kind
of discipline conditioned by devotion.
With Buddhism, that's not what we're doing.
With Buddhism, we're talking about interdependence.
We're talking about selflessness.
The Gita emphasizes the importance of the self, the reality of the self, the permanence
of the self, the union of the self with the Godhead.
Buddhism emphasizes the idea that the self is illusory and that interdependence is all
that we find.
So we can't run these things together no matter how much we might be tempted to do so.
We might be tempted to do the same thing with the book of Job, with the Stoics and the Bodhicharya
Avatar of Shantideva.
After all, all of them emphasize patience.
All of them emphasize the pervasiveness of suffering in the world and the need for us
to in some sense insulate ourselves from that suffering and find meaning of life in
that context.
But they're not doing the same thing.
The book of Job, after all, is theistic.
The Stoics are theistic too, but the God of Job and the rational God Thucer is different
as night and day.
And the Bodhicharya Avatar comes out of the Buddhist tradition, which is resolutely atheistic.
Some of these, like the book of Job and the Stoics, are asking us to find meaning in
something totally transcendent, where the Bodhicharya Avatar is really counseling us
to focus on what's imminent.
Similarly, we might be tempted to say, ah, Aristotle, Confucius, the Laoza, all of them
are emphasizing the importance of effortlessness, of virtuosity in our lives and the importance
of cultivating this effortless glide through life.
But they're not doing the same thing either.
Aristotle and Confucius are really emphasizing the importance of social cultivation of our
social roles and the role of society in finishing us, whereas the Laoza emphasizes the idea
that society in fact ruins us and that we need to get out of that kind of social construction
in order to find the meaning of our lives.
Moreover, we've been looking at classical traditions, modern traditions, and postmodern
traditions, and these offer very different perspectives.
The classical traditions emphasized the collective, they emphasized the importance of particular
textual traditions and views, they emphasized transcendence.
The modern tradition emphasized the sovereignty of the individual, the importance of science,
the foundational role of the individual in the political, the epistemic, and the social
realms.
When we turned to postmodernism, we again saw that rejected, but not with a re-embrace
of the classical, but with a rejection of systematicity itself, with a rejection of
the importance of the individual, with a rejection of the idea that knowledge is foundational.
So we've seen all of these different views.
What are we going to do with them at this point in order to help us answer the question
that motivated this entire course?
What is the meaning of life?
First, let's note that despite all of this diversity, there are certain important recurrent
themes, and appreciating those themes can be extraordinarily helpful.
Almost every text we've examined, almost every position we've considered, has emphasized
the importance of a connection between our own lives and some larger context.
That's not surprising, since as we saw in our very first lecture, the very idea of meaning
carries with it the relationship of something small, finite, and determinant to something
outside of itself.
Almost every position that we've examined has emphasized the importance of temporality,
of focusing on time, on impermanence, and on what's permanent.
That's not surprising either, considering what raises the question in the first place.
How is it that something that comes up and is cut down so quickly, as we say in the book
of Job, has any meaning at all?
Each of these positions that we've examined involves consideration of some ideal of human
perfection.
That's something we might not have expected, because we might have thought that it's our
own imperfection that poses the problem.
But one of the things that we've seen over these lectures is that if we can imagine what
a perfect life would be, we can begin to imagine what the trajectory of our lives might be
towards that goal.
And finally, we've noticed that almost every text we've examined, almost every position
we've considered, has emphasized the importance of some kind of spontaneity, and effortlessness
as I've put it repeatedly, a virtuosity in our lives.
Some way of getting our actions to conform naturally to our values without calculation.
That may have been one of the surprises in this course.
In conjunction with spontaneity, we've seen an emphasis on a certain kind of freedom,
even though that freedom has been differently conceived at different points in this course.
Freedom from external constraint versus political freedom, for instance.
But freedom has still played an important role in thinking about the meaning of life
in almost every tradition we've examined.
We've emphasized the need in leading a meaningful life to face up to reality, to really understand
the nature of the world that we live in, and the nature of our own lives, and the need
to do that in order to live an authentic life, a life of which we are the authors, and a
life that we can reflectively endorse.
Let's try to examine each of these themes in a little more detail to see what kind of
general conclusions we might draw despite the diversity.
First, we talked about the need to live in a larger context, and that's something that
we can certainly take away.
Sometimes, that context is conceived as universal, divine, or cosmic.
We've seen that view articulated in the Bhagavad Gita, where the context is the context of
the entire universe.
The book of Job, where the context is also, in a certain sense, universal, where that
universality is conditioned by the creation of a particular divinity.
The Stoics also emphasized a very universal context, a context, again, conditioned by
a divinity.
Curiously, the Daoists also give us this very large context, but it's a much more impersonal
context.
For the Daoists, remember, the context is the great Dao, the way of things, the nature
of things, and that our lives have to be lived in that context, and so the Dao of our own
lives needs to be brought into harmony with the great Dao, the way that the universe works.
Sometimes on the other hand, the context is a bit more narrow, a global context, or a
natural context.
Lamedear, for instance, really emphasized that the context of our lives that matters
most is the context of nature, the context in which we figure as biological animals,
among other animals.
The Dalai Lama emphasizes that the context of our lives is a social context, a context
lived in which our primary responsibilities and our primary joys are social joys, and
that's a context that we saw Aristotle, Confucius, and indeed most early modern philosophers
emphasize as well.
In each of these views, meaning emerges from contextuality, but notice again, the contexts
can vary and the context can be different.
But in each case, the key to finding the meaning in our lives is to first identify the context
in which our lives make sense, and then to understand how we can make our small lives
meaningful by connecting them to something much larger.
There's also a temporal context to life, of course.
The Stoics we saw emphasize the vastness of the universe that we live in, the eternality
of the universe.
The fact that it goes back to beginningless time continues to be an endless future, and
we are merely a blip in all of that.
The time of the universe in which we exist is so tiny and bounded by finite gulfs and
bounded by infinite gulfs of our absence.
That ephemerality is what generates the problem of the meaning of life from a Stoic perspective.
But notice that it also generates the answer, because part of the answer for the Stoics
is that the reason that our lives are so valuable and that they're so meaningful is A, that
they are part of something so vast, such a vast history, but B, that they're so rare,
they're so precious, our moments are so few, and so they need to be valued all the more.
The same idea we saw developed in Buddhism, a constant awareness of impermanence and an
awareness of the beauty of impermanence and the urgency that impermanence gives to our
lives.
Impermanence can cause us anxiety and the fear of meaninglessness as when we push death
to the background and allow it to condition our lives without being confronted, but when
we seriously confront our own impermanence and appreciate it, it gives a kind of urgency,
beauty, and meaning to our lives.
Tolstoy and lame, dear, each in very different ways, pick up on this theme, the importance
of mindfulness of death, the importance in each moment of our lives to be aware of our
own mortality and our own finitude, and that this need not be something depressing.
This isn't a kind of awareness of a catastrophe of something that's wrong with our lives,
but an awareness of the finitude and context that means that every moment of our lives
is important.
That the novel that we're enacting in Nietzsche's terms is a novel that has an end, and we need
to make sure that the structure of the entire life is one that we could look back at and
say, yes, that was a work of art worth creating.
Still often, we've seen the question of the meaning of life addressed in the texts that
we've examined in terms of an account of human perfection, a kind of larger sense of who
we are.
That began in the Gita because the Gita gave us an idea of perfection as involving a very
deep kind of union of our own lives, our own consciousness, and our own purpose with a
fully divine cosmos.
In the Gita, we saw this idea that the cosmos itself is permeated by meaning, it's permeated
by significance, it's already fundamentally divine, and that if we can lead a life that
is disciplined by concern for action, by knowledge and understanding of the nature of the world
around us, and especially by devotion, devotion to the whole and a commitment of our lives
to the benefit of the whole, and to our own particular role and duty, that becomes a life
of human perfection.
To the degree that we can strive for that ideal, we make our lives meaningful.
Aristotle again offered us an ideal of the perfect human life, when Aristotle characterizes
Eudaimonea, or happiness, as the highest good, and then characterizes happiness as a life
of activity in accordance with virtue.
He characterizes a life in which we've cultivated a manifold of human virtues, all social virtues,
and in which we've cultivated a certain kind of moral strength, a certain kind of practical
wisdom, in which we have got a certain kind of relationship to those around us, deep friendships,
and a membership in a culture that itself is valuable.
Life for Aristotle is the perfect life, the happy life, the life of human flourishing.
And again, it's a life that we can attain, or that we can at least aspire to attaining
and approximate, and we can imagine a trajectory of our lives towards Aristotelian flourishing
as one account of a life that lived meaningfully.
Confucius too emphasizes this kind of socialized notion of perfection, a life in which we
cultivate our humanity, in which we cultivate our propriety, in which we cultivate our virtue,
in which we cultivate our sense of our place in the world, of our place in the universe.
That life of the Confucian gentleman, or gentlewoman if we want to update Confucius, is again,
a life to which we can aspire, a life that we can understand, and indeed a life that
in a certain sense we can all admire, even if we don't accept all of the details.
And that again provides a trajectory that we can imagine our lives taking towards a
certain kind of perfection, and a trajectory that can give point and meaning to our lives.
The Daoists and the Zen Buddhists offered us another ideal of human perfection.
The Daoist sage, the sage who is like water, not like the rock.
The sage who is soft, the sage who pays attention to the empty spaces, not what's in the foreground,
and who lives completely spontaneously, effortlessly, who lives his life in the way one might cook
a small fish, in a very delicate way, in a way that does not push too hard.
That's an ideal of perfection.
Maybe a more complex and a deeper and more aestheticized ideal, but again, an ideal of
spontaneous life that we saw taken up very much in Zen Buddhism, when Buddhism moves
to China and engages with Daoism, and again, gives us a model of a trajectory that we could
imagine our lives taking, and a trajectory that could give a very different kind of meaning
to our lives.
Shantideva in Bodhicharya, Avatar, How to Lead an Awakened Life, and the Dalai Lama,
who is such a close student of Shantideva, extend this account of perfection.
They understand perfection in terms of the cultivation of a certain kind of compassion,
or again, we understood this compassion as an altruistic commitment to action on behalf
of others, action to relieve suffering.
And His Holiness the Dalai Lama emphasized that this kind of compassion naturally extends
to a universal concern and a universal responsibility.
So on this view again, we have an ideal of human perfection, the ideal of the Bodhisattva,
the being committed to gaining awakening for the sake of all sentient beings, and who
has cultivated this engaged kind of compassion that drives and motivates actions for the benefit
of all.
Kant and Mill offered us an understanding of what human life is about.
It's about reason, it's about knowledge, it's about discourse, it's about participating
in liberal democratic societies in which we trade arguments, we trade reasons, we freely
express ourselves, we develop our individuality, we develop our creativity, we develop our
ideas, we dare to know, and we express ourselves in this kind of freedom.
That's another rich sense of human perfection, the perfection of the free citizen engaging
in public discourse in an open society.
We can understand that ideal, that's an ideal that many of us share.
And so we can begin to see that our lives might be meaningful to the extent that they
approximate that ideal.
That ideal of course was challenged by Nietzsche who argued that this emphasis on reason is
too narrow and focuses only on one and that that a highly abstract part of what it is
to be human.
Nietzsche emphasized that what makes our lives beautiful, what makes our lives creative is
our artistry, our spontaneity, our ability to make something special out of our lives,
to treat our lives as art or literature, to be courageous, to be authentic, to not accept
the values of others even if those values are values that look well entrenched like
values of freedom, democracy, goodness, but to create our own values, to reevaluate all
values and to lead our lives in a way that is in harmony with values that we ourselves
create, to be creative in our own existence.
You can understand how that's another vision of human perfection, a trajectory towards
which we might imagine our lives taking.
Lamedere offers yet another kind of understanding of a perfect life.
It's a life led in harmony with nature.
It's not the life of action and service that the Dalai Lama suggests, that Gandhi suggests.
Use your lives of superhuman commitment to others.
Lamedere instead says, focus on your nature and on your relationship to the rest of nature.
Live harmoniously with it.
Live reflectively.
Live thoughtfully.
Don't push so hard.
And in that sense, we have yet another vision of human perfection.
And so human visions of human perfection can be part of what guides us to finding meaning
in our lives.
So many of the philosophers and theologians we've examined have thought hard about spontaneity.
And have urged that spontaneity is a feature of our lives we need to cultivate, that the
spontaneous life is the life lived best, the life that's not calculated, the life where
we don't have to deliberate about each action we perform, the life in which we're not constantly
offering justifications, but acting naturally.
It's important for several reasons.
One, it's a life of grace.
But secondly, it's not just the aesthetic grace of a spontaneous life.
It's the idea that our actions and our deepest values, the values that saturate us and make
us who we are, are in complete harmony and don't need to be artificially brought together.
Aristotle and Confucius, we saw, each emphasized the need to work hard to cultivate spontaneity.
The model here is the model of the artist, the performer, who needs to practice, practice,
practice, develop skills, develop skills, as Confucius put it, cut, ground, polished,
in order to achieve a second nature, a nature given to us by society and a nature which
we then inhabit with complete spontaneity after our Jewish training and cultivation.
The Taoists share with Aristotle and Confucius this emphasis on the meaningful life as the
virtuoso life, the totally spontaneous life.
But they reject the entire idea of a second nature.
They argue that what happens when we are socialized and learn all the Confucian virtues, or we
might imagine learning all of the Aristotelian virtues, we end up cultivating a way of being,
but it's not a genuinely spontaneous way of being from a Taoist perspective.
It's an artificial, socialized way of being, that second nature isn't nature at all.
The Taoists emphasize the need we have to pair off that artificial second nature and
to return to our first nature, which is in harmony with the nature of the universe.
This idea of a return to naturalness is inherited by Zen and stirred together with Buddhist ideas
out of India.
And in Zen we found the emphasis on a return to naturalness that was based not on some sense
of a great Tao or a particular way the universe is, but rather a focus on what's internal
to us, on the nature of our own mind and the nature of our own experience.
Because what is urged in Zen is the spontaneity that emerges from immediate open experience,
from presence, from living in perception instead of living through conceptuality, from acting
spontaneously in response to what we perceive and to what we experience, not to the calculations
that come afterwards.
And in Zen we saw this enriched with a kind of deeply aesthetic approach to life, an account
of that spontaneity that emphasizes the beauty of life around us and the beauty of the spontaneous
life.
Hume, though you might not think of Hume as somebody who's so involved in spontaneity,
emphasizes a certain kind of spontaneity as well.
Because remember that it was Hume who emphasized that it's our passions and our emotions that
mediate so much of our lives and so much of our values.
And so Hume is urging us not to govern our passions and emotions with reason, but rather
to allow a kind of natural expression, cultivation and extension of our passions in order to
make us the kind of people we would like to be that suppressing our passions suppresses
our humanity.
Nietzsche follows Hume very much in this, in this dethroning of reason and emphasis on
our passionate emotional biological nature.
And of course that intuition is perhaps expressed in the deepest way by John Lehmdeer in his
emphasis that what we really need to do as human beings is to get away from the modernist
notion that we're abstract, rational beings who stand against a natural world.
And to understand the fact that we are fundamentally biological, that we don't interact with the
natural world, that we are part of the natural world.
And that involves a kind of return to a life of circles rather than a life of squares,
a life of continuity rather than a life of pausing, judging and prescribing and hence
a different kind of spontaneity.
Freedom is so important as we think about the nature of a meaningful life.
A meaningful life is a life that's not lived under constraint, that's not lived in prison.
The Taoist we saw urged the need to free ourselves from social norms and social standards.
The Gita emphasized the fact that freedom emerges from discipline and the very reason
for adopting the disciplines or yogas in the Gita isn't to constrain us but to free us
from external constraint, from the constraint of the sensory, from the constraint of the
immediate, from the constraint of the trivial.
Human can't, in their own ways, each emphasized in the context of the Enlightenment the need
to attain freedom from authority, especially religious authority but also political authority.
And the meaningful life was the life of individual liberty.
In Mill we saw the dramatic extension of this Kantian idea in the establishment of freedom,
liberty and an absolute kind of freedom of thought and political freedom as the absolute
condition of the meaningful life and a very powerful articulation of that in terms of
the harm principle.
Nietzsche was certainly critical of almost everything happening in modernity, including
almost all of the central ideas that Kant and Mill are defending.
But Nietzsche is not critical of the idea of freedom, rather he reconceives it slightly.
Nietzsche is worried not so much about freedom from individual authority, the authority of
the pastor, the authority of the king, the authority of the dictator, but rather the
freedom from philosophical ideas, idols or mummies as he calls them.
The freedom from an intellectual tradition that makes it impossible for us to be creative
in order to enable the genuine artistic creativity that could make a life meaningful.
Gandhi emphasizes self-mastery, svaraj and insistence on the truth, but that self-mastery
is the self-mastery of the Gita, the kind of discipline that frees us from consumerism,
that frees us from external constraint, that frees us from feeling that we need to obey
another and frees us to master ourselves and to obey ourselves.
And lame, dear, of course, concurs with Gandhi in thinking that one of the most important
things from which we need to free ourselves is consumerism, commodity fetishism and this
constant demand to acquire more things, to acquire more things, thinking that that will
bring us happiness.
Almost every account of the meaning of life that we've encountered has urged us to begin
answering the question by thinking hard about the nature of reality and facing reality squarely.
In the Four Noble Truths, Four Truths, for those who would be noble as I prefer to call
them, the Buddha asked us to face squarely the reality of universal suffering, the reality
of impermanence, the reality of death, and the reality of the way that those are conditioned
by confusion, attraction and aversion and that only by first understanding that reality
could we begin to find liberation from suffering and move to something more meaningful.
Tolstoy echoes this emphasis on facing the reality of death and the reality of our impermanence.
All of the Buddhist traditions emphasize as well understanding the reality of interdependence,
the reality of impermanence, the details of interdependence, causal interdependence, part
whole interdependence, interdependence of conceptuality, gross impermanence, subtle impermanence,
to really develop an analytical understanding because if we lead our lives in ignorance
of the details of the reality in which we lead them, there's no way that we can understand
that there is no way that we could ever make them meaningful.
And lame dear of course, emphasizes the need to understand our biological nature and to
understand the symbolic nature of the natural world, to read those symbols, to attend to
those symbols in order to live meaningfully.
And everybody we look at urges us to live authentically.
For Kant and Mill, that is to live in what we might call epistemic authenticity, to dare
to know, to really think hard, understand and identify with and propagate the views that
we take seriously, politically, morally, scientifically.
Lao Zedogen and Nietzsche emphasize a different kind of dimension of authenticity.
We might call it an aesthetic authenticity, to develop an understanding of what a truly
beautiful life looks like, a life that's lived truly in harmony with the fundamental
nature of reality and to lead that life.
So we might say that there is a kind of answer to the question, what is the meaning of life?
But it's not a single answer and it's not a simple answer.
It's a deeply complex and deeply conflicted answer, an answer that requires us to integrate
an understanding and an awareness of reality in all of its complexity and in all of its
adversity to understand the difficulties that the world poses for us, but also the ways
in which each of those difficulties and each of those adversities contains the seeds of
our overcoming it.
We're called upon to lead our lives in a context, but it's a context that is at the same time
cosmic, global, natural and biological and social, that all of these contexts condition
who we are and what it is to lead a human life.
And we have to lead that life at a finite time.
It's not something that we have all of eternity for.
We lead a life that is bounded and so if we're going to find meaning in that life, we can't
wait.
We can't postpone.
Finding that meaning is found in a commitment not only to our own individual excellence,
but to making others excellent and to making other lives meaningful and so to social service.
And that can only be understood by paying attention to our own roles in the social networks
in which we figure and a commitment to advancing understanding not only of our own understanding
of ourselves, but the understanding globally that makes possible meaning quite generally.
And this requires us to achieve in some way, somehow, a kind of authentic virtuosity.
The virtuosity that makes our lives effective, that makes it possible for us to say at the
end of our lives, when we finally are facing death, that it was better that we were here,
that we actually made a difference, and that we made that difference happily, generously,
spontaneously, creatively, and compassionately.
I can't tell you how to make your life meaningful, but what we can say is that asking the question
what is the meaning of life is a very good first step.
And a very good second step is to engage with the wide diversity of answers to that question
that has been given throughout history and throughout the world's traditions.
By engaging with that diversity and by engaging in constant conversation with others who ask
that question, there's at least the possibility that we may come up with an answer.
I've really enjoyed the time that I've spent with you.
I hope that you've enjoyed it as well, and I hope that it's been helpful to you.
I hope that you'll read more.
I hope that you'll pick up these texts, and I hope that you will continue to think about
these questions, and perhaps someday we'll meet in person.
