Human beings have plied the sea for many thousands of years.
First they were driven by the desire for resources and trade and just simply using the ocean
as a route to get around.
Here it was a quest for knowledge and it's an exploration that continues today.
So in this lecture I'm going to look at the engagement with the ocean through the eyes
of these explorers over time.
We'll bring us right up from prehistoric times to essentially the beginning of the
20th century.
We'll look at the unknowns, the motivations and the problems that all these people had
to solve in order to literally discover the ocean.
Well, let's start our very brief story of ocean exploration with the age of voyaging,
the earliest ages of discovery of the sea and the use of the sea really as a means of
getting around.
But that's also a time that really is the dawn of ocean science.
In the periods of the Egyptians, in the time of the Phoenicians and Cretans, the Mediterranean
Sea, by about 1200 BC or so was certainly an area where accomplished sailors were moving
around, traveling up and down the coastline, beginning to map and chart the regions around
them in order to travel by sea.
Trade was going on, sales had already been invented, they rode their vessels back and
forth all along the Mediterranean coastlines.
And in fact, the ancient Phoenicians made it even into the Atlantic, through the Straits
of Gibraltar and out into the open ocean, at least along the coastline, by something
like 900 to 700 BC, and it also explored down the Northwestern African coast as well.
But during all of this time, the people who were really moving around the ocean and spreading
out in the most remarkable way were actually not the Europeans, but the Polynesian people
and the people of the Northwest Pacific, the Native Americans and Islanders of the Aleutians,
who were traveling around through much more difficult conditions and navigating large
parts of the sea in various areas.
The Polynesians had certainly spread over many of the Pacific Islands over a period
of something like 20,000 years, and it actually moved long distances by about 2500 BC or so.
Well, all of these voyagers, whether they were in Europe, or whether they were the Polynesians,
or whether they were the Northwesterners of the U.S., Canada and Alaska, needed various
kinds of technology.
And technology is so important in so many ways to our ocean story, but in particular,
the early technologies they needed were things like shipbuilding, right?
They needed seaworthy vessels in order to venture away from the coastline and the protected
waters and out into the rougher waters of the open ocean.
They needed some form of navigation.
You've got to know where you're going, and you've got to know where you are, and that
means astronomical direction finding, and a knowledge actually of just literally the
shape of the coastline, but also the size and shape of the Earth as a whole.
And they needed mapping.
They needed accurate charts to find their way, so they needed some way to keep a record
beyond just simply oral tradition passing the lower down from one navigator to another.
Well, in the ocean world, by the way, we describe charts as showing us water and water-related
landmarks as distinct perhaps from maps.
So we use the word charts to describe the ocean features and the coastal features where
maps primarily represent land.
Well, let's go back to the Phoenicians and the time of Alexandria as really the dominant,
perhaps, and most learned place in the ancient world.
The ancient Phoenicians and the ancient Greeks and all of the civilizations in the last few
centuries BC were very accomplished travelers.
And Eritastanese was the librarian at the famous Librarian Alexandria, and in the third
century BC published, or made, a map of the Mediterranean regions that survives today as
perhaps the first kind of true mapping and oceanographic chart in a sense.
And the key feature of this map that, as far as we know, is the first example, is that
it orients the map with lines that are something like latitude and longitude, reference lines
on the map that compare the position, either east-west or north-south, of different features
around the Mediterranean Sea.
And you can see how Mediterranean and, in fact, Alexandria-centric Eritastanese world
really was by what's at the center of this map.
Well, Eritastanese was remarkably learned and discovered scientific facts about the
planet that are really remarkable to us, perhaps, today.
In fact, there was a real understanding at that time of the angle to celestial objects,
like the North Star or the Sun, showing you that the Earth was a sphere.
People think that everyone believed that the Earth was flat until the end of the Middle
Ages.
Well, that's not true.
Certainly known in ancient times, the Earth was spherical, and Eritastanese actually calculated
the size of the Earth to remarkably good precision, about only 8 or 10 percent incorrect.
Some of that knowledge was lost in the Middle Ages and had to be rediscovered in the Renaissance.
But the Mediterranean navigation was really regional, and the open ocean crossings that
came about were accomplished through development of incredibly skilled navigation based on
that idea of using celestial reference points to get around.
So let's take a closer look at that.
The navigators that made the first open ocean crossings in Europe were the Nordic and Mediterranean
seafarers that I've already mentioned, and we'll talk about some more.
But as I said, the Polynesians are really the ones who did it earliest and did it the
best in so many ways in terms of actually crossing large expanses of open ocean.
In order to populate all of the Pacific islands that became the Polynesian home.
And we refer to this region in the Pacific Ocean actually as the Polynesian Triangle,
and it just represented unimaginably vast swath of ocean dotted by tiny islands and
atolls, many of which are so small as to barely be representable on a map of the whole Pacific
Ocean scale.
By 20,000 years ago or so, it's clear from archaeology that there were islanders dotting
the Philippines and the islands of New Guinea and launching off for seafaring trips further
and further afield from those regions.
We'll look at their technology in just a second.
But over the course of nearly 20,000 years, 19,000 years or so, they spread from that
region in the sort of near to Asia islands out across all of the southwestern Pacific,
Indonesia, but also across Micronesia and Melanesian regions.
And we're poised around where the islands of Fiji are today by 900 BC or so for what
we think of as the Polynesian explosion, the Polynesian expansion.
And over the course of the next 1400 years or something like that, they spread to islands
all over the southern Pacific, as far away as Easter Island, several thousand miles from
any nearby land of any size, and maybe most remarkably of all, all the way to Hawaii, which
was 2,000 miles from the nearest inhabited island of any sort.
How did the Polynesians find these locations?
Was it just a matter of getting blown by storms and accidentally landing on some island, whereas
many other people perhaps perished?
No, it was a deliberate and skillful act of navigation and archaeological evidence really
shows us that the islands were populated by people who went looking for new places to
live and then moved back and forth in order to accomplish that navigation.
They did so in incredibly seaworthy vessels for their time, and here's a representation
of a modern replica of a double-hulled Polynesian sailing canoe.
Anyone who's ever sailed a catamaran knows that that double-hulled design is very stable
in the water, and these were stable enough for crossings of open ocean water with even
dozens of people on board, carrying food, carrying even fire, actually, on board the ship to
transfer it to new locations around the Pacific.
But how did they sail across the open ocean, even sailing sometimes against prevailing
winds and against currents, in order to discover new islands and, in fact, colonize and populate
those islands?
Well, it's clear from the oral history and present-day knowledge of Micronesians and
Polynesian peoples, as well as the archaeology, that they had a sophisticated ability to navigate
by stars and also by features of the ocean itself and the islands.
Micronesian stick charts are probably very similar to what was used by Polynesians during
the expansion, and there are these simple networks or lattices of bamboo sticks with
shells tied at particular junctures.
Now it's clear that the shells represent individual islands dotting the Polynesian region, and
then the curved sticks that are tied onto there or bent onto the stick chart actually
represent the refraction of waves around those islands.
So while sailing a double-hulled canoe, one might see the wave patterns coming and recognize
that if you sailed directly perpendicular to the waves, for example, you would arrive
back at the point that had diffracted them, which was an island.
These Polynesian navigators would also watch the atmosphere, because clouds build up over
islands, so even islands you can't see over the horizon actually have a signature in terms
of the clouds that are there.
The birds, the smells in the air and the water would all lead them towards land and places
that they could identify and then sail towards.
So this was a deliberate navigation, not simply sort of a random wandering across the Pacific
Ocean, and they were incredibly capable or incredibly skilled at finding these new islands
to populate and in fact sailing back and forth between them for trade.
Well in the Atlantic side, meanwhile, or actually later on for the most part, the Nordic people
in particular were making the open ocean voyages that kind of discovered the new parts of the
world beyond the European mainland and beyond the British Isles.
We all know about Columbus, but of course many hundreds of years before Columbus, first
Eric the Red and then his son, Leif Erickson, the Viking explorers had sailed across the
open North Atlantic to Iceland and then beyond to Greenland and even to Nova Scotia and
the mainland of North America.
Actually visiting the mainland of North America is something Columbus never even accomplished.
Well in China, shipbuilding and navigation were very rapidly advancing.
The magnetic compass was invented in China.
Even more important for open ocean voyaging, the central rudder, a rudder in the center
of your ship as opposed to just oars for steering, was developed.
The concept of putting multiple masts with big sails and rigging the sails so that you
didn't have to go up and manually move them but could move them by means of ropes and
things like that.
They were all invented in China and were ultimately exported technologies to Europe.
By the 1400s in China, the Admiral Jin He was commanding a Ming Dynasty fleet that was
just unimaginable in its size for the time.
More than 300 ships of this fleet, the largest of which was 400 and some feet long and held
hundreds of sailors.
We don't think of China as a seafaring nation and in fact China abruptly stopped being a
seafaring nation in the 1420s just because of basically political changes that made them
not want to continue this fleet.
But during the Ming Dynasty, the most advanced technologies in seafaring were certainly from
the Chinese side.
But Europe adopted many of these innovations, of course, and made others of its own to build
more and more ocean-worthy vessels.
And Columbus's voyage in 1492 certainly opened a European era of global expansion.
Now Columbus actually had his computation based on Ptolemy, not Ertustin, he's unfortunately,
of the size of the earth completely wrong.
He thought the earth was only about half as big as it is.
So Columbus thought that he could sail to Asia and get to China for trade.
When he got to the island of Hispaniola, he thought he in fact had arrived in Asia, which
is of course why we call it the West Indies because he thought he was somehow in India.
Columbus didn't know where he had gone, he never made it to North America, and yet he
opened up the entirely new era that was just an explosion then of exploration by European
merchants and European colonists along the way.
It was opened by new technologies in navigation and in shipbuilding, and it was certainly
driven by the competition for resources in these new colonies that rapidly opened up
after Columbus's day.
So let's look at what I mean by new technologies and new challenges in navigation.
Well let's take a step back and just think about how we think about where we are on the
planet, right?
If you look at a globe of the earth, what you see of course are lines of latitude and
longitude.
Latitude measures the distance north and south from zero degrees at the equator to 90 degrees
at the pole north or south, and longitude measures a reference point in meridians around
the planet perpendicular to latitude, so measures your distance east and west.
Stop and think about those two measurements for a second and think about which is easier
to determine at sea, latitude or longitude?
Well let's look at latitude first, okay?
Well north-south, one thing is which way is north?
Well that's not so bad, that's not so hard to determine because compasses to know the
direction north had been invented in China in something like 400 BC.
Now they didn't make it to Europe until much later, and actually compasses were a closely
guarded secret of ship captains for a long time, right up until the Renaissance period,
because they were such sort of magical object.
But so you know which way is north, but how far north or south are you?
Well in order to determine your position in latitude, of course what you need to do is
make a measurement of the angle to a celestial object.
And as I said, this was understood even by the ancient Greeks that the north star hung
above the north pole, apparently in the sky just based on where it is celestially compared
to our axis of rotation of the planet, and the sun reaches its zenith at noon, in fact
that's the definition of noon, the highest point in the sky, and that depends on how
far south and north you are and the time of the year, if you're in a particular hemisphere
or not.
So how did that actually translate into making a measurement of position in latitude?
Well of course the device that you need in order to do that is something called a sextant,
and a sextant is a very simple tool, they've been around for many hundreds of years, they're
an outgrowth of even those ancient Greek measurements, and a sextant is nothing more than a measure
of a geometrical angle.
So I have one here, this is a very simple sextant but it's a modern one that will do
exactly what Columbus needed to do in order to determine how far north or south he was,
which is measure the reference angle between the horizon and some celestial object, most
typically the north star, that's the one that's the most direct measurement of latitude, because
you're measuring the angle to north.
Well how does a sextant work?
It looks like a little bit of a complicated object, but in fact it's really very simple.
It has a siting tube and it looks through a piece of glass that we can look straight
through and get a reference line to the horizon, at sea the horizon is out there well defined,
it's absolutely horizontal by definition, but next to that glass is a mirror, the mirror
is right here, and that's reflecting the light from a second mirror, which is reflecting
off in the distance, and that second mirror is mounted on a swivel arm with essentially
a protractor, so I can measure the angle from 0 degrees out to 90 degrees and beyond by
swinging this arm back and forth.
Well so the principle of making the measurement with a sextant is a simple one, site down
the tube, line it up on the horizon, then swing the view next to it until the object you're
trying to measure, the north star, is brought into alignment with that horizon, and we can
make fine adjustments with the wheel until we get it just right, and then read off an
angle in degrees that this mirror is making, and in fact with the vernier scale on the
sextant we can even measure off minutes of a degree down beyond that, so I've just made
a measurement of 50 degrees and about 30 minutes or so.
So that really illustrates what the principle is behind latitude, and that's that it's
just an angle, it's nothing more than an angle, if I say I'm at 40 degrees north, that means
the angle that I'm making between the horizon and the north star is that 40 degree angle.
Sextants have been around for, as I said, for many hundreds of years, and even simpler
designs than this are illustrated in some of the images we have from the Middle Ages
and from the Renaissance period, for example a two person operated sextant where one guy
is just setting the horizon line, the other is responsible for finding the sun or the
north star, but the principle is exactly the same, and it's been around for a long time.
So that allows you to measure your position north and south, and in fact finding north
and south was exactly the way that a lot of that early sailing was accomplished, Columbus
included. They would find a line of latitude they wanted to be on, sail north or south
until they got to it, and then just try to stay on it and head due west in the case of
crossing the Atlantic to find a place in North America.
And the reason they did that was because finding your position in longitude is a lot trickier
proposition. Basically there's nothing celestial because longitude is changing, you know, your
position is changing as the earth rotates all day long, over a 24 hour period, the earth
goes around one full rotation. So the secret to measuring longitude is actually
measuring time, because time is just arbitrarily defined based on perhaps when the sun rises
and sets, but that changes through the year, so even better based on the time that the
sun is the highest in the sky, the zenith or the noon position. Well if you know when
it's noon back in Portugal or back in England, and you know when it's noon on your ship,
if there's a difference in that time, then that is a measure of how far you've traveled
west or east, just like the existence of time zones today, right? The secret then to determining
position accurately east and west was keeping time well. At first this just meant literally
having a pendulum clock or an hourglass on a ship that you kept turning, but of course
those would lose time, those weren't very accurate, it was hard to keep that going for
weeks and weeks at sea. There's a wonderful book by Dava Sobo called Longitude, which
tells the story of the prize that was offered by the Royal Society in the UK for the person
who could build a clock accurate enough to keep Longitude position well determined by
knowing what time it was back home while you sailed a ship for weeks and weeks across the
Atlantic Ocean. And John Harrison's chronometers are described in that book, and there really
it was a technological innovation, the development of a new way of keeping time in order to determine
position at sea, that's where clocks actually came from. It was a wind up clock with lots
of gears and motions, but it kept time precisely enough in order to allow this navigation to
take place. Well okay, so after Columbus then in the 1500s, exploration expanded rapidly,
and by 1507 the Waldseemuller map was made, which really shows that the world's size and
shape was beginning to come into focus, at least across the Atlantic for the Europeans.
And if we zoom in on a particular region of that map, we can see that the coastlines in
particular that were being explored by many explorers after Columbus were becoming well
mapped and charted, and the river mouse and the locations of villages and the locations
of colonies were quickly mapped into place. Of course the size of the Atlantic was not
so well determined, again because longitude is difficult, north-south was better, and
the far side of North America wasn't mapped at all at this time, but things developed
pretty quickly. Just a few years later Magellan set sail from Portugal in 1519, and as has
come down through the history books made the first circumnavigation of the world, sailed
through the Atlantic, around into the Pacific, south of South America, and made it all the
way around the world. But of course Magellan himself didn't actually make it all the way
around the world. He set sail with five ships, and those five ships made it into the Pacific
Ocean, spent two years stopping at various islands, ended up in the Philippines by 1521.
Many of his crew had already died of various diseases. Magellan himself was killed in some
kind of altercation with native peoples in the Philippines at that time. His fleet continued
beyond without him, and by 1522 returned all the way back, having made the first circumnavigation
of the world, but at the cost of only one of five ships returned, and only 18 crew members,
only 18 seaman out of 270 returned back to have made that circumnavigation, not including
Magellan himself. Well, all of this was really just exploring the oceans, again mainly to
find places for commerce and trade. And so I'd like to turn our attention now as we jump
forward to maybe the 1700s and talk about the beginnings and underpinnings of real modern
ocean science. By the 18th and 19th centuries, systematic observations in sampling had begun.
And maybe the first one that's an interesting one to discuss is the voyages of Captain Cook
and Charles Darwin, and certainly the British voyages of exploration were not the only explorers,
but they were the ones that perhaps developed at the most and took at the furthest in this
era. So if we looked at Captain Cook in the 1760s through the 1770s, he led the first
expeditions that we can think of as having a real oceanographic component. His exploration
was very much a colonial and empire-building activity, but he took naturalists from the
Royal Society on board, and their job was systematic botany for the very first time,
systematic natural science observation of the islands, detailed charting, all of those
sorts of things. This is a beginning of kind of ocean-going science. They took many samples,
both from the sea and the lands that they visited, and recorded them for history. Captain
Cook's voyages were pretty phenomenal, actually. He had made three different voyages that went
into the Pacific from the Atlantic and visited many, many of the Pacific islands for the
very first time. Cook was the first to the east coast of Australia, the first European
to make contact in New Zealand, the first European to make contact in Hawaii, and many, many
other islands throughout the Pacific. His objective was actually to discover a hypothesized
southern continent that some philosophers believed should balance out the land in the
northern hemisphere with a very large continent in the southern hemisphere. He didn't actually
ever make it to Antarctica because the ice pack was too great to sail all the way down,
but went to more than 80 degrees south. He also made it all the way up into the Bering
Sea region and charted the Pacific Northwest and the Alaskan coastal regions for the very
first time. Many, many animals were discovered during Cook's voyages and many features, of
course, of both the islands again and the ocean. Now, Cook also didn't make it back
home from his third voyage. As you probably know, he was in Hawaii for the second time
on his third voyage, and they had greeted him there as essentially a visiting god. When
he first arrived, in fact, there were some, maybe fortunately for Cook, there were some
local prophecies or tales of a ghost-like or white sailor coming from across the sea
who was the god Lono. Cook definitely benefited from this, and they traded with the locals
and then were in amicable terms for a while, but upon their return apparently abused the
privileges a little bit because some sort of altercation started, and in a fight that
ensued, Cook was killed right there on the island of Hawaii. You can visit the spot with
a monument today if you go to the Kona coast of the island of Hawaii in Kealakekua Bay.
But Cook really started the oceanographic science, and this continues then in the 1800s
with real naturalist expeditions, and Charles Darwin is one of the most famous of those
naturalists, the Royal Navy ship HMS Beagle from 1831 to 1836 made more voyages into the
Pacific. Darwin, seen here as a young man, is famous for his description of the life
of the Galapagos, the Finches, and all of the other botany and his theory of natural
selection and evolution, but Charles Darwin was also a pretty phenomenal naturalist in
general and observer of geology. And in fact, in the ocean sciences, one of the things we
think of Darwin first for is his theory of coral reefs and atolls. We'll come back to
the sea islands later on in another lecture, but Darwin recognized that there were islands
dotting the Pacific that were surrounded by fringing reefs of coral, and then in some
cases there were islands that were just the reefs themselves, or atolls, with no rocky
island in the center. And he came up with a theory of initially a volcano surrounded
by a reef that slowly subsided beneath the waves, leaving the reef behind as it grew
up and stayed in the sunlit zone that it needed for photosynthesis. And that theory
of the formation of atolls that Charles Darwin set up is actually exactly the same theory
as the way we understand these atolls today. Well, by the 1870s, the late 1800s, oceanographic
expeditions were really taking off. And the first true oceanographic expedition, the one
that, in fact, the word oceanography was coined for, was the HMS Challenger Expeditions, put
in place by the Royal Society in the UK. And it set sail on the Challenger, which was a
ship that was given to them by the Royal Navy, and sailed around the world's oceans with
the sole purpose of conducting oceanographic observations. They documented something like
4,700 new species during that time, collected many, many samples, dragged plankton nets
through the water to determine what was in the deep water. And as we'll see in the next
lectures, made hundreds of deep soundings, charting the bathymetry of the ocean in the
deep water for the very first time, and using new technologies in order to do it. Some of
those Challenger observations are ones that we still use today, and some of the charts
that they made were so good that, in fact, they remain in use until really only a few
decades ago. One more ocean explorer that I'd like to introduce you to, just at the turning
of the 20th century, is Fritschof Nansen, a Norwegian arctic explorer who's really one
of the most remarkable, both adventurers and also ocean scientists that pioneered the science
that I'm involved in today. In the latest 1800s, he took a voyage, he actually built a special
ship called the Fram. You can see it today if you go to Oslo, Norway, and it was designed
to be frozen in ice and survive that experience. It was a wooden vessel, but it had a two-meter-thick
hull that could withstand the arctic sea ice. And the reason that he did it was that Nansen
hypothesized that the arctic was not a landmass with ice on top, but was actually an ocean,
another ocean basin with deep water, just like the Atlantic and the Pacific. And so
he wanted to prove this theory by putting his money where his mouth was and freezing
his ship, his vessel, into the sea ice along with his crew, and then drifting with the
ice pack until he drifted right across the North Pole. And so Nansen did exactly that.
They froze their ship into the ice, and they started what ultimately became literally a
five-year expedition, three years spent intentionally locked in the polar ice. They brought lots
of provisions along. There were sled dogs and everything associated with this vessel
in order for them to survive that journey. Nansen actually got drifted along for a while
and got to sort of close to the northern polar region, but it wasn't going to make it there.
So he decided this wasn't good enough and actually set off with one other of his crew
and some sled dogs and some provisions and went hundreds of miles across the ice in a
vein attempt to actually reach the North Pole itself. He reached about 88 something north
but didn't quite make it. Then turned back and made an overwinter on some islands in
the polar sea and then eventually made it back to Norway, ironically on the same day
that the rest of his crew finally made it back, years after starting the voyage. The
thing is that this voyage established Nansen's idea that there was a polar sea, and it really
again established the science of oceanography as something to do in its own right. Later
years Nansen became a professor with the title, the first time a professor was titled Professor
of Oceanography in Norway. In fact, he wasn't even done having a big impact on the planet
because Nansen also became the League of Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in the period
after World War I and even won the Nobel Peace Prize for that work with refugees. Truly
a remarkable scientist and truly a remarkable man.
Well, by the 20th century then ocean exploration was exploding and in coming lectures we're
going to look at many of these different features that we understand of the sea and many of
the technologies that we use to explore it. I'll just give you a taste right now to say
that from all of this work on the surface of the ocean, it was recognized that to really
understand what was in the sea, especially the deep sea, one had to visit it, one had
to go to the bottom. So the development of submarines in the 20th century afforded the
opportunity to do that. And by 1960 perhaps the culmination of kind of the exploratory
phase of oceanography was the dive of the Bathiscaf Trieste, a special pressure vessel
designed to house a few human beings under the crushing pressure of the bottom of the
deepest place in the entire ocean, which as we'll see is the base of the ocean trench
called the Mariana's Trench. Almost 11,000 meters, 35,000 feet down at the bottom of
the ocean, two scientists visited, saw that there was life out through the porthole of
their submarine and came back to tell the tale. The rest of this course will be an examination
of all the ways in which we investigate and study and explore the ocean from the bottom
of the sea to satellites in space.
