At the end of the last lecture, I left us on the brink of the 20th century explosion
of science and technology in the oceans, mapping the seafloor and mapping all of the things
that are in it.
In the next lecture after this one, I'll actually take a look at the technologies of
how we do that, but before we go there, what I'd like to do is just introduce you to the
ocean basins themselves, what the shape of the seafloor is, what the kind of scale and
size and dimensions and features of the seafloor actually are.
Even as recently as the 1950s or so, geologists had a conception of the ocean basins, the
seabed itself as kind of a submerged version of the continents, probably with the same
sorts of rocks at the bottom of the ocean and all the same sorts of cragginess and features,
but just simply down lower and therefore trapping all the sediments that came off the continent
and thick accumulations of very ancient sediments.
But in fact, the oceans are not like this at all, they're their own unique physiographic
province, physiographic just meaning that the morphology and shape of the seafloor itself
that reflects a unique geological origin of all these features.
We'll be exploring those, but the question we want to ask first is, how do we know the
depth and shape of the ocean floor and what does it actually look like?
So little has been known until very recently, you know, we didn't know about even the basic
how deep was the water out there in the deep sea until the late 1800s and maybe the past
50 or 60 years we've known something about what lies beneath the seabed.
With really the period around the Second World War, the turning point in massive data collection
in the oceans was the explosion during and then after the Second World War with new instruments
and new amounts of trade going on all around the planet.
It has allowed us to define what's the container for the oceans, what are these ocean basins
and how are they shaped and therefore what does that tell us about how are they formed.
So one of the questions we want to ask immediately is, you know, why does the earth have big
areas of continent and big areas of ocean as opposed to, for example, a sort of random
collection of many islands, small seas, a little bit bigger islands, a little bit bigger islands
and sort of random distribution of sizes.
The planet doesn't really look like that, does it?
If we look at the earth from space or if we look at a map of the earth, we see big areas
of land that fill up only about one third of the planet and then big areas of ocean
that fill up more than two thirds, actually almost three quarters of the planet.
Now we're in the 21st century now, we're used to seeing depictions of the planet that looks
something like this one where you can actually see a mid-ocean ridge and variations in the
depth of the water depicted in different colors as sort of bathymetric features.
But of course, you know, that's not what you see when you're actually gazing out to see
from the shoreline or sailing over it or looking down from an airplane or even looking from
space.
The water out there in the ocean is impenetrable to light.
We can map the coastline, but beyond the shallow water near the coast we can't see through
the water to the bottom and in fact a satellite can't even see through the water to the bottom
with radar or any other technology.
None of those forms of electromagnetic radiation, light, radio waves, etc. penetrate more than
really a few meters into the water.
So the deep ocean basins were a mystery until very recently.
We just see a limitless sea.
What's out there underneath the waves?
Well, we'll explore how those measurements are made, but let's take up the main features
of the ocean basins now.
And if we really look at Earth's elevation, we can say that it doesn't come in some random
distribution, as I said, of land and sea.
And in fact, the elevation of the surface of the planet above or below sea level isn't
random either.
It comes in two different modes, continent and ocean.
There are continental areas and there are oceanic areas.
And as we'll see, these represent really different kinds of crust on the planet.
Now the ocean basins are dominated by broad, deep, flat planes that have a depth of about
3,000 to 5,000 meters depth.
It's not just simply from sea level on down gradually to the center of the ocean, no.
There's a defined slope and then broad open areas, we call the abyssal planes, that are
the vast majority of the open ocean basins.
And so the average depth of the ocean is almost 4,000 meters below sea level, 3,796 meters,
to the exact below sea level.
The average elevation of land above sea level is about 840 meters.
But the land is distributed in sort of an exponential way, from the coastline up to the highest
elevations with less and less land at each higher elevation until you get to the peak
of Mount Everest or the Himalayas, where a tiny fraction of the land is that high.
We can look at a special kind of a graph, which is a cumulative graph of the elevation
of the surface.
This is called a hypsographic chart.
And this hypsographic chart shows us graphically, not meant as a cross section of the earth
or anything, but just graphically the distribution of elevations on the planet.
And so you can see that above sea level on the land, it is that sort of exponential area
of land with just a fraction of 1% at the height of the high mountains going down to
sea level.
But then in the oceans, there's a cumulative amount of land above some certain elevation
that gets larger and is really centered on a broad flat that represents those abyssal
plains.
And then finally, the oceans reach depths in the deep sea trenches that represent just
a vanishingly small area of the oceans, but they get to very large depths, as deep as
11,000 meters below sea level.
So the hypsographic chart really shows us in a very graphic way this kind of bimodal
distribution of elevation on earth.
And that's because there's continental crust and there's oceanic crust.
And we'll explore the differences in those two crusts in a lecture to come.
Well, another way to think about the scale of the ocean basins is to think about what
would happen if we flattened out all that topography on earth.
So just made it all level and made a new sea level where we just filled in all the land
to exactly the same level.
Well, if it was like that, and we had a sort of a water world kind of planet, then it would
make an ocean that was less deep than the average depth of the ocean now, because we
have to include the area that's covered by continents, about 2,600 meters deep.
But if all the land was leveled out like that, then sea level would only rise by about 243
meters higher than it is now.
And the point of going through this mental exercise is just to show that the volume of
the sea is so much greater than the volume of all the land above sea level on the planet.
The ocean basins greatly exceed the continents in volume.
A way to depict that is actually to look at a cross section of the landscape, just the
topography along a line, and compare a line that crosses North America, say from east
coast to west coast across the United States, to a line that crosses the Atlantic Ocean,
say from Africa to South America.
And if you look at the positive elevation on land, the elevation that's all above sea
level, and then you compare that to the Atlantic Ocean basin, you can see that all that land
across North America, including the Rocky Mountains, including the Sierra Nevada, and
the Appalachians and everything else, would easily fit within the Atlantic Ocean basin
with lots of room to spare for more seawater, a great deal more seawater, in fact.
So the landscape of the ocean floor is actually a larger sort of amplitude, a larger magnitude,
the mountains are bigger, the canyons are deeper, all of it is scaled up in the ocean
basins in a way that we're not used to seeing on land.
Okay, well so this different geology of the ocean floor compared to the continents is
the thing that creates the fundamental difference between the two.
And briefly speaking now, we'll amplify this later on, what we call the oceanic crust,
the bedrock of the sea bottom.
It turns out is formed by exclusively volcanic processes, and it's made of basaltic lava.
It's made of the lava rock that is called basalt, and that's erupted out of innumerable
volcanoes along the sea floor.
It's much thinner as a crust than the continents, and it's also much denser than the continents.
Now you think of all rocks as being pretty dense, right, they're pretty heavy, but in
fact continental rocks in general are less dense than oceanic floor rocks, and that
makes a difference in the elevation that they attain as sort of their equilibrium at the
surface of the earth.
We'll explore that in more detail a little later on.
Okay, so what are the features of the oceanic basins?
Well they have something in common, and maybe the first thing to say is that when we look
at the world's oceans, the Atlantic, the Pacific, the Indian Ocean, the Arctic Ocean, those
are the major ones, they're all one ocean.
They're not a whole series of individual oceans.
The definitions of which one is which or the boundaries between them are arbitrary from
the point of view of the oceans, because there is not just shallow water, but a deep water
ocean floor connection between and among all of the ocean basins.
So in fact there's a globe encircling mid-ocean ridge mountain range that we'll look at.
There are deep sea trenches all around the world, there are these vast abyssal plains
I already mentioned, and then there's the connection to the continents, the continental
shelves, slopes, and rises, and we'll describe all of that here in the next few minutes.
Okay, so first the mid-ocean ridge, this is in some sense the largest or most continuous
sort of feature of the bedrock geology of the whole planet.
It's a continuous, essentially mountain range or mountain chain that starts at an arbitrary
point because it really encircles the entire globe like the seams on a baseball, but let's
start from some place like Iceland, which straddles the mid-ocean ridge of the mid-Atlantic,
and passes down through the South Atlantic Ocean, then on into the Pacific and what's
called the East Pacific Rise, and ultimately also connecting across to the Southwest Indian
ridge, a mountain chain that runs through the planet to a distance of something like
60,000 kilometers across the planet.
Okay, well let's look at major components of the ocean floor, and we're going to talk
about the continental margins, we're going to talk about islands and sea mounts and other
features of the ocean basins, but let's just get the main features of the deep ocean basins
in place first. So I'll talk about these oceanic ridges in a little more detail that
I just mentioned. We'll bring in the abyssal plains, and we'll talk about all of this deep
ocean area, the more than one half of the Earth's surface that's actually covered by
water deeper than 3,000 meters as a sort of a generic definition of deep ocean versus
continental slope and continental shelf areas.
Let's tour a few of the oceans of the planet and look at this physiographic view. Well
the Pacific Ocean first of all, of course, because the Pacific Ocean is more than a third
of the whole surface area of the Earth. It's 50% of the total ocean area. If you look at
the planet from the right angle, as in this view, you can barely see any landscape at all.
It really looks like a water planet from this kind of perspective. The Pacific Ocean is
deeper on average than the other oceans by a few hundred meters. The averages are about
the same across all the ocean basins, but the Pacific Ocean is the deepest. It has a
mid-ocean ridge. It's not as well defined perhaps in its appearance in the maps as the
mid-Atlantic ridge, and it's called the East Pacific Rise. The East Pacific Rise is a
broad, gently sloping region that you wouldn't even think of as basically a mountain range
in the seafloor, but nonetheless it rises up thousands of meters above the surrounding
abyssal plains and comes up through the Pacific Ocean to the west of South America and actually
runs up, and as we'll see, runs into North America just at the Baja California Peninsula.
That's significant, and we'll return to that thought a little later on.
The Pacific Ocean also features thousands of islands and seamounts and atolls. We think
of Pacific as dotted with small islands throughout there. It's all oceanic crust, and all of
these islands and seamounts are essentially all originally volcanoes that formed by processes
of volcanic eruption building up an island off the deep seafloor thousands of meters
until it actually reaches the surface. The islands sometimes come through the surface,
and of course other times the volcanoes build up a rise in topography, build up a volcanic
edifice, but one that doesn't make it all the way to the sea surface. If it doesn't
make it all the way up, we don't call it an island, of course, but it becomes a mountain
in the sea or a seamount. The Pacific Ocean is also ringed by the deep sea trenches, and
that's something that's really quite different from the Atlantic, as we'll see, but the deepest
places in the ocean are all around the regions of the western Pacific. The Japan trench,
the Marianas trench, and the Tonga trench are the deepest places in the ocean. They don't
cover very much area, but they drop from the average ocean elevation around 4,000 meters
or a little less down to 8,000, 9,000, and even 11,000 meters below sea level, the deepest
places in the ocean. The Marianas trench is so deep, in fact, that if you could take Mount
Everest and the Himalayas and turn them upside down and plop them into the Marianas trench,
there would still be thousands of meters of seawater sitting on top of them. Mount Everest
is 8,800 meters above sea level. The Marianas trench is 11,000 meters below.
Well, let's jump from the Pacific then to the Atlantic Ocean base. The Atlantic is the
second largest ocean on the planet, and it's about one-fifth of the Earth's surface area,
so it's really much, much smaller, less than half the size of the Pacific Ocean. The Atlantic
is especially remarkable, of course, for the fit of the continents. If you closed up the
Atlantic Ocean, how South America would nestle in right beneath Africa, and North America
and Europe would all, would all nestle together very beautifully, and we'll see that that
is part of the story of seafloor spreading in plate tectonics later on. But the center
of the Atlantic Ocean is the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. It's a high mountain range, virtually
all as sea mounts below the surface of the water, but again, where it's been especially
active volcanically at Iceland and a few other places with islands that dot the Atlantic
Ocean, then we actually see volcanic islands at the surface. But the Atlantic Ocean shares
with the Pacific the existence of the broad abyssal plains away from the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge and water depths in as much as or in excess of 4,000 meters, where it differs from
the Pacific Ocean is the lack of real deep sea trenches. There's a couple of small examples,
the lesser Antilles region, where the Caribbean meets the main part of the Atlantic Ocean,
and a place even less well known in the far south, what's called the Scotia Trench down
there between South America and Antarctica. But otherwise, there are no trenches around
the Atlantic Ocean, and there's just a smooth continuous connection between the abyssal
plains and then up onto the continents that surround it on both eastern and western sides.
Well if we go north from the Atlantic Ocean, then the ocean basin that's maybe sort of
unknown to most of us, or we don't think of as a true ocean basin, but in fact it really
is, is the Arctic Ocean. It's the smallest of the major ocean basins at only 2.4% or
so of the world's surface area. But the reason I say it's a real major ocean basin is because
it has true deep water that thousands of meters deep abyssal plain morphology of the sea floor
that was formed as true oceanic crust through the ocean floor volcanic processes.
As we saw in the last lecture, until Nansen's expedition and other work that went on around
the same time in the early part of the 20th century, the Arctic Ocean wasn't even known
to be one, wasn't even known to be an ocean, and not have for example land at the North
Pole, until really quite recently in history. But it's an ocean basin with currents that
connect the Atlantic to the Pacific across the North, and open water, whether it's filled
with pack ice, or as is perhaps developing just now in the 21st century, true open water
in the Northwest Passage between the Atlantic and the Pacific through the Arctic Ocean Basin.
Finally, if we're thinking of the major oceans, we can think of the Indian Ocean. It's the
third largest of the ocean basins. It has the Southwest Indian Ridge in the center, which
is a continuation once again of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and East Pacific Rise, high elevations
at the center with abyssal plains to either side between Antarctica, Australia, India,
and the eastern coast of Africa. Once again, very much like the Pacific and the Atlantic,
in its general sea floor morphology surrounded by some continental shelves and slopes, and
containing the deep water ocean basin formed by oceanic crust. All continuous with each
other. If we want to see how they're continuous with each other, maybe the easiest way to
see that is to look straight on at the South Pole of the planet. If we look at Antarctica,
we see that that is a continent, and Antarctica certainly is a continent. It's a land mass
that's covered largely, although not entirely, with thick ice sheets, but it's a true blue
continental land mass down there at the southern pole of the planet, but it's completely encircled
by open deep water. Sometimes this is referred to as a sort of a fifth ocean called the Southern
Ocean, but really it just encompasses pieces of the Atlantic, the Pacific, and the Indian
Ocean. But it really illustrates for us very clearly how all of the ocean is one great
circulating mass. In fact, we are surrounded by the ocean. There's not really a difference
between islands and continents in any meaningful sense. In North and South America, we live
on one great giant island, just as the Australians live on an island, just as Hawaiians live
on an island, because we're all surrounded by deep ocean basins. So this one ocean that
covers the entire planet has common processes all over it, and each major ocean basin has
formed by these ocean crust forming processes. But each one also has different histories,
and therefore they have different morphologies. And so I've already mentioned the deep sea
trenches that are a feature of the Pacific Ocean that are really not present in any significant
amounts in the Atlantic Ocean, and for the most part not in the Indian Ocean as well.
These are different histories of each ocean basin that are a reflection of actually the
plate tectonic processes that have formed the ocean floor. The other big distinction
among the different ocean basins is the shape of that mid-ocean ridge. We have, again, the
broad, wide-east Pacific rise compared to the relatively steep and narrow mid-Atlantic
ridge and relatively steep and narrow southwest Indian ridge. As we'll see later, these reflect
different rates and speeds of plate tectonics going on on the planet.
Okay, well let's turn our attention now from the deep ocean basins to the continental margins.
The edges of the continents, we have a coastline, of course, and we know that the land somehow
doesn't just abruptly drop off in a gigantic cliff down to the base of the Abyssal Plain,
but rather we have a continuation of the continent offshore in something called the continental
shelf. And so we'll take a look at the continental shelf and then its connection to the deep
ocean basin, which is just defined as the continental slope.
In this case, different continental margins around the planet are going to, again, reflect
plate tectonic processes and other geological sort of workings that have shaped them into
the kinds of continental shelves and kinds of continental margins that they are around
in different parts of North America or other continents, in fact.
So first of all, the continental shelf is really just the very shallow water extension of the
land. And it may surprise you that the continental shelf extends quite a long distance offshore
in many regions. We define it as something from just zero to about 200 meters water depth,
just a few hundred feet. I mean, deep enough that you might think of it as deep water as
a swimmer, but compared to the open ocean basins of thousands of meters depth, the
continental shelf is practically at sea level. It's so shallow.
So if you go out to 200 meters water depth along the Atlantic seaboard of the United
States, you see this wide, several hundreds of miles wide actually, continental shelf extending
out offshore. And it's really fundamentally an extension of the landscape onshore. And
in fact, some of the features we see on the continental shelf when we map out its terrain
or its bathymetry are actually canyons or valleys that were carved by rivers when sea
level was lower and then have been drowned as sea level has risen.
And in fact, that points out the defining feature of the continental shelf is it's really
the offshore extension of the continent to the extent that sea level tends to rise and
fall. We'll see in a later lecture that sea level basically has gone down by as much as
180 or so up to almost 200 meters below the present day level, and then has also been
higher by than present day, but only by a few meters. So basically the continental shelf
is showing us where the exposed land was during the lowest points in the sea level rise and
fall that occurs over many tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of year cycles.
So we look at that continental shelf of the East Coast and we see its width. And then
out there at that 200 meter or so mark, we see that it kind of makes an abrupt transition
and the slope increases greatly. The continental shelf is almost absolutely flat. It has a
slope of less than a degree or so actually. But then it turns into an area that slopes
much more steeply down towards the offshore. And we see that that region, that continental
slope, is marked by a whole series of what are called submarine canyons. Areas where
transport of sediments, not in the air, not by rivers, but by undersea flows, have carved
canyons and channels down along the continental slope. If we look at a kind of a cross section
then of these features, we get a sense for how the continental slope is really just the
connection between the continental shelf and the abyssal plain of the deep ocean floor.
And it's nothing more than that. The continent extends out to the continental shelf edge.
Sediments are being shed off the landscape and delivered to the continental edge by rivers
and streams and maybe some of its windblown. But anyway, it all ends up in the shallow
water on the continental shelf and then waves and current action move it further offshore
and ultimately shed it down and build up the kind of large sediment accumulations that
represent a lot of the continental slope. Now diagrams like this one that depict the
continental slope as this very steep edge to the continent are kind of a little bit misleading
because there's a great deal of vertical exaggeration in those diagrams. If we look at a true one
to one scale, meaning the vertical scale is equal to the horizontal scale, we see that
even the continental slope has a slope angle of only a few degrees. If it wasn't underwater
you could probably manage to ride your bike up it, although it would be a kind of a slow
long uphill, uphill haul. The continental shelf, you wouldn't even be able to tell you're
on a slope at all. But so the continental slope is this 8 to 10 to 12 degree kind of tapering
slope down, ultimately reaching the deep sea floor. Now in places where there's a lot of
sediment coming off the continent and it's dumping a lot of material into the deep ocean,
it builds up essentially a pile or an accumulation of sediment, almost like a deep sea delta.
We actually call it a deep sea fan of sediments at the base of the continental slope. It's
just simply material that cascades down through those submarine canyons, spills out and then
where it flattens out to the abyssal plain, builds up a pile of sediments. Those deep sea
fans, kind of if they extend all along the coastline, will eventually coalesce or they
over time have built up a kind of a gently sloping lower end of the continental slope.
And we refer to that as the continental rise. So it's just the gradual beginnings of a
rise upward from the abyssal plain at a shallow angle that ultimately grades its way into
the continental slope. Well, so some places as I said already, the continental shelves
are very broad and very well defined. If we take a look at the Florida peninsula, we
see this super wide continental shelf extending in both directions into the Gulf of Mexico
and out in the Atlantic Ocean. And it's built up a vast plateau and in fact a lot of the
carbonate banks and coral reefs that we'll talk about of the Caribbean have also built
into the Florida Keys region in Florida and built this very wide continental shelf.
But let's contrast that with the west coast of the US. On the west coast, we see a continental
shelf that's very narrow, often just a few miles, a short distance offshore, abruptly
dropping into a steep continental slope region. And this is really reflecting the complexity
of tectonic activity along the west coast of North America, as committed to the east
coast of North America. And we could say the same about various other continents around
the world. So we have regions with narrow continental shelves and steep continental slopes
cut by very large and well developed submarine canyons along these tectonically active margins
of the continents. We'll explore that tectonic activity in a lecture coming up pretty soon.
Submarine canyons along the west coast include some really phenomenal features. One of the
best developed ones is the Monterey Canyon that comes out of Monterey Bay, south of San
Francisco, north of Santa Barbara in Los Angeles along the California coast. The Monterey Canyon
carves out a feature along the Monterey coastline, which is actually deeper, broader, and also
longer than the Grand Canyon of Colorado. All developed not again by lower sea level
and rivers carving out a river channel under sub aerial processes or out in the open landscape,
but completely submarine processes by flows of sediments carving out the seabed over eons
down in the deep water. The last major coastline of North America and our little tour that
we're doing here then would be the Gulf Coast. And the Gulf Coast is shaped by some even
more remarkable sort of physiographic features that we don't see on either the east coast
or the west coast. The continental shelf is built out very largely on the Gulf Coast by
the gigantic submarine fan and sediment delta of the Mississippi River and the related river
deposits that are coming out in that region. So coming out the Mississippi and the Ocifoli
and other rivers, vast volumes of sediment have been dumped into the ocean over millions
of years and built up a muddy, enormous continental shelf where the actual bedrock underpinnings
are many miles below the surface, actually 68 miles below the surface. But some of those
deposits, especially in the early geological era in the bottom of the Gulf region, were
actually areas where large accumulations of salt as sedimentary horizons were accumulated.
And that happened because of a shallow water basin in an earlier geological era where it
could actually dry out and form big salt pan deposits. Well, with the dumping of all
that sediment, all that mud on top of this salt, salt is actually a very strange geological
feature because it can flow. And what it's done is flowed and had landslides and all
sorts of kind of submarine movements of the landscape to form this pock marked and almost
a lunar looking texture of the continental slope off the Gulf Coast of North America.
Okay, well, so to sum up just some of these basic morphological features that we're next
going to really explore in detail the entire story of how they got that way, we have the
deep ocean basins and we have the continental margins. And in all of the deep ocean basins,
we find some common features like mid-ocean ridges, but we also find some unique features
like deep sea trenches and the formation of numerous sea mounds and atolls. On the continental
margins, on the continental margins we see wide shelves in some areas, narrow shelves
in others, wide slopes that are basically fairly smooth in some areas, and narrow deeply
incised canyon ridden slopes in other areas. So we want to ask the question, why? What
makes these different features around the planet? And the real way to answer that question
is to understand the fundamental underpinnings of how our planet works at all. So we'll make
a detour into plate tectonics to understand the ocean basins. But first, what I'd like
to do in the next lecture is now return to this question of how we know all this. How
do we go from a surface that is covered by water and unknowable in depth unless we find
a way to make a sounding to a planet where we've mapped in a great level of detail all
of these features of the ocean floor, as if they were drained and laid bare just like
the Rocky Mountains in the Sierra Nevada. So in the next lecture then, what we'll do
is we'll look at the mapping of the ocean floor from the era of rope soundings all the
way up through the era of satellite measurements and echosounder profiles and all of these
sorts of things. But the ultimate goal then is to weave that together with the mapping
and bring it into our understanding of plate tectonics and how the ocean basins got the
way they are today.
