The deep ocean, far away from the shoreline, is a pretty difficult place to study.
Access is limited.
You need boats, or you need measurements from satellites or airplanes.
In this lecture, we're going to explore the development of that scientific data collection
in the deep sea.
We've already taken a look at what mapping the sea floor entails, and we'll look at that
in a lot more detail, looking at sounding and mapping the depths.
We'll also spend some time on sampling the bottom, how to get samples of the rocks or
the organisms, the things that tell us a little bit about what actually the deep ocean environment
is all about.
We'll kind of close that out with looking at the water itself, the temperature, pressure,
and chemistry, the clarity of the water.
How do we understand a little bit about the physics and chemistry of the water column
between the seabed and the surface?
As we saw in the previous lecture, the depth and the shape of the seabed has been a tremendously
difficult thing to get to know.
Despite human interest and use in plying the seas for thousands of years, it wasn't really
until the 19th century that any sense of even major features or the general depth of the
ocean was known, and it wasn't until the 20th century until it was mapped in any kind of
level of detail.
Even today, the ocean floor, three quarters of the planet's solid surface, is less well
mapped than the surface of the moon or Venus or Mars because light and radar can't penetrate
the water.
We can't measure it with the same tools that we use for ordinary observations.
If you have a backyard telescope, you can take a look at the moon and you can see features
at a scale that are smaller than our best maps available for large parts of the ocean
today.
That's really remarkable because this is our own planet, and yet it's really true that
until the mid-20th century, the deep sea floor was literally terra incognita, and even here
in the 21st century, it's an unknown frontier in many ways.
By that time in the mid-20th century or so, by the 1950s, by the early 1960s, geologists
believed that the ocean was probably a catch basin, kind of the oldest rocks on Earth,
submerged versions of the continents, as I said before, slowly accumulating sediments
throughout geologic times so that a thick pile of sediments would have been a record
of the full, multi-billion-year history of the Earth.
Biologists believed for a long time in the 17th, 18th, 19th centuries that life couldn't
exist at all at great depths, and even in the 20th century, even into the late 20th
century, believed that life was, at best, very sparse in the deep ocean, limited by just
the small amount of nutrients available and slow and actually fairly dismal, in fact.
It turns out that both of these fundamental assumptions about how the deep ocean works
were quite false. It took new means to access the ocean floor to gain this understanding
that, in fact, it's a dynamic environment, both geologically and biologically, in fact,
among the most dynamic environments on the planet.
The first thing we want to take up, then, is the measurement of bathymetry. Bathymetry,
the measurement of the depth below sea level, it's sort of an inverse mirror of topography
on land. Bathy is just from a Greek root for depth, and Metri, of course, is the measurement
of something. So we can think of it as the ocean is sort of a bathtub, and the bathymetry
is the measure of the depth of that bathtub.
So let's explore the technologies involved in measuring bathymetry. We'll go back to
the early days in line-sounding, and we'll take up echo-sounding, and then modern methods
that we call things like multi-beam bathymetry mapping and satellite altimetry. I'll explain
all of those over the course of the next few minutes.
Well, line-sounding is the oldest and most obvious method, and by this I just mean literally
taking a rope, as long a rope as you have available, attaching the weight to the end
of the rope, lowering it over the side of a ship until you feel that it hits bottom.
This has been around clearly for millennia. According to an account by ancient Greek writer
Strabo, a person named Pasodonius of Rhodes, a naturalist of the ancient Greek world in
85 B.C., measured the depth of the Mediterranean near Crete at 1,000 fathoms, or 2,000 meters.
Now, no equal depth to that has been measured for over 1,900 years until the 19th century,
and I guess it's possible that Pasodonius had a rope that long, although it seems kind
of incredible, and I don't know if the story is actually true or not. The depth, certainly
in the Mediterranean near Crete, could have been a depth like that. That's close to the
actual value, but this is sort of one measurement that we've seen, and for many centuries after
that no similar measurement was ever made. I just used the word fathoms, you know, to
talk about the depth. What is a fathom? We've all heard about it. Well, nowadays a fathom
is standardized as a six-foot measure. It comes from an old English word that means
outstretched arms. Why is that? Well, a fathom was measured with a line by, as you reeled
in a rope, you stretched your arms out, pulled in one arm's length of rope, and kept doing
it, so it was not a very standard measure for millennia of just the length of the span
of one sailor's arms. Now, we use this word fathom nowadays to mean understand, you know,
I can't fathom that, for example, because knowing the depth of the ocean evokes, I
think, that mystery and discovery of something unknown, or maybe even unknowable. Fathomming
the true depth of the deep ocean was something that people with ropes and arms lengths really
fundamentally couldn't do. Rope can only get you so far. And it turns out there's a
couple of key reasons. For one thing, in deep water, it's difficult to actually feel the
bottom, even if you have a rope that long. If you lower a rope over the side of a vessel,
well, the weight of the rope itself, after a while, starts to exceed the weight of whatever
you've hung off the bottom of that rope. And so having it hit bottom is not something you'll
necessarily be able to tell a big difference, and it doesn't just simply go slack. Additionally,
the ocean has currents in it, so a rope you lower over the side might not actually land
directly beneath the ship. So in order to address this problem by the 1830s or so, something
called the U.S. Navy Exploring Expedition launched the first wire soundings, and that
means they used a wire line, a cable instead of a rope, wheeled it off of some kind of
a winch, attached a cannonball to the end of that wire, so that you get a really good
weight and send it down to the bottom rapidly. And as the line paid out off of the reel,
they would time literally the speed that that line paid out. It would slow down when it
hit the bottom, and so that's how they could tell that they had actually reached the bottom.
In addition, with those line soundings, they would actually put a little bit of, just paint
a little bit of grease or maybe some wax onto the bottom of the cannonball. Why would you
do that? Well, when you lowered it down, it hit bottom, it came back up just a little
bit of what was at the seabed, the mud or the rocks, or maybe if you were lucky, some
poor brittle star or other seafloor organism would be stuck to the bottom of that weight.
And that would confirm that you'd reached the bottom and therefore had made a measurement
as opposed to just stopping somewhere in the middle of the water, and also would give you
a tiny little sample of what was at the seafloor. And in fact, this was the first way in which
the deep ocean seafloor was sampled in any way, and naturalists started to know what
was at the bottom of the ocean. By 1854, using this wirewinch method in the
Naval Exploring Expedition, the Lieutenant Matthew Mori made the first map of the Atlantic
Ocean in terms of the depth of the water. And that 1854 map had a series of soundings
made all over the Atlantic, and it had some hints of what the depth of the ocean actually
was. The map really contained actually many, many erroneous soundings for exactly the reasons
that I just said. It's hard to find the depth, the currents carry the cable off in the wrong
direction a lot of times, and it's just difficult to make these soundings, so not many measurements
were made. If you take a look at this map, you can see in detail that there's sort of
a deep basin, and maybe even a little bit of a high spot in the middle of it, but can
you really find the Mid-Atlantic Ridge on the map? Certainly nothing like the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge was described by Mori or anyone else after this map was published, despite the
intense amount of effort that went into it. For the near shore environment, it did a good
job. On the continental shelf, certainly soundings were very good by that time. Off the slopes,
not so much. Well, the big change, the really first knockout step in mapping the ocean floor
was the Challenger Expedition that I've already mentioned before, mounted by the British Royal
Navy in the 1870s. And in the Challenger, they actually chose to use a hemp line, amazingly,
eventually superseded by piano wire, winched over the side so that a very light line, but with a
heavy weight attached to it. Instead of just a cannonball, they sort of had a big lead weight
weighing a ton or two that was designed for this. And they used mechanical winches that you can see
in old engravings from the period, from the Challenger report, actually. In order to lower
the line over the side and measure how much cable or rope was paid out, they also included a actual
device on the line, better than a little bit of grease, but a little plug, a little sampler that
would take a plug of whatever was at the seafloor. So if it hit soft bottom, it would take a short
plug sample of the mud. On the Challenger, they spent three and a half years at sea,
collecting all sorts of biological samples and everything else, but one of their main goals
was mapping the seafloor. And in all that three and a half year time, they sounded 361 locations
with this method. So clearly, that was pretty difficult. It was still many fewer than one
measurement per day. But they included, for the first time, a really deep measure, in fact,
a measure of nearly 5,000 fathoms, or 8,180 meters, in the Marianas Trench in the Pacific,
one of those deep sea trenches. And this is really the first recorded observation that there was such
a thing as a deep sea trench or places in the ocean that were much deeper than that sort of
4,000 meter average that we've seen already. Well, that was all well and good, but spot
measurements like that to cover the entire ocean really don't amount to very much. There's just
too much sea out there, too much seafloor for a few hundred measurements to do anything like
mapping it. So the big transformation of mapping of the seafloor was the invention
of the Echosounder in the 1920s. And this is a measure, of course, of acoustic measurement of
depth, as the name implies. Many of us have certainly used a simple Echosounder on recreational
boats and everything else. But in the 1920s, this was a huge innovation. And the Echosounder method
gave us a couple of really great advantages to mapping out the seafloor. The first is that it's
an almost instantaneous measurement. You make a ping, and the wave comes back from the bottom of
the ocean in a matter of seconds. So it can be done quickly, a lot of measurements can be made,
and it can be done, most importantly, while the ship is continuously sailing along, while the ship
is underway at full steam, as opposed to stopping, lowering a line, making a sounding, and so on.
So the Echosounder method produces a continuous profile of the sea bottom topography, or
bathymetry, as opposed to some kind of a spot measurement.
Just to remind us maybe of how an Echosounder works, it relies on one fundamental feature,
and that is that the speed of sound in water is virtually a constant number. If you send out a
ping of sound from the bottom of a ship, we've all heard that sound from all kinds of, you know,
underwater World War II submarine movies and things like that, and then you simply
wait for that to bounce off something, usually the sea bottom, it's also possible for it to be used
to find other things, and then return back to the ship and measure the delay time, the travel time.
And since it has to go down and back up, then half of that time is the depth of the water if
you multiply it by the velocity of sound in water. And that speed of sound in water is 1500
meters per second, plus or minus just a percent or two. It varies a little bit with the temperature
of the water and the density of the water, as we'll see later on, but it doesn't vary very much.
So if you can measure the time precisely, then you can measure the depth of the water. And in the
pre-digital era, the way the time was measured precisely was an operator would actually send out
a ping and have it repeat using a little dial that would change the repeat time, and what he would do
would be listen to the return time and match them up until the return came at exactly the same time
as the next pulse was being sent out and figure out exactly what that repeat interval of the pulses
was, and that would be a measure of the travel time in the water. Well, Echosounders really
revolutionized mapping of the seafloor. In 1925, the German research vessel, the Meteor, made the
first real use, profiled the seafloor, and detected the mid-Atlantic ridge for the first time, detected
that there was this rising mountain range in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean. The use of Echosounders
really took off in the Second World War, with the Allied war effort sending many, many vessels,
both merchant and military, back and forth between the US and the UK and Europe, but also in the
Pacific, where all of the military vessels traveled all around the Pacific, were equipped with
Echosounders, and detected the deep trenches, many undersea mountains, broad abyssal plains,
all of the really big-scale features of the seafloor were first detected at this time.
So the terrain of the seabed was finally coming into focus, and this was of great military use,
because, for example, they wanted to be able to find places where submarines could be hiding out
in submarine canyons and things, but also, of course, of great scientific use, and as soon as
the war effort was over, a number of scientists, many with experience at sea, during the war,
came back and really got to work mapping out the seabed from all the data that had been collected.
The thing that really revolutionized our understanding of the ocean floor and revolutionized
earth sciences through this mapping of the seafloor can be traced back directly, in many ways,
to two key people who were working at Columbia University's Lamont Geological Observatory
at that time in New York, and that is Bruce Heeson and Marie Tharp. Bruce Heeson was an
oceanographer, and Marie Tharp was a geologist who worked with him and a cartographer, and they
set out, using the research vessels of Lamont at that time, to make profiles across the Atlantic
Ocean first, and then eventually into the Pacific. At this time, actually, only men were allowed to
go to sea on these oceanographic expeditions, so Heeson would go to sea to measure the profile
using the echo sounders, and Tharp had to wait back in the offices at Columbia, but when the data
came back, she was able to then use those profiles, locate them, and map out the terrain, the topography
and the symmetry of the Atlantic Ocean floor. In this wonderful image of Marie in her drafting
studio, you can see the profiles of the seabed on the left-hand side, where we see the highs and
lows of the echo sounder, direct imaging of the timing of the sound waves below the seabed,
and then how she's turned that into individual profiles on the right,
and finally turned all of that into mapping of the seafloor in the beautifully drawn map
that you see in the center. Now, Heeson and Tharp had to take on a pretty difficult job,
because even with all of the data that they had to map out the seabed, the spacing between individual
tracks of these ships was, you know, on the scale of 50 or sometimes 100 miles. The Atlantic Ocean
is a vast area, and even with dozens of ship tracks, they didn't really have a lot to go on,
but they used it, and they interpolated it, and they created this first map of the ocean floor.
This is actually not exactly a map so much, but a physiographic representation, meaning a kind
of a perspective image of their mapping work, published in 1957. It really showed the shape
and contours of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and the Abyssal Plains and even the Continental
Shelves and Slopes for the first time. This map is, I can't understate its importance in terms of
revolutionizing our science of how the earth works, and it really was the oceans that made
the plate tectonic revolution happen, and we'll see how that works in the next lecture.
All of this mapping was wonderful, and it really created, you know, a set of seafloor
images that were tremendously useful and a tremendous advance over what had already existed
up to that time. But in order to get down to the level of detail where we can see even really
big features, if you imagine that 50-mile separation between two tracks on Heisen and Tharp's maps,
well, they had to miss whole mountain ranges, for example, in between a kind of a gap like that.
So new methods of mapping were developed first actually primarily by the military, and in fact
classified mapping operations in the 1960s were way ahead of what oceanographers had available
to them, and only became available in sort of a regular use by oceanographers after the end of
the Cold War in the early 1990s. But one method was basically taking the echo sounder and taking
it one step better, and that's something called multi-beam bathymetry developed by the Navy's
super-secret operation, again for part of their submarine warfare program in the oceans.
The concept of multi-beam bathymetry is very much like an echo sounder. The ship sends out a pulse
to the seafloor, but instead of just sending out a ping and waiting for a bounce back, it has a
series of acoustic pulsars that send out a very narrowly focused beam of sound energy,
and it sends out a whole series of them so they sort of travel out in certain directions below
the ship, directly below, but then off to the side in a kind of a fanning swath. And as it does that,
then it gets back an echo, but within each sort of pixel or each area that one pulse is sent out
to, and these could be 16, 64, more than 100 individual sort of channels that measure out
a swath of the seafloor. Well, using this multi-beam method, which we know now by actually a sort of
a brand-name sea beam, they could map out a swath of the seafloor in a lot more detail than was
ever possible before. The echoes were more focused, so the precision was higher, and it could map out
an area about the region that it would cover was about three times whatever the water depth was.
So if you were in four kilometers of water depth, you could measure as much as 10 or 12 kilometers
in width, with one ship track pass with the multi-beam bathymeter. And this is used very much
today to map out the seafloor. You can imagine a ship has to go, and in order to get complete
coverage of the seafloor, you have to basically essentially mow the lawn back and forth in a
series of rows that overlap each other so that you get a complete mapping of the seafloor,
where you don't get a complete mapping, as in this image, then you see kind of little bits and
pieces of the symmetry with gaps between them, as if some drunken suburban dad has mowed the
lawn, but not quite made his rows very well. Well, this is an ultra-high-resolution method
to map the seafloor out. It's really the best method we have today, but it's very labor-intensive.
You need a ship. Ships are expensive. They have a lot of crew. You spend tens of thousands of
dollars a day to keep a ship at sea. As it maps out the seafloor like this, we get a fantastic
image, but it turns out only about 10 percent of the ocean floor has been mapped even today by
these sea-beam methods, maybe a little bit more. To map the entire ocean using sea-beam with the
available ships we have today would take something like a century, literally. It would certainly
be doable, but it would take a very long time, and it's not even an effort that's really underway
at this scale because of that time and cost. However, the images that it can generate are
phenomenal. If you take the befimetry that's measured offshore, especially in shallow water
near the coasts, and then you put it together with the surface topography, what we call digital
elevation models of the landscape, then you can build a seamless image of what the earth's surface
looks like. Here's an image that's rendered from a perspective view so we can really see all the
features very well of a very familiar place that may not look familiar to you at first glance,
but the onshore region that you can see in the upper part of that image is actually
the Los Angeles Basin, the city of Los Angeles, Santa Monica off to the left, and then offshore you
see all of the features of the seabed, just as interesting perhaps as the landscape that we see
onshore. We can take a look at this image and see big submarine canyons coming off this continental
shelf and spilling down the continental slope. You see a deep sea fan at the base of one of those
major submarine canyons just to the north of Palos Verdes there where all the sediments have been
shed and spilled out on the seafloor. We can even see landslide deposits where parts of the
continental shelf and slope have failed and given way and slid down and landed as big blocky chunks
onto the seabed. So this is the kind of mapping that gives us the really level of detail that we
would like to have for the entire ocean, but of course we don't. Well one way that we can actually
get at the whole ocean at once is through satellite measurements, and so the 1980s brought the dawn
of something called satellite altimetry. Once again, actually a military mission at first that
was later declassified, but a satellite called Geosat and then its successors like Topax Poseidon
and others that have come since then were sent into space and they didn't even have the goal of
mapping out the seafloor. They actually had the goal of measuring the surface height of the ocean
very precisely, and that's why it's called satellite altimetry. So they use a radar signal,
the satellite passes over the world and passes over the ocean and measures the distance from the
satellite to the sea surface to the top of the water, and the satellite orbits are known very
precisely, and the radar signal is timed very accurately, and these could actually achieve,
even in the 1980s, an accuracy of three centimeters, you know just an inch or so, a variation in the
elevation of the surface above or below sea level, or above or below what we think of as sea level.
So as waves go up and down, as the tides go up and down, mapping of the surface elevations of the
ocean was accomplished by these satellites. The purpose of the satellites was actually physical
oceanography, as we'll see later on. It was to map ocean currents and differences in sea surface
elevation that are very subtle, just differences of a meter or two spread out over a hundred miles or
more that tell us where the edges of things like the Gulf Stream are and stuff like that,
as well as mapping of the tides in a lot of detail. But there was a sort of unexpected side benefit,
and that benefit was to generate our modern maps of the ocean floor in a level of detail that was
unprecedented before that. So how do you use the mapping of the surface of the water, which is
subject to waves and ripples and tides and everything else, to map out the elevation of the sea floor
itself? Well, it's a really interesting story, and maybe one that would be unexpected.
The sea level on the surface of the earth would be a perfect, you know, sort of sphere if the
earth was a perfect sphere with no topography below it. But the sea level on earth is actually
a function of the gravity field. Now the earth has gravity, right? We think of, it's a big massive
ball, and so therefore it has gravity that reaches out and holds the water and the atmosphere, for
that matter, down on the planet. But it turns out that the gravity field is not as regular as you
would think, or it's not as uniform as you would think. Anywhere where there's a little extra mass
or a deficit of mass that's part of the planet produces a little extra plus up or subtraction
from the actual strength of the force of gravity in a local area. So for example, if you have a flat
sea floor, but there's a big mountain, a sea mount there, or an island that's maybe, you know, 20
kilometers wide and 2,000 meters high, all that rock in that sea mount is denser than the water
around it. What that does is it creates a little local addition to gravity. It's extra mass, and so
the water above it feels a stronger force of gravity than the water in other places. The effect of
this is it actually makes the sea surface irregular in shape. It creates a broad smooth dome in the
sea surface. It might be as much as two meters high for that 2,000 meter high sea mount. A ship
will never notice it because it's, again, very broad, distributed over a wide area, but the satellite
measures those differences in the sea surface. So if you can take the satellite altimeter
measurements and you can subtract out the sort of short-term variations from the tides and the
waves and all those sorts of things, then what's left behind is sort of a residual measurement of
the undulations of sea level. And two very clever oceanographers, Smith and Sandwell in 1997,
published the first map of the world's ocean based on these gravity anomalies
measured by these radar-based satellite altimetry measurements. It gives us a spatial resolution
that was unprecedented for the ocean at the time, still low compared to the multi-beam
bathymetry, but just tremendous. In this mapping of the global topographic relief or the global
bathymetry in the ocean and topography on land, it's been refined several times since the 1990s
with better satellite measurements. They mapped out whole undersea features of just almost
unimaginable scale that were unknown before that. For example, a 1600 kilometer long range of
mountains in the South Pacific, completely unknown in any of the previous mapping that had existed,
but showed up in the first satellite altimetry-based maps of the seafloor.
Whole areas of the ocean were now mapped in a lot more detail. Key features of the ocean floor,
like the mid-ocean ridges, came into much greater focus than they had in those older
ecosounder-based maps. The deep sea trenches were mapped out in a lot of detail, and features of
the abyssal plains, in particular the existence of many thousands of new seamounts and the existence
of what are called fracture zones in the seafloor, which can extend thousands of kilometers across
the open ocean and hadn't really been appreciated before, were mapped by this method. We're only
talking about the 1990s and the first decade of the 21st century before this level of mapping
had even been achieved. This is brand new stuff, and it's our own planet, still mapped at less
detail than Mars and Venus. And in fact, the seafloor remains remarkably poorly mapped.
In 2005, the USS San Francisco, part of the nuclear navy, a nuclear submarine,
was cruising near Guam in the South Pacific at 35 knots underneath the water, and they managed to
crash into an uncharted seamount, doing a lot of damage to the vessel. Fortunately, only one
sailor was killed, a number were injured, a billion dollars in damage was done to this vessel,
and there was an inquiry into this, and it was a seamount that rose 2,000 meters above the
surrounding seafloor, but it wasn't on their chart, the navy's best chart, which was created in 1989.
A seamount of this scale is still not mappable from either the satellite altimetry measurements
or any other method that was used to map the open ocean floor. If it was all mapped with
multi-beam bathymetry at the kind of scale we've been talking about, then perhaps that would happen.
Again, that 100 years or so to map that out, well, you could speed that up by equipping a lot of ships
with sea beam, and that would probably cost about one billion dollars, maybe equivalent to the cost
of just repairing that one vessel that crashed into a seamount, something to think about.
Well, there's an excellent book on how the oceans have been explored, and I just wanted to share it
with you, because if you want to read more about that whole process from the echo sounders to the
line sounding to the satellite altimetry, and actually many, many other features I'm going to
talk about in this class, I really recommend this book Mapping the Deep by Robert Kunzig.
It was published in the late 1990s, but it's largely not out of date today, just really
fascinating information. I just wanted to take a pause there to mention that reading material.
Okay, well, I'd like to finish discussing this material in this lecture with sampling
of the seafloor. So we've talked about sounding the depths, but what about that material you're
getting on the bottom? From the days of getting a little bit of mud stuck to the bottom of a weight,
geological and biological sampling of the seabed has certainly come a long way,
and it includes things that really got started with the Challenger Expedition,
like dredging the seafloor. So attached to their line, instead of just a weight, they could put a
sort of a basket and tow it along the seabed for a little while and see what they got back, drag up
some rocks, some unfortunate organisms that got caught in there, and come up with a little bit
of a sample of what's at the bottom of the ocean. A little bit more sophisticated way to actually
sample in a particular spot, so you're not just sort of getting a grab bag of material in a dredge,
is to use either something called a box core or a piston core, ways of taking an actual core
sample of the seafloor, just like the way you would take a plug out of an apple or a core
sample out of a tree, let's say for studies that foresters might do. The piston core is a
simple device, but it's the workhorse of much of our understanding of, for example, the history
of ocean currents and ocean climate by looking at the sediments that have been laid down over time.
It's nothing more than a long tube with a heavy weight at the top that's lowered over the side
of a ship and in fact dropped in almost freefall from a winch, and as it plunges into the seafloor,
a little trigger releases and it actually has a hydraulic piston that drives it down into the
seabed with a lot of force very quickly, and using this method you can take a core sample plug of
anywhere from 9 meters, 30 feet or so, up to actually 30 or more meters, more than 100 feet long
of the mud at the bottom of the ocean, and then just like when you put your finger over a straw
and lift some of the milkshake out, when they close the top and lift it up, it will keep the
core inside the core long enough to winch it back up to the ship, lay it out on the deck,
perhaps split it open and then study all the individual sedimentary layers in that core sample.
Well, the ultimate in sampling goes beneath the seafloor by drilling deep holes to take
core samples beyond what a piston core can do, and everybody's seen images of and knows about
oceanic oil drilling, oil and gas drilling, but did you know that ocean drilling actually
began as a scientific project, and in fact scientific ocean drilling continues today?
Ocean drilling began with something called project mohole back in 1960, an attempt to drill into
the earth's mantle at sea, and they had to invent the method of keeping a ship on one station
long enough to drill a hole even out in the middle of the ocean. They actually failed to drill to
their objective but still learned a great deal more about the seafloor than it never been known
before, and we'll talk about that in the next lecture. Following that project mohole, the deep
sea drilling project and its follow-ons up to what's currently called the integrated ocean
drilling program have now sampled thousands of sites all over the world's oceans, and this ship,
the Joides Resolution, and its Japanese counterpart called Chikyu, are mainstays of
scientific ocean drilling and in fact mainstays of marine geology. In fact, my own research work
is really focused heavily on using these vessels and using ocean drilling to access
undersea fault zones to investigate how tsunamis and the earthquakes that spawn them occur in
the deep sea setting, and it turns out as we'll see in the next lecture, virtually all of the
great earthquakes on earth happened under the ocean, not under the land. I've actually spent
close to one and a half years of my life, cumulatively, not all at once, fortunately,
at sea on this vessel, several other vessels pursuing this kind of work of sampling the sea bottom.
Well, in this lecture, we've seen the progression from the most basic measurements to the most
advanced global scale using satellites and high-tech technology, and certainly modern ocean
science is a high-tech operation, but remote sensing and computer simulations and computer
calculations can't replace expeditions. We still need to go to sea to get the data and to get the
samples, and that's really the nature of modern oceanography today.
