In recent lectures, we've explored the ocean basins, we've probed their defining features,
and we've talked about the habitat that that creates for life on the abyssal plains as well
as up on the mid-ocean ridges.
So this begs the question now, well why does the ocean floor have this particular form?
What is it that's made it this way?
Is it just a matter of sort of the random chance of billions of years of geological
processes leaving us with a legacy of an ocean that looks like this, or is it a reflection
of some very specific underlying process?
Well it's no surprise that in fact it's the latter.
It's an underlying process that creates ocean basins in a very specific way, and it's the
fundamental theory of plate tectonics that provides the answers to understand why the
Atlantic Ocean, the Pacific, the Indian, the Arctic are shaped the way that they are.
Let's roll back in time to, oh the late 1950s or the early 1960s, and for all of the history
of the science of geology up to that point, it was basically a land-based science.
Geologists studied the continents, now they recognized the marine origin of many sedimentary
rocks.
It had been recognized actually for centuries, however the continents were generally regarded
as something fixed in place, and how marine rocks managed to get up onto land was a conundrum
that was explained by mostly up and down motions of the Earth's crust, and the deformation
associated with that just sort of squeezing things around the edges, and perhaps the Earth
had somehow shrunk at some time in the past, and so folds and pile-ups of marine rocks
had gotten onto land through that kind of process, but all of it driven by gravity.
The ocean basins, as I've mentioned before, were conceived as being like submerged versions
of the continents, so the same sorts of granitic rocks that the continents are made of, but
accumulating fixed sediments over Earth's long history.
Well all of this has proved to be wrong.
The story of how geology got its modern form is intertwined with the discovery of the seafloor.
In fact, if we were still dependent on just continental geology, it's not clear that we
would have ever arrived at a real theory of plate tectonics.
It was figuring out what was in the oceans that was the key to unraveling the whole history
of the Earth.
So let me tell you a little bit about that story.
Well, going way back in history, even to the 1500s, Leonardo da Vinci was one of the first
to at least write down an account that noted that there seemed to be something coincidentally
odd about how across the Atlantic Ocean you could match up the boundaries of North America
and Africa and South America and put them together as if you could close up the Atlantic
Ocean and all the continents fit together.
Francis Bacon noted this.
Edward Seuss, a Swiss geologist of the 1800s, all made comments on the fact that the Atlantic
Ocean looked like it was a puzzle that you could close up and fit all the pieces back
together into one continent.
Well, this was generally not really taken as more than a curiosity for a long time because
there was no explanation of really how the continents might move.
And in fact, even into the 1900s, the early 1900s, 1915 book by a German meteorologist
actually who was sort of a moonlighting as a geologist, perhaps Alfred Wegener, he proposed
the first real theory of continental drift.
And what he did was he looked at that fit of the continents that had been noted for so
long, so many hundreds of years, but he bolstered it by gathering together a lot of different
geological evidence, including matching zones of fossils that matched up from South America
into Africa, the same sorts of organisms that looked like before a certain era that turns
out to be about 150 million years ago.
They could freely range across the continents, but then later their evolution diverged from
each other, suggesting that they were separated.
Also belts of rocks that had geological similarities, mountain chains look like they were interrupted
in North America and continued into the British Isles in Northern Europe.
Even deposits from glaciers in places that no longer have glaciers and in fact are too
close to the tropics to even possibly have glaciers showing up.
And so Wegener hypothesized that all this together really required, just like if you
tore a sheet of newspaper apart but found that the print fit back together, required
that all those continents were once assembled as one.
And he called this one supercontinent, Pangaea, or all land, Pangaea, and it was surrounded
by one single large ocean, which he referred to as panthelossa after the Greek word for
ocean or for the sea.
So panthelossa would be the sea that's all the way around us.
And this was really the first full sort of explanation or proposition of continental drift
as a major portion of Earth history.
Well Wegener had this idea, but he was pretty vague on the mechanism by which the continents
could move around on the planet.
He thought that they were driven somehow by centrifugal force of the Earth's rotation
spinning the continents towards the equator, which has certainly since then proved to be
not accurate.
And he also was sort of vague on the idea that perhaps the continents plowed their way through
the seafloor somehow.
And the geological and in fact geophysical communities, the scientific community as a
whole really couldn't imagine that this could happen.
How could these blocks of crust of the continent plow their way through and break up the rocks
that were known to be below the seabed by this time?
So it was debated, but ultimately this idea of continental drift was essentially rejected
by the scientific community in Europe and in North America.
And people who were adherents of continental drift were essentially ridiculed or self-censored
over the intervening decades between then and about the 1960s.
But meanwhile things were changing.
And for example, the map that we've already seen from 1957 by Heisen and Tharp of the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge was published.
And this got people really thinking and saying, hmm, there's something really odd going on
because the Atlantic Ocean has this very symmetrical pattern about it with the central ridge and
the abyssal plains to either side.
And is that not somehow also a coincidence along with the fit of the continents along
the way?
Well even at that time, this fit was still seen as essentially a curiosity and something
hard to understand.
Continental geology held sway and continued to hold sway.
And so what we call the fixist notion or the idea that continental motions were mostly
up and down and not horizontal continued to be the kind of dominant paradigm through
the 1950s even.
But in 1960, a Princeton geologist named Harry Hess, who had been a Navy commander during
the war and had actually done a great deal of surveying with Echosounder profiling and
also other instruments in the Pacific Ocean, published a new idea.
And he basically said, you know, maybe we need to take a second look at this, at Wagner's
crazy continental drift idea because the pattern of the Atlantic Ocean is just a little too
coincidental to not mean something.
And he published a paper that he described as an essay in geopoetry.
And he was acknowledging that the evidence for a lot of what he was proposing was not
really there, but maybe this was a new hypothesis that could be tested.
And what Harry Hess proposed was that new sea floor was continuously being formed by
volcanic processes at the mid-Atlantic Ridge and perhaps at other ridges around the world
and then spread outward equally in both directions from a central ridge or that central valley
that we'll see at the top of the ridge.
He further proposed that perhaps somehow convection currents in the Earth's deep interior are
responsible for this process.
And so that somehow the mantle of the Earth was not solid as had long been thought, but
that some portion of it was sort of like a very thick and viscous fluid.
And so he proposed that basically some kind of convection currents in the Earth's interior,
and he was drawing on the work of others, I don't mean to say that he invented this
himself, were pulling the ridges apart such that new magma, new lava could be erupted
at the surface at the ridges.
Well, let's think about Hess's theory and the hypothesis of sea floor spreading in 1960
and say, what are some of the testable predictions of that new mode, this idea of sea floor spreading?
Well, one of the first was just simply to make that observation and certainly the profiling
that Heisen and Tharp had done as well as many others showed that there was this incredible
level of detailed symmetry about the mid-ocean ridge, the high ridge axis, then the deeper
water abyssal plains to both the west and the east of it across the Atlantic Ocean, eventually
going up to the continental rises and slopes.
So this simple mapping of the sea floor terrain actually started, in a sense, this scientific
revolution.
But the evidence for it goes beyond that.
And one of the key observations was the development of a new instrument called a magnetometer
that could be towed behind a ship, towed through the water, and it was used by marine geophysicists
to measure the strength of the Earth's magnetic field.
They were actually interested in variations in the strength of the magnetic field on the planet,
which isn't uniform everywhere.
But quite surprisingly, the operators of these magnetometers, as they drove across the Pacific
or across the Atlantic ridge, noticed that the strength of the magnetic field that they
measured went up and went down again, and went up and went down again in this sort of
fairly regularly undulating pattern.
And, in fact, as they went across the mid-Atlantic ridge or the East Pacific rise, they even
found that the patterns of ups and downs was sort of symmetrical, just like the topography
of the sea floor was, on either side of the ridge.
Well, as these ships crisscrossed the Atlantic and ran profiles with magnetometers over the
and over again, these recurring patterns started to appear.
Again, much like the bathymetry, they mapped out similar patterns in the magnetic stripes,
in the magnetic field that defined stripes, actually, of alternating high and low magnetization,
or magnetic field strength, in the water.
What did it mean?
Well, in 1963, another seminal paper in the plate tectonic revolution was by Vine and
Matthews, and Vine and Matthews proposed that the variations were the smoking gun that
confirmed Harry Hess's hypothesis of sea floor spreading.
And their idea went something like this.
We know that the Earth has a magnetic field, right, compasses point towards the north and south
poles of the magnetic field.
And that's because the Earth's magnetic field, at least to a sort of first approximation,
is like a bar magnet exists at the center of the Earth.
Now, it turns out the actual source of the magnetic field is the swirling iron fluid of the Earth's core.
But leaving that aside for the moment, let's just say that the magnetic field has a strength that is polarized.
It's a dipole field, we call it, and it has a north pole and a south pole.
And so, when the Earth's magnetic field is present, we measure its direction with a compass,
but we can also measure its strength with what's called a magnetometer, a magnetic field strength measurement.
Now, what Vine and Matthews proposed was, first of all, well, actually, what Vine and Matthews already knew
was that when rocks were formed from lava, when a lava was erupted and the lava cooled on the surface of the Earth,
the rock has a certain number of particles in it, usually made of magnetite, which is a mineral that is magnetic in itself,
and that's susceptible to the magnetic field, and that those little grains of magnetite that form part of the matrix of this rock,
the crystals of magnetite, would align themselves with the magnetic field on the day or weeks that that rock was cooling.
And when they're aligned with the magnetic field, then, they actually add a little bit of extra magnetic field strength to that field.
So, the field you measure when you're over a volcanic region of rocks, let's say in the ocean with your magnetometer,
is the Earth's magnetic field, plus a little more from the rocks that have locked in the signal of that magnetic field today.
What Vine and Matthews recognized and was beginning to be understood by people studying the magnetic field was that,
perhaps that Earth dipole field isn't really like a bar magnet, but because of the swirling motion of the Earth's core,
it actually reverses its field strength at different times in Earth history.
They didn't really understand a mechanism for this, but just recognized the observation.
Because if the Earth's magnetic field reversed directions, then the North Pole would become the South Pole,
and the South Pole would become the North Pole.
Now, that doesn't mean that the actual poles of the Earth change,
it just means that the magnetic reference directions change relative to the spinning of the Earth.
Well, if that's true, then the magnetic field that is locked into the rocks would get an alternating pattern,
because when the Earth's magnetic field is the same as it is today,
and the rocks have that locked in what we call normal polarity, only normal because it's the way we think of it now,
then the magnetic field strength measured by a magnetometer would be a little bit high.
But if the rocks had been formed at a time when the magnetic field was reversed the other direction,
then instead of adding to the present-day field, they subtract from the present-day field.
And so what that would produce is an area of relatively low magnetic field strength
because of the competing magnetic forces.
So, Vine and Matthews proposed that those strange stripes of high and low magnetization of the sea floor
were actually the signature of continuous formation of the ocean floor crust
in times of both normal and reversed polarity of the seabed.
We can kind of visualize this in a way by looking at an animation of the sea floor spreading over several million years,
so lava is erupting along the mid-ocean ridge, let's say the mid-Atlantic ridge,
and then the dark and light regions in the diagram or in the animation
suggest times of reversed polarity or normal polarity there at magnetic field.
And then a ship traveling across this perpendicular to the ridge would just see these sort of tape recorder stripes
of what's happening or what happened at the time that the lava was erupted.
And what was recognized was that because the periods of normal and reversed polarity are not constant or regular in time
but oscillate at different paces over geological time,
that it actually creates something like a barcode for the ocean floor,
a series of stripes of different thickness and width and in certain patterns that are recognizable.
So anywhere you go in the world's ocean, you can see the sort of pattern of normal and reversed polarity,
the reversals of the Earth's magnetic field that generate that particular bit of the sea floor.
Well, this was a really particularly powerful bit of information.
And it didn't come about sort of in isolation.
During the same time frame, from the 1940s to the early 1960s,
a couple of other things were becoming very clear to the scientific community.
One really key factor was the development of radiometric dating,
what we think of as using isotopes of radioactive elements like radiocarbon, for example,
to date things.
We've all heard about radiocarbon dating for archaeological or paleontological samples
to tell us how old certain artifacts are.
But you can also do radiometric dating for much older features in the rock,
things that are millions and even tens or hundreds of millions or billions of years old.
All radiometric dating basically depends on just a very simple principle.
And that is that most rocks, in fact, all rocks contain small amounts of naturally radioactive elements.
Okay.
Well, these radioactive elements have different isotopes within them.
Remember, those are things that are the same element, but have different numbers of neutrons in their nucleus.
And some isotopes are unstable, and some isotopes are stable.
Well, the unstable ones decay to stable ones at a fixed rate,
which we call the half-life of that element, right, or of that isotope.
So if you take a sample and you can actually measure,
and the development of mass spectrometers is the way this measurement was accomplished,
if you can actually measure the ratio of the original unstable isotope to the,
what we call the daughter isotope, the one that it is decayed down to,
then you can determine how many half-lives have gone by,
or what fraction of a half-life has gone by,
and that determines the age of the rock.
This is the basis of all of our dating of geological samples,
from meteorites to sediments in the seafloor to very young artifacts using things like radiocarbon.
Well, they were dredging up rocks from the seafloor through the 1940s and 50s,
and whenever volcanic rocks were found on the seafloor,
the kind of basaltic lava rocks were found, and they were dated,
and they were found to be surprisingly young, everywhere, less than about 200 million years old.
200 million years sounds like a long time, but to a geologist, it's really not very much.
That's only 4% of the age of the Earth, which is well over 4.5 billion years.
So if the entire ocean floor is 200 million years older, younger,
and the continents are actually much older, then there's something wrong with the idea
that the ocean floor is the oldest and deepest and coldest part of the Earth,
which is what was thought up till this point.
This was actually confirmed post-dredging by the early stages of the Deep Sea Drilling Program
that I described in an earlier lecture.
Drilling in the Atlantic found that the seafloor everywhere they went,
if you got below the sediments, and sometimes that meant drilling hundreds of meters down,
was made of basaltic lava, a particular kind of volcanic lava rock,
and that the ages were all young, as I said, less than 200 million years,
and the key thing was that the ages progressively got older as you went away from the mid-ocean ridges.
So rocks close to the ridge would only be a million years old, or two or three million years old,
and then get much older away from the ridges.
Well, let's take a look actually at what the formation of the ocean floor then actually looks like.
I've got a little bit of video for you that wasn't filmed at the Mid-Atlantic Ridge or anywhere deep in the ocean,
but filmed actually by some incredibly brave, perhaps foolhardy, divers right off the coast of Kilauea in Hawaii,
where they're looking at the eruption of basaltic lava on the seafloor.
And you can see the lava flowing in, the surface flash freezes or flash cools so that you see a sort of rocky exterior surface,
but the lava kind of balloons inside and then bursts out like bursts of toothpaste coming out of that initial block of rock.
We call this formation pillow basalt because of these bulbous shapes that are very characteristic
that look like pillows on the seafloor, of course, made out of lava rock.
The pillow basalts are actually basically something like 50% of all the rocks on the surface of the earth.
The entire deep sea floor is made out of pillow basalt that forms in exactly the kinds of same way as you see in the videotape here.
And in fact, all of the volcanic sea mounts of the ocean as well are formed basically of the formation of pillow basalts.
So we have a volcanic sea floor that's made of basaltic lava specifically,
which is a special kind of lava rock that, well, maybe it's not special since it's 50% of the surface of the earth.
It's about the most common bedrock type on the whole planet,
but it's special in the sense that it is what we call a mafic rock that has erupted by coming out of magma that came directly from the earth's mantle.
And we have lava rock everywhere, we have dated samples, and then we have the magnetic stripes,
and so the magnetic stripes could kind of be calibrated by the radiometric dating of individual samples,
and in that way build up a map of not just the age of rocks at a particular place where they happen to be sampled,
but actually the entire ocean floor all over the planet very quickly mapped out once the magnetic information and the radiometric dating were combined.
And so the age of the ocean floor proved all over the world to be young, as was initially surmised, less than 200 million years.
In fact, about 180 to 190 million years is the oldest ocean floor anywhere on the planet.
Apparently anything older than that is gone somehow from the planet.
Additionally, we see that the age of the ocean floor is in fact symmetrical about the mid-ocean ridges.
You can see the Mid-Atlantic Ridge as very young rocks, and they get older and older,
and then the oldest rocks in the Atlantic Ocean are off the west coast of Africa or the east coast of North America.
Similarly, in the Pacific Ocean, we see the East Pacific rise, which is also a mid-ocean ridge,
where apparently new seafloor has been continuously created right along the ridge.
Notice the difference in the thickness of the stripes of different colors in the map of the age of the ocean floor.
If you think about it, that's a direct measure of how rapidly the ocean floor has been spreading, right?
Narrow stripes that give a certain age and a certain relatively short distance away from the ridge means that it's not spreading very quickly.
That's the Atlantic Ocean.
The East Pacific rise has wide stripes to get to the same age at a much greater distance away from the ridge on either side.
So that suggests the East Pacific rise is spreading much more quickly than the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, and that's true.
Now, the rate of the ocean floor spreading can actually be calculated, of course, from the widths of these stripes on the ocean floor,
and it gives us a sense for how rapidly, in fact, tectonic plates really move, and that rate is pretty slow.
It's measured at the scale of sort of a few centimeters to a maximum on the planet of about 20 centimeters per year of motion or of creation of new crust.
Well, 20 centimeters per year is not a lot. 8 or 10 centimeters per year is about how fast your fingernails grow.
If you let them go for an entire year, you'd have trouble typing and eating,
but you'd have about one year's worth of plate tectonic motion at the ends of your fingers to show for it.
Okay, well, let's look a little bit about how this process can go on then.
If the Atlantic really was closed up, and 180 to 190 million years ago, it didn't exist.
There was a seamless continent that included North America, most of Europe, Africa, and South America.
Then what's the process that caused that to develop an ocean in between?
We call that process continental rifting.
Now, continents are made of different kinds of rocks than the dense basaltic lavas of the seafloor.
They're actually made of the least dense of the common rock types, and they accumulated as the Earth's interior convection proceeded.
The continents are 40 to 80 kilometers in thickness, and they are basically the material that was least dense
and therefore rose to the surface of the Earth, especially in the early period several billion years ago when the Earth was just getting formed.
It was kind of a roiling mass of more molten material than it is today.
We can think of the continents almost as, like, if you're boiling a pot of soup,
and there's a scum that floats to the top and doesn't boil back down, but stays on the surface.
Continents aren't exactly scum, but they are because they're lower density, they've tended to remain and accumulate on the surface of the Earth.
Well, the process of continental rifting, then, is that this thick continental mass is sitting there,
and it actually sort of traps the heat of the interior of the Earth below it,
and that heat of the magma beneath the crust starts to build up.
The internal parts of the Earth, the mantle of the Earth, as it warms up beneath this insulating continent, will expand.
It becomes less dense, just like the hot air in a balloon expands the balloon,
and what it does is it domes the continent up, like some kind of great blister beneath the continent.
And as that doming happens, the continent will start to crack, and the cracks in the cracks, magma wells up, lava starts to pour out,
initial volcanic eruptions start to take place.
The cracks are faults, and this is the beginning stage of continental rifting and volcanic activity.
As it continues, it breaks along a line that forms a central rift valley,
and this is similar today to the East African rift zone, or actually even the Rio Grande rift zone in New Mexico and Southern Colorado.
The volcanism becomes strong, and it adds whole areas of low-lying land because of the breaking of the continent.
You can see the sort of keystone blocks of continental crust that have formed as the falting continues,
sliding against one another like books sliding on the shelf as the volcanic material fills in the center.
Well, if you carry this process far enough after a couple of million years,
then eventually the continent has broken completely apart, and there's no more continental crust beneath the center at all anymore.
And in fact, you're just forming a crust that's exclusively of this basaltic composition.
That's the dense oceanic crust. It's thinner than continental crust, and it's heavier,
so it sort of rides lower in the Earth's somewhat fluid upper mantle.
And that true oceanic crust forms, and the continent completely separates.
So this makeup is an entirely different geology than the continent, and it is what makes the ocean floor.
So this would be the growing initial Atlantic Ocean.
And then once that process starts, the welling up just can continue, and the continents move apart,
and the volcanism continues just along the center of the ridge.
Everything else is gradually cooling as it moves away, and the magnetism, the lava,
is concentrated in just a few kilometers width zone right along the center of that ridge,
and that continues to this day in the Mid-Atlantic Ridge where the East Pacific rise.
And in fact, we can see examples of continental rifting today.
If you go to the Red Sea region between Africa and the Arabian Peninsula,
you can see the open growing initial stages of an oceanic basin,
much like probably the initial stages of the Atlantic,
as well as the actual continental portion.
When you look on land in the perspective view, you see the sort of the symmetrical pattern
of faults and fault blocks of rock facing each other as the continent is torn apart
at the north end of the Red Sea there.
Now this one probably won't continue to form a whole ocean basin,
as Arabia is jamming into Eurasia and probably won't open an entire continental region,
but we don't know until a few million years go by, so stay tuned for that one.
Okay, well let's zoom in our attention for the last part of this lecture,
then just on what's going on right at the Mid-Ocean Ridge.
And this is one of the most remarkable environments, as we saw in the last lecture, on the entire planet.
The heat at the Mid-Ocean Ridge that's coming from this upwelling of magma
and ability of lava to pour out and form the most voluminous volcanoes on the planet,
making the pillow basalts that make up the whole sea floor,
drives a chemical engine,
and that chemical engine involves moving seawater into and through the rocks
and scavenging chemicals out of the rocks
and driving these phenomenal hydrothermal vent systems
that are a ubiquitous feature, as far as we know now, of the Mid-Ocean ridges.
These vent systems are called the black smokers,
and they have that name for a very good reason,
because they look exactly like a kind of industrial-age chimney
pouring out black smoke into the seawater at the bottom of the ocean.
Now fortunately it's not actually smoke, although you certainly wouldn't want to inhale it or even go anywhere near it.
Water is coming out of the rock that's superheated to a temperature of 300 to 450 or so degrees Celsius.
It's still water because at the intense pressure at the bottom of the ocean
it doesn't turn into steam or gas immediately.
But that water is black, not because of some kind of smoke or carbon particles,
but because it carries little pieces and fragments of all sorts of sulfides,
metal deposits essentially, that it's picked up along the way
as the water is heated up and travels through the subsurface to pour out at the surface.
These black smokers have been driven by an amazing convection process
where the heat from the Mid-Ocean ridge itself actually heats the water that's in the pore space in the rock
and forces it out through the surface because it's hot and so it becomes buoyant.
And that creates a suction force that actually brings cold seawater in on either side of the ridge a few kilometers away.
Cold seawater is being sucked into the oceanic crust, the new young oceanic crust.
It's traveling through the rock, percolating through cracks, dissolving and picking up all these minerals
and then pouring out of the hydrothermal vents laden with all those minerals that make it look like the black smoke.
This is the energy that drives the deep-sea vent communities that we saw in the end of the previous lecture
and drives the chemosynthesis we'll explore later on when we look at the energy balance of life on the planet.
It's also actually the source ultimately of many of our deposits of copper and iron and nickel and even gold,
what we call epithermal hydrothermal deposits in mining are actually ancient seafloor mid-ocean ridge black smoker systems
because these black smokers deposit all of that metal material as it's exuded into the water and rapidly cools off and depressurizes.
So building up those phenomenal chimneys is just a process of literally the formation of a mineral deposit.
Now no one's mining the present-day black smokers, at least not yet, but ancient black smokers that have become part of land geology
are mined all the time, they're the source of many of our metals.
Well, to sum up then, multiple strands of deep-ocean mapping and discovery had to all come together,
facilitated by new technologies in the mid-20th century and they converged and led to the concept of seafloor spreading
as the source of all the great ocean basins.
Ironically, actually, Heisen and Tharp, the people who made those maps that were so evocative of the mid-Atlantic ridge,
were adherents of a completely different theory until quite late in the game
and they initially supported the idea that the Earth was simply expanding as opposed to convecting in plate tectonics.
Well, this wasn't really such a strange idea because if the sea was spreading, that was clear,
but what was happening to all that seafloor that was spreading and where was anything older than 200 million years?
That wasn't so clear, so one possibility was that the Earth was simply expanding.
Now it turns out that that's probably not a viable possibility.
So we'll continue in the next lecture to take on the rest of the plate tectonics story
and examine what happens to those oceanic plates once they've formed and what's their ultimate fate
and how does plate tectonics proceed on Earth that actually does stay exactly the same size.
