Well, in the last lecture, we explored how the Earth acquired its ocean, and we saw that
the ocean has great antiquity.
It's essentially as old as the planet itself.
So now I'd like to turn to the topic of how that ocean evolved over time since a few billion
years ago, and what the origins of life on Earth have been.
We started out talking about the first atmospheric composition of Earth, and we said, well, initially
a hydrogen-helium atmosphere existed, but was probably blown away very quickly.
And then an atmosphere formed that was dominated by water vapor, which eventually rained out
the oceans and filled up the low-lying spots, the oceanic basins, with that initial sort
of proto-ocean.
Well, that left behind an earlier, what we call the second atmosphere of the planet.
And that atmosphere was dominated by carbon dioxide and water vapor.
And then it had lesser amounts of things like nitrogen, carbon monoxide, hydrogen chloride,
just elemental hydrogen, methane, ammonia, all of these different gases.
But if you think of that list I just gave you, what's missing from it?
We'll take a deep breath.
Ah, oxygen.
Wouldn't it be nice to have some oxygen in the atmosphere?
The early Earth's atmosphere had essentially no oxygen in it, and that's the missing ingredient
from that second atmospheric composition.
But the evolution to the present composition of the atmosphere that does include a significant
proportion of oxygen is the evolution to the third atmosphere.
And really the story of that change begins at about three and a half billion years ago.
Several changes in the chemistry of the oldest rocks on the planet show us that the initial
rocks and the initial water started to interact.
At first there was a lot of carbon dioxide dissolved in that water, because the atmosphere
was very rich in carbon dioxide at that time.
That formed carbonic acids.
CO2 dissolved in water makes the water much more acidic.
That dissolves more rock.
That releases more of some of the gases from the rock, including a lot of oxygen, including
the beginnings of oxygen availability for the planet.
But those quickly combine, quickly react with other rocks to form different compounds.
But after three and a half billion years ago, the atmosphere composition started to gradually
change by about two billion years ago, so a long period of time expanding, something
really radical happened to the atmosphere.
And that is something that we call the oxygen revolution, the atmosphere which had been
completely depleted in or lacking in free oxygen up to that point suddenly became rich
in oxygen.
And that richness in oxygen began at two billion years ago, probably began a little earlier
than that, and then expanded over the course of the next billion years or so to a composition
very similar to the present day atmosphere today.
We know about this from the chemistry of rocks.
Before that time, before two billion years ago, many of the rocks that were laid down
as sedimentary rocks on the planet were laid down in conditions or have chemistries that
are incompatible with free oxygen in the atmosphere.
But rocks since that time are compatible only with a really oxygenated atmosphere and in
fact an oxygenated ocean.
So something happened to cause this oxygen revolution on the planet.
And that's something was the development of photosynthesis, and that means organisms
that used sunlight and carbon dioxide to make oxygen in the atmosphere.
Photosynthesis is a process and we're going to examine it in a little bit more detail later
on in the course, but where carbon dioxide and water are turned into food or fuel, which
essentially takes the form of simple sugars like glucose and as well free oxygen.
And that process doesn't just happen by some kind of spontaneous chemical reaction.
It requires a set of very detailed reactions to take place that are catalyzed by, mediated
by this molecule called chlorophyll or other related molecules that are organic compounds
that are only created by life on the planet.
So the chlorophyll uses the energy of sunlight to basically make a chemical reaction occur
that would not otherwise occur by inorganic processes.
Sunlight is the energy source, the chlorophyll is the catalyst, carbon dioxide and water
are turned into sugar and oxygen.
That's the process of photosynthesis.
And that's the basis of the energy system for most life, almost all life on Earth today.
But it probably wasn't the basis of energy for the absolute first life that existed on
the planet.
But sometime in the early stages of the planet, between three and a half billion and two billion
years ago, whatever life already existed, we'll get to that in a second, developed the ability
to carry out this photosynthesis, developed the metabolic systems to use chlorophyll and
use sunlight to make food, to make energy.
So this oxygen revolution, this photosynthetic ecosystem apparently became so dominant on
the planet, and in fact it's dominant in the ocean.
We know that life only existed in the ocean at that time, that between two billion years
ago, up to about eight hundred million years ago, it added so much oxygen to the atmosphere
that it went from essentially zero percent of the atmosphere, non-existent, to twenty
percent of the atmosphere.
And the present day atmosphere has probably got about the same composition as the atmosphere
of eight hundred million years ago, about eighty percent nitrogen, twenty percent oxygen,
just very small trace amounts of carbon dioxide and of most of the other gases that make up
the atmosphere.
So this composition of the atmosphere, that twenty percent oxygen composition, requires
ongoing photosynthesis to maintain it.
If all the life on earth suddenly stopped photosynthesizing, it wouldn't stay that way
for very long, at least not for very long on a geological kind of scale.
So active maintenance of the third atmosphere, the post oxygen revolution atmosphere, is
a hallmark of the planetary system.
Life on earth that photosynthesizes keeps the atmosphere going with this very large
oxygen volume that can then be used by the other non-photosynthetic life on the planet,
of course, like us.
So let's stop and think for a second.
Now I will tell you that paleontologists know from a wealth of information from rocks all
over the planet that there's no evidence for land-based life, no animals, no dinosaurs,
no plants even, no lichens, nothing living on land as far as we know, before about 470
to 500 million years ago.
So the land was essentially barren.
But we know that there was life in the ocean through life in sedimentary rocks going back
much further.
I'll show you some examples in a few minutes.
And that means that marine life maintained the atmosphere through this photosynthetic
process for most of the past two billion years.
And certainly for the first three quarters of that two billion years was really the only
game in town.
So that implies that the planet has continuously had a liquid ocean throughout nearly all of
earth's history.
Because if you're going to have organisms that live in the sea, and we'll see what
those organisms are a little bit later on and in some later lectures, but basically floating
organisms that live in the photic zone of the ocean, that means they live where the
light penetrates the seawater, you remember.
They have to be able to live there in the near surface water, they don't live on land,
and they continue to photosynthesize during all that time.
It implies the planet has continuously had that liquid ocean throughout nearly all of
earth's history, at least throughout all of the time since photosynthesis got going about
two billion years ago.
Now you may have heard of a theory that's been proposed by a number of scientists that
there have been periods in the earth where the earth was completely glaciated and actually
frozen over, even the oceans frozen over with an ice pack, to form something that gets
called snowball earth.
The idea that the earth basically was covered with ice everywhere, oceans and land together
during parts of the pre-Cambrian or the period between a few billion years ago and six hundred
or so million years ago.
And it's possible, although quite controversial, that this happened over brief periods of time,
but not long enough to shut down the photosynthetic operations of the life that's in the ocean.
Other people have really adapted this theory and called it perhaps slush ball earth, implying
that there were still open areas of water that photosynthesis could continue and that those
species didn't go completely extinct.
It's true that there was some kind of oxygen crisis during some of these times that had
been associated with the idea of snowball earth, but it's not true that photosynthesis
went put completely.
And so that implies then that really the earth has basically had a liquid ocean at least
somewhere on the planet.
Well, it certainly had a liquid ocean below the ice anyway, but a liquid ocean somewhere
on the planet, again, continuously throughout all of that period.
That really requires that the earth's temperature has stayed within a very narrow band for several
billion years now.
It's never gotten so hot again that the ocean boiled away and dried up and formed just a
water vapor atmosphere.
And it's also never gotten so cold that it froze from the surface right down to the bottom
of the ocean.
So the surface temperature of the earth has stayed between zero and 100 degrees C on average
or over the volume of the ocean for all of that time.
It's kept the earth in this zone that we can think of as the Goldilocks zone because life
needs liquid water.
One of the most fundamental things, the most fundamental thing about life as far as we
can tell, as far as biologists know it on the planet, is that it can't survive unless
it has liquid water to use inside its cellular structures.
So the temperature of the ocean has not really changed very much over the whole span of life
on earth.
Geochemistry, chemistry of rocks throughout all of the eons of geological history, also
shows that the ocean based on the sedimentary rocks has had a composition, or basically
a salinity, fairly similar to the present day for at least about the past 600 million
years and probably much longer.
We'll explore that in a lot more detail when I get to some lectures on water chemistry
later on.
But so the chemistry hasn't changed that much and the temperature hasn't changed that
much of the ocean during all this time.
And it's a little less certain but as far as we can tell, most likely the total volume
of the ocean hasn't changed all that much over the span of life on earth either.
So for the past couple of billion years there's been a big ocean, sea level has gone up and
down, but it goes up and down by a small fraction of the total volume and total depth of the
ocean.
And so therefore we think the water's been around and it's been added to in little
bits and some of it gets actually recycled back into the mantle of the earth by being
trapped in the pore spaces and rock that go down those subduction zones.
But basically the ocean's been there and it's had the same temperature, the same chemistry,
and same volume over all of this time.
Well if you think about that then tying that together with some stuff I talked about in
some earlier lectures leaves us with a really remarkable kind of observation.
If we think of the plate tectonic cycle and all these plates moving around on the planet
and the ocean basins opening and then closing on a time scale of just a few hundred million
years so that over the span of the earth's entire history the ocean basins have formed
and closed and reformed tens or twenty times over all of that time.
The ocean basins are recycled, but the oceans themselves, all that water in the ocean doesn't.
It's just sitting there enjoying the space that the ocean basins are creating.
The oceans themselves are far older than the container.
It's like you had a jug of water and you kept replacing the jug but keeping exactly the
same water for billions of years.
Well let's turn now to the origin of life and I've already talked about life on the
planet and we know that because of the signature of photosynthesis because of the existence
of the oxygen revolution then life's been around apparently on our planet for at least
two billion years but it actually looks like it's been around substantially longer based
on some of those trace chemical signatures in the rocks going back even older than that
period before there was an oxygen revolution there was life on the planet.
Now that life was probably from our perspective a fairly simple kind of life certainly single
celled organisms dominated and since we're looking at the time before the oxygen revolution
we have to assume that it wasn't photosynthetic life and therefore it was probably life that
had to use other pathways to get energy for to make food to make sugars or to make something
that could fuel its existence and therefore it was life that we think of as chemo-synthetic
or using chemical energy somehow from the earth.
Now let's think about what life actually is or what life requires well as I said all life
on earth requires liquid water and the reason for that is that water is a fantastic solvent
it's often called the universal solvent we'll come back around to that one as well and so
you can use it to transport the nutrients that you need inside your cells move them
around and assemble them into the locations where the chemical reactions can happen that
sustain metabolism.
Water also as we'll see has a phenomenal property of retaining heat and moderating temperature
so that's important for organisms to manage the heat within their structures and water
also can suspend solids so it can suspend wastes and nutrients and allow you to expel
them for example from your cellular structure.
Well let's look at how life began then and I don't have special knowledge or special
answers to what the absolute origin of life was any more than probably anyone else does
on the planet but we can look at what some of the ingredients had to be for life to originate
on earth and we can ask the question actually where did organic molecules come from where
did these simple carbon compounds such as amino acids that were the building blocks of the
more complex organic chemistry that represents what life has and what life is did they spontaneously
form here on earth were they transported here in comets and asteroids both of these things
have actually been proposed and it's possible that that basic building blocks of like basic
organic compounds not life itself even necessarily but just the chemical building blocks of life
could have come from space and transported here in comets and comets and asteroids meteorites
and things like that.
In fact we know that within comets satellite rendezvous with comets have shown that there
are organic compounds present within the sort of slushy ice balls that represent comets.
However it's also very very clear that it's possible for these things from inorganic processes
from processes that have nothing to do with life to be spontaneously created here on earth
just through basic chemistry and there's a famous experiment that was done all the way
back in 1953 by Miller and Urie who basically wanted to just test the question of can you
make what we call organic molecules carbon compounds spontaneously on earth and so they
set up an ingeniously simple experiment.
What they did was they took some water they boiled it to make water vapor inside a sterilized
and evacuated vacuum tube and they injected a mix of gases into it which they thought
represented the gas composition of earth's early atmosphere methane ammonia hydrogen
and water vapor and they ran this gas into a chamber where they put a sparking system
basically some electrodes with a gap to make sort of simulated lightning or essentially
something like a spark plug and so they just ran this spark plug for multiple days kept
sparking the material this mix of completely inorganic gases and then they condensed the
fluid the gas back to a fluid and sampled that the water droplets that were coming off
that experiment and what they found was that that water contained organic compounds amino
acids actually even simple sugars and some proteins in the water that had not been present
in what they put into the system.
Many more experiments have verified these same kind of results since then and the basic
principle that Miller and Urey found was has held firm in all the years since the 1950s
that with just the input of a little bit of electrical energy in the form of that spark
maybe as a kind of an analog for lightning or something like that you can turn materials
that were present on the earlier earth into the building blocks for life.
Now they did not create life in this experiment they certainly didn't make any organisms what
they created were the chemical building blocks that would need to be present to be assembled
for life. Further experiments since that time have shown that you don't even really need
the spark you just need some source of energy and that can be energy in form of heat coming
from a chemical reaction or heat coming from a hot spring or something like that in the
interior of the earth and in fact you can build a whole range of amino acids including
all the ones that are commonly used to form things like RNA and DNA that are common to
all life on the planet.
So it kind of begs the question then where did life on earth begin it's at least sufficient
to say that it could have begun here on the planet as opposed to being transported here
from space we don't know that it wasn't but there's no particular reason to think that
it was when we have all the ingredients right here on earth and as far as we know to this
day at least earth is the only place where there is life in the solar system.
So you can ask the question where life began well first of all it had to begin in the ocean
because for three quarters of the time that we know about life on earth actually even
more than that there's only been life in the water and not on land so it must have begun
in the ocean and we can think of multiple different habitats from the point of view
of what we've already talked about of the ocean environment where life might have begun.
Perhaps just in the open ocean area the pelagic photic zone or the pelagic deep water zone
we could have just the assembly of the building blocks of early life.
Perhaps some kind of shallow tide pools or lagoons in regions you know around the coastline
where you had shallow water and you had a lot of potential for lightning to strike that
water or for heat coming from the sun, ultraviolet energy, etc.
Charles Darwin in a letter speculating on the origin of life suggested that he imagined
somehow in some warm little pond somewhere the basic ingredients were assembled and
a lightning strike or something else could have sparked the whole thing into existence
somehow.
Another option would be to think about life beginning in a place where we see it today
completely separate from the photosynthetic system on earth and that's in the deep sea
hot springs, the black smoker vents that we've described in some previous lectures now.
We have lots of energy and we certainly know that we have life there that includes organisms,
bacteria that can live on chemical energy coming out of the hot springs today.
Well each of these has sort of pros and cons to it.
The open ocean idea has pretty much been rejected I think and that's because the ocean is a
pretty thin soup you know it's any spontaneously created amino acid compounds would be diluted
and widely distributed in a great volume of the water and so it seems unlikely that the
concentration of energy could happen out in the open ocean to sort of spontaneously have
these things start to assemble themselves.
The shallow tide pools is definitely a possibility or the shallow lagoonal systems, shallow water
with sunlight shining down on it.
One objection to that idea is that ultraviolet radiation from the sun is really damaging to
the sort of delicate carbon chain compounds that life depends on that things like RNA and
DNA quickly breaks them down.
So some have said that perhaps in this shallow water environment early life wouldn't have
been able to assemble you know it's basic structures that it needed to get going.
These many life forms actually have the ability to resist that breakdown but it must have taken
some time for those systems to evolve such that we protect ourselves from ultraviolet
radiation today.
So it's certainly not a certain thing but many, many adherents or many of the people
who study early life forms think that it's not at all unlikely that the deep sea hot
springs are great places for life to have initially evolved and one of the reasons is
that there's this continuous supply of energy and there's no reason to think that the mid
ocean ridges weren't very similar back in the time two and three and more than three
billion years ago as they are today.
So they were happening, the black smoker processes would have been going on, there's
lots of chemical energy and heat energy around for life to exploit.
A second advantage of these settings is that they're deep in the ocean floor and especially
early in the history of the solar system the planet was being bombarded by asteroids, it
was a pretty active place, there's the potential for things as we'll see that create mass extinction
events that radically alter the environment at the surface but a hot spring at the bottom
of the ocean several thousand meters down might be completely insulated from those kind
of cataclysmic events going on on the surface.
So it would be a refuge for early life even as it was getting going on a kind of incubator
that could keep going even through cataclysmic events happening on the surface of the planet.
So these deep sea hot springs are at least one possibility of a great place to both start
and incubate that early life.
Now I won't speculate too much on how you go from carbon rich inorganic compounds to
actually biology to life, that's a complicated topic and beyond the scope of this course
or my understanding perhaps, although it has been shown that there are many fairly complicated
carbon compounds that can spontaneously assemble themselves through an organic process and
the leap from those to RNA and DNA and self sustaining life, self replicating life is
not as large as it was once thought to be.
But at any rate this early life was certainly single celled organisms and it was something
like what we call the prokaryotes today and we'll look into the phylogenetic tree of life
more later on in the course.
But for starters we know that the earliest cells had to exist and eventually branched
into the three fundamental domains of life today.
The eukarya which is all of the organisms with complex cellular structure including
a nucleus and other structures within their cellular protoplasm and that includes all
the plants, all the animals, many of the different organisms on the planet and then the two domains
of life that has cells but they lack a nucleus and they lack any kind of complex internal
structure and that includes the bacteria which are familiar to us and a whole domain of organisms
which were not familiar at all even just a few decades ago called the archaea.
In some ways the simplest of single celled organisms and ones that are actually distinct
enough in both the way their DNA works and in the way their cells are constructed that
we can separate them from the bacteria completely.
Well this early life had to be prokaryotes of some kind and presumably it started out
as chemosynthetics so probably something like the archaea bacteria and the archaeans are
now recognized in fact have been discovered at places like the mid-ocean ridges, the deep
sea vents where they use the sulfides and methane coming out of the sea floor to live
on.
If photosynthesis developed later then it stands to reason that these what are called
extremophiles or life that likes extreme environments like a deep sea hot springs or a hot spring
in Yellowstone National Park or perhaps living actually in the in the ice of a glacier.
These are all places that are extreme environments and these extremophile archaean single celled
organisms live in.
But we can say anyway that that life's been around on the planet for a very long time
and for a very long time before the Oxygen Revolution and the photosynthesis got going
because there are fossils that are even in some of the oldest sedimentary rocks on the
planet.
This small structure that we can see in a photomicrograph just just a few thousands
of a millimeter across show all kinds of special carbon signatures that suggest that it is
actually a fossil of something that was originally not an inorganic a wisp of some mineral or
something like that but something that was produced by a living organism.
It's a three and a half billion year old fossil microorganism in the rock formation called
the Apex Chert which is in Western Australia.
It was laid down in a shallow water marine environment so early in Earth's history and
having an organism that looks like this or a piece of an organism that looks like this
suggests that there were already some fairly complex structures some real structure and
they're even simpler looking single celled bacteria and archaea on the planet and that
really suggests that life had to be even older.
There are very few rocks on the planet this old so we don't have a lot of samples of that
period of time.
It stands to reason then that if there's life even showing up in the few rocks that we do
have from that time that it was relatively abundant on the planet by that point.
Just to be lucky enough to have acquired a fossil of it.
Well life probably then is even older than that and began sometime pretty close to the
formation time of the oceans.
Now by the time of the oxygen revolution so between two billion years and eight hundred
million years ago we know that there were great numbers of what are called cyanobacteria
so from the bacterium domain of early life still mostly single celled or what we call
colonial organisms and the cyanobacteria given that name because of their color and
because they were early photosynthesizers and perhaps the oxygen revolution was carried
out by things much like these fossil stromatolites as they're called.
Fossil mats of colonial organisms, colonial cyanobacteria that kind of would form these
structures of biofilms, sticky biological protoplasmic material that would trap sediments
in layers and then those layers would form and now they've been cut through in section
in some of these examples of 1.1 billion year old fossil stromatolites that also come actually
from old rocks in Australia and the interesting thing about stromatolites is that in very
much that same form they're still present there today also in Australia as well as some
other places around the world but these are modern day stromatolites from a place called
Shark Bay in Western Australia still growing right there in the intertidal zone as mats
of cyanobacteria happily photosynthesizing away perhaps just as they've been doing for
something on the order of 2 billion years.
Well I've been talking about billions of years now you know for a couple of lectures and
I think geologic time is just one of those things that it's hard to get your mind around.
We're all used to thinking in sort of human time scales, thinking about a decade is difficult,
thinking about a lifetime seems like seems like very long and imagining what our great
great great grandparents were doing just seems like an almost unimaginably long period of
time and yet that might only be a century or two.
So how do we get our minds around four and a half 4.6 billion years?
Well one way to do it maybe is to try to relate it by analogy to a time scale we can get our
minds around so I'm going to compress 4.6 billion years for you into one year.
So we'll start the clock on January 1st and we'll end it on New Year's Eve of the following
of the following winter.
Okay so in our one year time frame for the earth in January and February we build the
core the mantle and the crust we do that early density differentiation of the earth.
Very early in earth's history actually by February 21st late winter only life begins
on the planet we see the first signature of life.
And that life happily cruises along probably being run by chemical energy until the summer
time and then in the summer time the oxygen atmosphere develops so we're at 2 billion
years we're middle of the middle of our one year period.
Mid-summer we have oxygen atmosphere we get the first fossil evidence of multi-cellular
organisms sometime around then.
November 25th we're all the way into the fall complex animals with shells first evolved
so the first things that have any kind of shell not even skeletons yet just just external
shells evolved by October 25th.
By November 24th well through the year the first life shows up on land that first life
is just lichens and then more bacterial mats and things like that eventually some larger
organisms invertebrates insects come onto the land.
It's December 7th by the time reptiles evolve on the planet and those reptiles you know
are the kings of the messozoic right but by December 25th Christmas day we have the extinction
of the dinosaurs so the dinosaurs are around and they go extinct through the cataclysmic
event that we'll see the asteroid impact just a few days before the end of our earth
year.
November 31st New Year's Eve we've had all the period since the dinosaurs went extinct
just in our few days we have to go all the way out to 11 o'clock p.m. one hour before
midnight on the last day of the year before Homo sapiens evolves on the planet so we human
beings in our sort of recognizably present form have been around for the last hour of
the last day of the year.
And then finally everybody's at the New Year's Eve party it's 11 58 and 45 seconds actually
it's one minute and 15 seconds before the end of the year and that's the end of the
last ice age 10,000 years ago about the time that we sort of think of a lot of human history
is beginning the actual historical record of human life on the planet what we have written
down is even shorter than that well within the last minute before the bell rings and
everybody says happy new year.
Well I'd like to sum up then and say a few things first of all the earth acquired its
ocean very early we've seen that over the course of these last two lectures and it's
been here ever since and this stable and watery environment was necessary for life to begin
on the planet and then that life proceeded to profoundly modify its own environment so
life got here life liked what things were like on the planet but it said wouldn't it
be even better if we could use the sunlight energy and a byproduct of that was to make
the oxygen environment the oxygen atmosphere that we have today and life has maintained
that oxygen atmosphere for all the time ever since then.
The global ocean along with that and because of that in part has been in something very
close to its present day chemistry salinity and temperature for at least the last 600
million years and probably much longer than that in fact.
