We've seen how the ocean basins are created and we've seen how the oceans filled them
up.
So we have one more kind of geological ingredient to put into the oceans to see how it is today.
And that's sediments.
Sediments are accumulating in the ocean continuously from as soon as the ocean floor is created
and they accumulate on it in layers that can get to great thicknesses and in fact that
are like tree rings that can be read as some kind of history of the ocean and climate through
time as they're deposited.
So in this lecture we're going to take up the question of what is sediment and how is
it distributed in the ocean, what are the sediments that make up the surface materials
of actually the vast majority of the sea floor except right at the mid-ocean ridges
or right on tops of seamounts where we have bare rock, virtually everything else is covered
up with sediment.
Sediment are just simply particles of inorganic or organic matter in fact that can accumulate
in some loose and unconsolidated form, unsemented form in the ocean.
These particles originate from erosion of rocks, from volcanic eruptions, but also from chemical
precipitation directly out of the water and very importantly from living organisms and
even actually directly to the ocean from outer space.
So let's take a look at what all those sediments are that make it into the ocean and ultimately
make it down to the bottom to be laid down on the ocean floor.
Well we'd like to know kind of why we're even interested in those sediments before we define
what all of them are and they're an incredibly important record of what's going on on the
planet as a whole.
And the reason is because they're laid down sequentially, right?
Geologists have this concept of superposition or the idea that everything that's laid down
is laid down on top of the thing that came before and providing a historical record.
So sediments provide this record of the organisms, the physical and chemical processes that were
going on in the ocean or maybe in the atmosphere or maybe on the land at a given time in Earth's
history.
They also tell us about the 190 million years of time that's present in the ocean today.
So the sedimentary record that we have out in the oceans gives us some kind of glimpse
of ocean currents, ocean temperature, ocean chemistry, ocean circulation during all that
time the oceans have been present and even more we have sedimentary rocks that have become
part of the geologic record on land on the continents and therefore we have a four billion
year history as we saw a little bit in the last couple of lectures based on sedimentary
rocks now preserved.
So some examples of what sediments can actually tell us about what's going on in terms of
this idea of providing a record of events in Earth's history.
We've all heard the story about how the dinosaurs were present on the Earth through the Mesozoic
up to the end of the Cretaceous period and that 65 or so million years ago most likely
a massive asteroid struck the Earth, actually hit the Earth in the region that's now the
Yucatan Peninsula and Gulf of Mexico and sent up an incredible amount of material from that
impact into the atmosphere that blacked out the sun, changed the climate on the planet,
also caused cataclysmic tsunami through the Gulf of Mexico region and fundamentally changed
the history of life on this planet.
So we have a direct record of that impact in many sedimentary rocks on the planet.
Some are on land but other ones are in the sea today and we can actually look at a core
sample taken by the ocean drilling program through the scientific ocean drilling vessel,
using the scientific ocean drilling vessel, the Joides Resolution and it comes from a
site in the Atlantic Ocean, actually a few thousand kilometers away from where the impact
actually occurred, but it preserves a record of before, after and during that event in
the sediments.
So the sediments at the bottom of this core sample, which is about this big around and
this long in this image, shows the open ocean conditions and the kinds of micro fossils
that I'll talk about in just a few minutes that represent the sedimentation before that
event and then we see a sharp division to a whole new type of sediment preserved in
that core sample.
That includes the material that was actually blasted out of the crater that this asteroid
formed when it struck the earth.
Now the ejecta, as it's called, the stuff that was blown out, blown to small bits, small
sedimentary particles, up into the atmosphere and then fell down, first the biggest, heaviest
stuff that fell down in the ocean, then the smaller and smaller particles.
Those particles, even including high concentrations of material that was melted upon impact, flew
up into the atmosphere, re-solidified as glassy particles and fell back down in the sediments.
And then once that layer was deposited, soon after, just minutes after actually, or hours
after, a deposit that was associated with the tsunami that washed up on the land and
then washed back down offshore, and then finally return a few centimeters higher in that sedimentary
column to background sedimentation of the open ocean.
And with a totally new collection of microfossils because new species had evolved during time
that this sedimentary layer represents.
Now interestingly enough, the time is not a continuous tape recorder or a continuous
set of years like tree rings.
We have actually a very slow sedimentation process at the bottom of the core that represents
tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of years, followed by just a few days or weeks
of sedimentation in the intervening sort of dark colored interval, and then back to
a very slow sedimentation rate at the top of the core.
All this can be teased out through combinations of radiometric dating and ages that come from
understanding the evolution of all those microfossils in the ocean.
We'll look at that over the course of this lecture.
Well another reason to look at sediments is that they tell us about the history of plate
tectonics and about the history of the continents themselves, in fact.
And one just really stark example is that everywhere we look on Earth, we see marine
sediments and marine fossils.
In fact, if we go to the highest point on the entire planet, 8,800 meters above sea level,
the top of Mount Everest and the Himalayas, and if we could manage to get there, like
a mountain climber, and pick up a rock from the surface, what we would find are marine
sedimentary rocks with fossils in them, showing that they were laid down in a relatively shallow
water environment in an ocean, and have then since then, because of the collision of India
and Eurasia, been lifted up to the highest point on Earth, so marine rocks at the highest
place in the mountains anywhere on the entire planet.
Give us a history of the plate tectonic events that got them there.
Well let's look at sedimentation on the ocean floor then.
We've said that we create new pillow lavas at the mid-ocean ridges, and those pillow
lavas don't stay sort of denuded for very long.
Because of processes going on in the sea, there's always some particulate matter in
the ocean, and it starts raining down out of the water, it starts falling down by settling
because it's denser than water, to the bottom, and starts building up a dusting right on
that pillow lava from the very first moment actually after the lavas are formed.
These sediments take a number of different forms.
They can be from the land, and they can be from organisms that are actually in the sea
themselves.
So let's take a look at what those sources of marine sediments actually are.
And we can kind of group them into four basic and simple sources.
The first type are what we call teridinous sediments.
Sediments that come from terra, from the land, and get deposited somehow in the sea.
So erosion of material off of the land, perhaps from volcanic eruptions, even windblown dust
as we'll see, produces all sorts of sediments, sands, silts, and muds, that all come from
quartz rich or feldspar rich rocks of the land.
They cover a pretty large fraction of the ocean floor actually, something like 45%.
In even larger fraction of the ocean floor, the majority actually is blanketed by layers
of sediments that we call biogenous, biogenous, having developed from biological processes.
The source of these sediments are what's left, the fossil parts, of marine organisms.
So if a marine organism lives and it has an exoskeleton or internal shell parts, or any
other sort of hard, durable material, then when it dies, it will fall to the bottom of
the ocean, or perhaps it already was on the bottom of the ocean crawling around, and be
incorporated into the sediments.
And so we have materials that I'll describe to you in a little while called carcarius and
salacious oozes, a wonderful term for these marine biogenous sediments, the official word
is an ooze, although it's a soft material, not necessarily exactly what's evoked by the
word ooze.
But those cover something like 55% of the seafloor.
Smaller fractions of the ocean floor are covered by additional kinds of sedimentary material.
These are much more rare, in fact less than a percent or so of the ocean floor, are actually
covered by sediments we called hydrogenous, or maybe more often just simply chemical precipitates.
And these are various kinds of sediments, I'll show you one or two examples later on,
that actually don't form from the land or through biological processes, but direct inorganic
precipitation from seawater in some way.
And then finally, the last type of sediment that actually shows up in the ocean, although
it's so weakly concentrated that it never forms an actual dominant sediment anywhere
on the seafloor, are cosmogonous sediments or extraterrestrial material, stuff that's
come in as dust or meteorites from space, ended up in the atmosphere, and ended up down in
the ocean water.
And we refer to these as tectites, and sometimes as magnetic spirals, just essentially micrometeorites
that end up in the ocean sediments.
They're certainly present all over the world.
Well, the sediments then have all these different kinds of origins, but they're very, they're
distributed very unevenly in the ocean.
The majority of sediments are present on the continental margins.
The land shed sediment, the torriginous sediment is very dominant.
And so the continental margins themselves represent only about 22 percent of the area of the ocean
floor, but they represent 87 percent of all the sediments in the ocean.
So the vast majority of sediments in the ocean are really concentrated into these small
areas that surround the continents.
And you can see that in this thickness map of sediments, what we call an isopac map of
sediments, showing the thick accumulations of sediments on the continental slopes and
rises in particular.
By contrast, the deep ocean floor, the abyssal plains and the ridges are 78 percent of the
area of the whole ocean, but they represent only about 23 percent of the sediments.
We have large areas of the ocean floor that are blanketed by sediment, but it's not very
thick.
You're far away from the continents and those sediments just accumulate at a much, much
slower rate, sometimes just a few millimeters in 10,000 years or in 100,000 years.
So the accumulation of those sediments is always going on, but it just doesn't put much
material down there.
By contrast, some of those continental margin sediments can accumulate at rates of of even
well in single events like storms and things, meters per year, but certainly even averaged
over the long term, a meter per thousand years or something like that is a typical accumulation
rate, which means, doesn't sound like much, a meter per thousand years, but that means
in one million years you can get a full kilometer thickness, enormous thickness of sediment
piled up on the ocean floor.
Okay, well we can talk about sedimentary, in a sense almost like sedimentary habitat,
the way we did with habitat in the ocean, by describing the source location of sediments.
So we can break them down into neuritic sediments and pelagic sediments.
Neuritic sediments, just as when we talked about the neuritic environment of the ocean,
remember, is the region that's close to, proximal to the coastline.
And so neuritic sediments are sediments that are sourced directly from the land, let's
say by input from rivers and streams and things like that, typically turigenous as we'll see,
and they typically dominate the sedimentation of the continental margin, the shelf itself,
but also the slope and rise offshore.
Those are neuritic sediments because of their source region being tied very closely to the
land.
By contrast with them, we also have pelagic sediments, sediments that originate in the
open ocean.
They're mixed of type, some of them actually come from the land in our turigenous, but
are dominated by these biogenous oozes on the deep sea floor.
They can occur anywhere in the ocean though as well, on the slopes and rises and even
on the continental shelf.
Well, let's take up these different types of sediment for a few minutes.
The turigenous sediment, as I said, means sediment that originates from the land, generally
from the continents or the islands through the erosion of older rocks, and also from
volcanic eruptions.
So the main constituents of these sediments are quartz, feldspar, and clay, the basic breakdown
products of all erosion on land.
There's a tremendous volume of turigenous sediment making it into the sea.
15 billion metric tons of this kind of sediment gets to the oceans every year, and we can
see it in satellite images from space all over the world where you look at river deltas.
The Mississippi River Delta is one great example.
One of the largest volume sources of sediment into the ocean is actually the Yangtzea River
and in this image we see near the city of Shanghai in China, the enormous plume of muddy
water flowing into the ocean from the Yangtzea River, spreading out and depositing its turigenous
sediment in the shallow water.
As that sediment makes it into the water, it spreads out on the continental shelf from
all of the river and stream mouths and deltas and things like that.
As it spreads out on the continental shelf, it makes it to the shelf edge in the region
where the submarine canyons of the continental slope are present.
Sediments collect at the upper ends of these submarine canyons and then where the slope
takes off and becomes steeper, bringing the seabed all the way down towards the abyssal
plains, these sediments actually can start to flow down the submarine canyons in special
kinds of flows that we call turbidity currents.
What's a turbidity current?
The turbidity current is where you have a whole bunch of sedimentary material, it's
very loose, it's very porous, and if it gets stirred up by especially large wave action
let's say from a storm or even more from a tsunami or an earthquake taking place on
that, then it can become mobilized, it mixes up with a lot of water and you get a kind
of a dense slurry of water and sediment which is denser than the water around it.
So this dense slurry forms a turbid mixture of water and that's why we call these turbidity
currents because they flow down the submarine canyons hugging the bottom of the ocean.
They erode out the canyons themselves as well and they form a flowing mass of mud, sand,
and even gravels that ultimately form deposits we call turbidites and those show up in the
continental rock record of sedimentary rocks all the time.
These turbidity currents can have phenomenal properties, our understanding of how dynamic
they actually are comes from or at least originated with an event that happened in 1929 actually.
There was an earthquake that took place on the Grand Banks region just off the coast
of Newfoundland and that earthquake was noted at the time by seismologists and then starting
a few minutes later sequentially transatlantic cables, telephone and telegraph cables were
cut were lost one after another actually more than a dozen cables spread out over a large
region of the Atlantic Ocean and by looking at the timing of the loss of these cables
it was deduced that a sea floor turbidity current had run along the seabed at speeds
of something like 60 miles an hour and had broken each one over a distance of 400 miles
more than 600 kilometers across the open ocean.
So it's the erosive power of these turbidity currents spreading out across the North Atlantic
that cut those cables and actually gave the sedimentologists a way to measure the speed
with which they could go and the distance which they could travel across the sea floor.
Well another form of torriginous sediment then is the direct input of ash from volcanoes
and whether it's Mount St. Helens erupting back in the 1980s in the Pacific Northwest
or more recently the Icelandic volcanoes that have put so much sediment into the atmosphere
and disrupted air traffic in Europe.
Volcanoes produce huge plumes of ash at times and that spreads into the stratosphere and
then it can fall back down onto the ocean and in fact can fall back down on the ocean
not just at the coastline of course but anywhere across the sea and these ash deposits form
blankets of sediment sometimes so distinctive that individual ash beds from very large prehistoric
volcanic eruptions can be identified in core samples of sediments from many places in the
ocean and actually used as kind of a marker, a bright line that marks off a particular
time and if those can be dated then we know exactly when that happened so we see the ashes
from individual volcanic eruptions in many places in the ocean.
Final type of torriginous sediment is the input of windblown dust that comes directly
from the land and this landsat image showing North African dust storm, the windblown dust
coming off the Sahara Desert being picked up and carried to high elevations in the atmosphere
and then spreading around the world puts very fine particles, it doesn't really pick up
sand grains but fine particles of clay and similar sized dust material can spread over
the whole planet and that's another form of torriginous sediment not tied just to the
seafloor but forms actually a pelagic sediment all over the world and in fact we have sedimentary
deposits in the open ocean basins called red clays which are basically the product of
windblown dust mainly from Africa and also from the large deserts of Central Asia like
in China.
So those are the torriginous sediments but as I said large parts of the seafloor are
actually dominated by what we call biogenous sediment and these are the remains of living
organisms, they're second in abundance to those torriginous sediments and they primarily
come in two forms, salacious meaning they're made of silica, silicon dioxide or calcareous
carbonate made of calcium carbonate material and that's because all sorts of different
marine organisms make hard parts, shells or skeletons and that includes very small organisms
like plankton as we'll see in a second as well as the shells and the skeletons of fish
and invertebrates of all sorts of sizes and shapes but all of them use one of these two
materials or virtually all of them use one of these two materials to make their shells
silica or carbonate and so we have these two types.
Some examples of biogenous sediments then include coral reefs themselves, corals build
very large edifices made of calcium carbonate but also these open ocean sort of muddy soft
sediments that we call the calcareous ooze or the salacious ooze and if you went down
and you could scoop up a handful of it it would be just sort of a soft and loose muddy
sediment not really gelatinous but certainly a material that you would think could ooze
between your fingers and so that's where we get this evocative name for them.
So what are the oozes? Well here's an example, a single celled actually it's an animal in
the sense that it's an amoeba-like organism that lives in the water, lives in the photic
zone and as we'll see is a major part of the ocean ecosystem is a thing called a foraminiferin
and this foraminiferin creates what's called a test, a sort of internal skeletal chambered
thing that's made out of calcium carbonate so while it's alive it floats in the water
but when it dies the test falls to the bottom, it forms part of this calcareous ooze.
Another organism is called a coccolithophoret, a different kind of organism completely in
the sense that it's an algae not an amoeba but it's also forming calcareous parts to keep
it floating in the water and to give it some structure to its cellular structure. When
these coccolithophoreids die they fall to the bottom of the ocean and they fall to the
bottom of the ocean in great profusion. In fact if you look at the white cliffs of Dover
and any other chalk cliffs around the world those chalks that the whiteness of the cliffs
is sedimentary deposits of just innumerable unimaginable numbers of dead coccolithophoreids,
these tiny microscopic organisms that build up these chalky cliffs and when you use a
piece of chalk in a classroom or even when you brush your teeth you're actually using
some calcium carbonate that's mined out of the ground and you are brushing your teeth
in fact with dead phytoplankton. Sorry to tell you about that, might put you off your toothbrush.
All of those organisms live up in the photic zone so they live in the top of the water
when they die they rain down to the seabed and they accumulate on the seafloor but it
turns out these calcareous organisms only accumulate in certain places on the seafloor.
That is a place that's determined by the calcite compensation depth. The calcite compensation
depth is a region in the ocean above which the water is super saturated enough in calcium
carbonate that it just simply settles to the seafloor. Below that the water is a little
bit more acidic and it dissolves the calcium carbonate so below a certain depth in the
ocean it doesn't deposit, it dissolves before it ever gets to the seafloor and so we have
this stuff coming down that makes these white calcium carbonate deposits above certain depths
and those depths are dependent on oceanographic conditions but are generally several thousand
meters deep. So the upper parts of the mid ocean ridges are covered with white calcareous
sediment. The calcium carbonate rich organisms are the most abundant by far in the ocean
but below these depths that as the abyssal plains get deeper that stuff isn't deposited
so what's deposited instead are the less abundant, salacious organisms or even sometimes just
simply the red clays that are not dissolved below the CCD or calcite compensation depth.
And so what this means is that the open ocean seafloor has a sort of a characteristic stratigraphy
or layering of different types of sediment. The sediment right on top of the lava rock
is almost always or is very typically the calcareous is, the carbonate rich sediments.
On top of that as long as the salacious organisms which includes things like diatoms that we'll
talk about later and dinoflagellates you get a salacious or what we call churdi ooze that
sits on top of the calcareous ooze where the rock has receded below the calcite compensation
depth. And then on top of that or instead of that salacious ooze in parts of the ocean
that are not very productive for those particular organisms you just get the red clays. The
stuff that came in is windblown dust from the land and is the slowest accumulating sediment
in the ocean but the stuff that's there sort of if nothing else is happening then at least
you get some red clay. So we often get on ocean floor a kind of a layer cake of lava
rock, calcareous ooze, salacious ooze and red clays on top of that. It's characteristic
stratigraphy. Well if we look at a map of the world and where sediments exist we see
some very regular patterns. The continental margins have all this torriginous sediments
of quartz and mud and silt and things like that. The open ocean floor is dominated by
the calcareous oozes but there are places so unproductive for biology like the North
Pacific gyre that we'll learn about a little later on in the course that basically the
red clays themselves dominate. And then the salacious organisms mostly dominate around
Antarctica and in the high northern latitudes as well like around the Lucian Islands where
conditions are especially favorable for seasonal blooms of diatoms. All of this is stuff that
we'll look at in much greater detail when we get some of the biological oceanography
later on. Well there's just a few more types of sediments that are worth taking a look
at even though they don't volumetrically form very large parts of the ocean floor deposits.
And the first one as I mentioned is the chemical or hydrogenous sediments. So hydrogenous meaning
from the water itself and these include things like sea floor ferromagnese nodules or just
called manganese nodules sometimes. Also various kinds of salt deposits gypsum and halite which
is just the geological word for salt regular garden variety sodium chloride and similar
salts or even barium barite deposits as well as phosphorite nodules. So all of these are
things that basically form different kinds of compounds and salts that under the right
oceanographic conditions can be precipitated directly from the water. They tend to form on
either the continental shelves and platforms or on the deep sea abyssal plain floor in places where
other processes like a lot of biological sedimentation or a lot of tariginous sedimentation is not
taking place and not dominating. So for example large parts of the ocean deep floor have at least
some amount of manganese nodule precipitation. These are little kind of cannonball sized or
even smaller golf ball sized lumps of metalliferous material that is a direct precipitate from the
excess manganese and iron and other metals that are present in the water everywhere in low
concentrations and they precipitate. It seems that they perhaps nucleate on an individual grain of
sand or something like that and although we call them non-bioginous there's probably a bacterial
metabolic process that helps facilitate the deposition of these materials. But at any rate
they form these nodules and in fact these nodules have been seen as potentially of economic benefit.
If you need a source of those particular metals and minerals then just simply going along and
literally trawling them up off the sea floor is one possible way to get a hold of those. Now mostly
they occur in international waters and they've essentially not been very economic to mine up
up until today but there's the beginnings of some efforts to actually collect these from the sea floor
and we'll take a look at that later on. Another example of chemical sedimentation are these very
small what are called carbonate nodules these little pellets you can see of a very tiny size that
are made of essentially limestone. They're also calcium carbonate and these are formed in shallow
water areas especially the banks and platforms associated with coral reefs or with lagoons
around atolls and things like that where the water because of the presence of all of the corals
and other material becomes super saturated in carbonate and so it precipitates right out of the
water because the water is evaporating in shallow water lagoons just from the heat and the sun and
everything and super saturating that material and then these little pellets they're actually called
uids sometime a nice little word o-o-i-d uids are rolling around in the base of the shallow water
lagoon or something like that and concentrically kind of picking up carbonate sort of mud and
developing this pellet like form. One last type of sediment again as I mentioned is the
extraterrestrial and cosmogenic sediments and one of the most interesting forms of those are the ones
that we call microtech types. If you look at them under a microscope they're little pellets and
sometimes little dumbbell shapes or needles and things like that and they're essentially made of
glass. They're made of what glass actually is of course is just a mineral type of composition
but that has cooled so rapidly from the melt that it didn't have time to form a crystal structure
that's the definition of a glass essentially and so the interpretation of these microtech types is
that they're small particles of melt that were ejected into the atmosphere on the impact of
an asteroid like the 65 million year old asteroid impact at the end of the Cretaceous and they fly
up into the atmosphere as literally little molten droplets of rock and then flash to
a frozen or glassy state fall on the ocean surface and then rain down into the sediments.
They're never very concentrated although concentrations of them at least above the
background level can be found that identify some of these asteroid impacts but they're ubiquitous
throughout the ocean sediments and in addition we also of course have micrometeorites just
very small scale meteoritic material that falls into the ocean. So in summary and kind of take
the big picture then most sediments are either turigenous or biogenous the vast majority the
turigenous sediments are the most abundant there's lots of them but they mostly stick to the
continental margins or the regions nearby the biogenous sediments cover the largest area of
the seafloor but because they're thinner they're actually much less abundant than the turigenous
ones. The marine sediments in general are useful in so many ways because they preserve clues to
the environment at the time of their deposition and to the events that have happened in earth history
in the types of fossils the nature of the grains of sand or material and in fact in the chemical
fingerprints of past climate as we're going to see. So in later lectures we're going to examine
how these sediments provide all sorts of clues to things like the past climate the ocean currents
and what we call the paleoceanography and the history of the planet and the ocean as a whole.
