For the next couple of lectures, I'd like to turn to the ocean itself, meaning the water
that's filling up the sea.
We're going to take a look at the chemical and physical properties of that water.
And in fact, we're going to look at what it is that makes water so special and how
it controls so many features of the ocean, but also of planet Earth as a whole and the
things that live on it.
So in this lecture, we'll take up the chemical properties of seawater.
We're going to look at all of the dissolved materials and what the properties of the
water molecule are itself that makes up that water.
At the end of the last lecture, I considered, you know, the freshwater and the salt components
as resources.
So let's take a closer look at what those salts really are.
The dissolved minerals in the ocean are in this incredibly remarkable state of stable
chemical equilibrium as we're going to see.
And this is maintained by a balance among a variety of geological and biological processes
and in fact, chemical processes that keep the water just the way it is.
So let's step back and take a look at what just some very fundamental properties of chemistry
and water are.
We have to really start from the beginning when it comes to chemistry of materials in
order to understand this.
The water molecule is one of the most fundamental molecules that exists in nature, right?
H2O, two hydrogen ions and one oxygen ion.
Just as a reminder, what's an ion?
It's simply an atom of a particular element that has either gained or lost one or more
electrons to give it a positive or negative charge to that atom.
Well in the water molecule then, two hydrogen atoms are sharing their electrons with one
oxygen atom to form that molecule through something that we call covalent bonding, meaning
the actual electron is shared.
This is a very strong bond between two individual or in this case three individual atoms in
order to make up a molecule, they're well bound together.
Now the nature of this particular molecule is such that the two hydrogens and the oxygen
have to balance each other out and the forces of positive and negative attraction of the
different electrons and their orbitals on the ions themselves mean that the two hydrogen
atoms are not sort of on opposite sides of the oxygen atom but they're distributed towards
one side with a certain angular difference between them in fact of about 105 degrees.
And that molecule then has actually got a sort of a kind of an unbalanced nature to it.
By that unbalanced nature what I mean is that it actually is a polar molecule, it acts as
if it has a negative and a positive side to it, in fact it does have a negative and
positively charged side to it.
So the molecule you know kind of might remind you a little bit of Mickey Mouse ears or something
like that as the two hydrogen ions ride on one side of the oxygen ion and so there's
a negatively charged side to this polar molecule and a positively charged side to the polar
molecule.
Well the water molecules in turn then because of this polar nature are held together to
each other by another kind of molecular bonding called hydrogen bonds and that's just the
linkage of that sort of positively charged side of the individual molecule to the negatively
charged side of an adjacent one.
And so in liquid water then this hydrogen bonding kind of keeps it all together.
It gives water special properties in terms of having surface tension for example that
we're familiar with and helps it resist evaporation and it turns out it also helps it as we're
going to see retain heat very well.
So the water molecule, its atomic scale structure gives liquid water some of the fundamental
properties that make it a special material, in fact make it liquid at the temperatures
of the surface of the earth.
Well of course seawater is not just water, it's water with a lot of stuff dissolved in
it, right?
When you take a spoonful of salt and dissolve it in water you're making a solution.
So just as a reminder then a little bit of terminology, the solvent is the medium in
which the substances are dissolved, in this case that means the water itself.
The solute is that which is dissolved, so the sodium and chloride ions and other ions
that are dissolved in the water that we'll take a look at in just a second.
And so any ionically bonded substance such as a salt crystal gets dissolved in the water
by a separation of the negatively and positively charged ions.
So for example if we think of a salt crystal as a bunch of chloride ions and sodium ions
then they're all stuck together by hydrogen bonding but when we put it into the polar
medium of the water which has this charge imbalance then it pulls them off and the chloride ions
stick to the positively charged side of the water molecules and the sodium ions stick
to the negatively charged side of the water molecules.
So it goes into what we call aqueous solution, aqueous like aqua meaning in water.
And the reason we call water the universal solvent and it's so good at dissolving so
many materials is because it has this charge imbalance to the water itself, the polar nature
of the molecule.
So what is sea water?
Well it's nothing more than pure water, H2O, with a small amount actually of dissolved
salts and then many other different compounds, many other different elements and compounds
in small quantities.
We use the term salinity to mean the total quantity of these dissolved inorganic solids.
So it's not just the amount of sodium chloride for example or potassium chloride or some
other individual salt, it's the total quantity of all the inorganic matter that's dissolved
in the water measured by weight.
So if you want to measure the salinity of something of some amount of sea water the
easiest way is to weigh it first, get a known quantity, evaporate all the water off and then
measure the weight of what's left behind.
That's not actually how it's necessarily done in practice anymore but that's the basic
measure of salinity.
Well what do I mean by salt then?
Salt is actually as I said a bunch of different compounds.
Sea water is mostly pure water, one kilogram of sea water has about 35 grams or 3.5% by
weight salinity meaning all other inorganic materials.
The most abundant of those ions are sodium and chloride, the things we think of as a
garden variety table salt, that represents the vast majority of what's dissolved in it
and then just fractions of a percent of the total amount include things like sulfates,
magnesium and bicarbonate, calcium and potassium.
Those are the major constituents of sea water's salt besides sodium and chloride.
But all of them occur in pretty small proportions really overall.
Well the ocean then contains about 3.5% salt, not very much it's mostly water but that still
amounts for the entire ocean of the planet to 5.5 trillion tons of salt out there dissolved
in the ocean.
There are also a bunch of minor and more trace constituents of sea water.
These are the kinds of things that are dissolved in the water but are measurable only at parts
per million kinds of scale, really very small amounts, much smaller than a fraction of 1%.
But some of them are really important nutrients for life.
So there are a whole bunch of trace elements and I won't tell you about all of them but
some of the key ones for example are nitrogen, iron and phosphorus, which as you know if
you're a gardener at all are all important nutrients that potentially are limiting factors
for the growth of organisms.
We use them as fertilizers essentially and the same is true in the ocean.
There are many others, lithium and boron, carbon, silica and fluorine, all occurring
as minor to trace components measured at the parts per million level in ocean water.
Well the interesting thing about ocean water is that all of those proportions that I've
just given you hold true for all the water in the ocean basically everywhere except right
perhaps in an estuary where fresh water is mixing directly with the ocean and hasn't
a chance to mix in at all yet.
If we go anywhere in the open sea, the ratio of these major salts, the proportion of sodium
and chloride and potassium and so on in the seawater is constant all over the oceans.
This is in fact known as the principle of constant proportions, doesn't matter where
you go, the Mediterranean Sea, the North Atlantic, somewhere near Antarctica in the Southern
Ocean, you'll get the same chemistry and sense of the same proportions.
This is also known actually as Forschammer's principle.
On the other hand, the salinity of the ocean, the total amount of those dissolved solids
varies and it varies over a relatively small range between about 3.3% and 3.7% or so and
in fact oceanographers don't really use percent to describe it.
Just because of the convenience of the size of the numbers, we talk about per mil.
So the salinity of the ocean ranges between 33 per mil and 37 per mil, per mil is just
like percent, except instead of dividing by a hundred to get the number you divide by
a thousand or multiply by a thousand to reach the per mil number.
Well, how is chemistry of the ocean measured?
Oceanographers want measures and samples from the entire water column and areas all over
the ocean.
So there needs to be a system for sampling and measuring all of these things, especially
to get measures of the water column means you need samples from different depths all
the way down from the surface waters in a given location down to thousands of meters
perhaps in the deep ocean.
So we need to measure the salinity and we need to measure the chemistry itself to demonstrate
in fact whether that principle of constant proportions holds.
Salinity, it turns out, can actually be measured not by having to take a sample and laboriously
evaporated and weigh the constituents, but measured directly by measuring the electrical
conductivity of the water.
You think of water as a conductor of electricity, that's why you're worried about it in your
bathroom perhaps, but water is only a conductor to the extent that it has dissolved solids,
those dissolved ions that can move around in the water.
Absolutely pure fresh water is a poor conductor, the more dissolved compounds, the more saline
the water is, the more conductive it is.
And so it's a very well calibrated direct measurement, if you measure the electrical
conductivity of the water then you can measure the salinity.
And so an electronic instrument can do this and can actually profile it with continuous
measurements right down through the water if you lower it down.
Chemistry is a little different, some chemical components can be measured directly in situ
like that with an electronic instrument, but really what you want to do is obtain samples
of the water for water chemistry and perhaps even for microbiology from different specified
depths.
And so our old friend Fritschhoff Nansen, the early pioneering Norwegian oceanographer invented
in the early 20th century something called a Nansen bottle.
It was pretty much just an open tube, something like a flask that was lowered down through
the water, open on the bottom, but closed on the top, so just like when you push a cup
down and you capture a bubble of air in the water, and then at a certain depth it could
be triggered with a little pulley to flip over and take a sample of the water right
at that depth and bring it back up.
If you have a backyard swimming pool you've probably done the same thing trying to get
a chemistry sample for your swimming pool.
An American oceanographer named Nisgen actually improved on this by coming up with a system
that instead has an open tube and some end caps that are open when it's put into the
water and spring loaded such that they can be triggered and the bottle closed capturing
a sealed sample.
That's called a Nisgen bottle and a Nisgen bottle is essentially the method for water
sampling that's used all over the world.
Nisgen bottles are lowered down into the water column and are triggered at given specific
depths to get a water sample.
Now one Nisgen bottle is great for get a water sample, but the typical system that's used
to do all kinds of water sampling and chemistry measurements is what's called a CTD Nisgen
rosette like the one you see in the image.
So it's a whole series of Nisgen bottles like some kind of a gatling gun configuration.
And so each one is set to be open at the beginning and then they can be individually triggered
by a pressure sensor to close and therefore capture a sample at different pre-specified
depths or ones that are specified by sending a signal down from the surface.
Along with the Nisgen bottles then the whole rosette of Nisgen bottles there's a continuous
profiler called a CTD a conductivity temperature depth sensor package and that records exactly
what it sounds like.
It records conductivity for salinity and then the temperature of the water as it's being
lowered down or pulled back up through the ocean.
So in this way samples from tens of thousands of sites all over the world's ocean have
been taken and the properties profiled and measured in all these different locations
to build up our picture of what the water properties throughout the world's ocean and
throughout the depth of the water column look like.
Well water chemistry has another important property that we think of and that's its measure
of the acidity or base nature or alkalinity of a solution.
So anything that has dissolved materials in it has something that's on the pH scale that
we've all heard about.
Remember that the pH basically just measures on a logarithmic scale.
Each variation is actually a very large factor of variation in the pH scale from 0 to 14.
Pure water right in the center at 7 very alkaline or basic things like lye for example are high
on the scale up close to the 14 end of the scale 12 to 14.
Very acidic things like lemon juice or wine are at the low end of the scale.
Sea water normally stands a little bit above freshwater because it has some dissolved materials
in it so it's a little bit alkaline.
It averages about 8.1 to 8.2 on the pH scale.
This balance is tremendously important for a lot of life in the ocean as we're going
to see later on in the course because things that make carbonate skeletons for example
the calcareous organisms can't be placed into a more acidic solution or those skeletons
will start to dissolve.
So the sea water alkalinity is maintained at a very close level in the ocean through the
constant mixing through the principle of constant proportions.
Rainwater by the way is a little bit acidic a little below 7 on the pH scale.
Well let's ask the question where does the salt come from in the ocean?
Why is the sea salty?
A nice sort of philosophical sounding question with a very reasonable chemical answer.
Usually the salts in the ocean are dissolved in organic compounds and so not too surprisingly
they come from the geological cycle.
They come from the erosion of rocks on land, erosion and breakdown by fresh water on land
carrying dissolved or even physically carrying components to the ocean putting all that dissolved
material into the sea water.
Also the volcanic eruption of gases and solids and the hydrological cycle groundwater flow
all add salt to the ocean in one way or another and they have many different inorganic constituents.
So if we look at river water and ocean water we might think well the river water is delivering
these components to the ocean so the ocean is continuously getting saltier over time
developing more and more salinity based on the input of dissolved material from rivers
from land.
Interestingly enough though that's not really accurate.
Yeah the source is the material that's on land but if we look at the composition of
what's coming out of a river mouth versus what the composition of the ocean we see
some huge differences.
There's a great deal more calcium in river water about 12% of the dissolved solids are
calcium the ocean only has about 1% of that.
Bicarbonate is almost half the composition of the solids in river water and it's a tiny
fraction of the solids in ocean water and so on down the line there's a lot of silica
in river water that comes to rocks.
Rocks are mostly silicates it's nearly absent it's just present in trace amounts in ocean
water.
Meanwhile the ocean is loaded with chloride and sodium which are present in relatively
small proportions so they're not at all similar.
The ocean salinity is not just a more concentrated product of the erosion and weathering of the
landscape for some reason.
Why is that?
Well the key thing is that the biology of what lives in the ocean actually actively
alters ocean chemistry.
The missing if you will silica and calcium that comes in from the river water is removed
is scavenged up by organisms and used to make their skeletons or their tests for these
microscopic plankton and this scanning electron microscope image of a bunch of plankton fossils
basically shows the individual tests of both the radiolarians which are silica based organisms
and the foraminifera which as I said before are carbonate based organisms they're using
up that calcium silica and actually bicarbonate and when they die it doesn't simply dissolve
back into the water at least a lot of it doesn't it rains down to the bottom as we said and
is sequestered into the salacious and calcareous oozes.
So the ocean chemistry is actively modified and it turns out it's actually actively maintained
by the biology of what lives in the ocean.
The other thing that's present in the ocean that's not present in the river water are
the excess of various volatile components mostly gases and that's why we call them volatile
components because they easily evaporate so that's what the word volatile means and the
carbon dioxide, chlorine, sulfur, hydrogen, nitrogen and other things are all gases that
come from mostly volcanic eruptions and also water coming out of the mantle of the earth
even beneath the sea so coming out of the geological process produces or carries with
it a certain amount of these trace gases so the ocean has great deal of carbon dioxide
mixed into it coming from the atmosphere mainly and chlorine and sulfur and hydrogen
and these other gases.
So the composition of ocean water is distinct from what's being put into it.
The proportions and the amounts of all of these dissolved compounds are nearly constant
everywhere in the ocean or essentially proportions are constant and the amounts are nearly constant
everywhere.
So we can say that the ocean is in some sort of steady state, that doesn't mean it's static
it doesn't mean that the ocean water is just sitting there and nothing is being exchanged
or happening it's a dynamic equilibrium, ions are being removed from the ocean at the same
rate they're being added and all of this is balancing out in the seawater.
We can define a mixing time for the ocean then and say that in order for all of these
materials to remain at constant proportions in the ocean even though they're being removed
and added continuously the ocean must have some sort of overturn or mixing time basically
the stirring of the ocean mixing in all those components so they're evenly distributed all
over the planet and it turns out the mixing time for the entire ocean is about 1600 years
or so sounds like a long time but the ocean is vast and the inputs are relatively slow
and so 1600 years actually means that the ocean is considered well mixed or well stirred
and that's the reason that the constant that the principle of constant proportions actually
works is that the ocean is all stirred up and so all these things are mixed together.
The reason we can say it's well mixed is that we can compare that mixing time to what we
call the residence time of most ions so let's take a look at what residence time means.
Well residence time is just a simple calculation that basically says there's an amount of some
particular element in the ocean and there's a rate at which that element is added to or
removed from the ocean so if we divide one by the other we say the total amount divided
by the rate at which that thing is fluxing into or out of the sea is the residence time
meaning how long would it take for that particular thing to turn over completely and be completely
removed from the ocean and replaced even though this recycling is going on continuously.
So residence time varies enormously for various major seawater constituents for example chloride
is the most abundant thing in the ocean it's got a residence time in the ocean of a hundred
million years the rate at which it's being added to the ocean is very slow not much of
it is going out of the ocean the ocean basically stays salty and so over a hundred million
year time scale the chloride is just there in the seawater somewhere on average sodium similar
tens of millions of years kind of residence time scale something like calcium that's used by
organisms has a much shorter residence time one million years silicon is even shorter 20,000
years because there's not as much of it the things that are used as nutrients by organisms that
are present only in trace amounts have very short residence times because there isn't much of them
so iron and manganese for example have residence times measured in the hundreds or maybe thousand
year kind of time scale the water itself in the ocean interestingly enough even though there's a
great deal of it has a relatively short residence time 3,500 years or so why is that well what
happens to the water it's part of the hydrological cycle so water is continuously evaporating off
the surface of the ocean forming clouds raining back down either on the ocean itself or on the
land and and therefore recycling all the time out of and then back into the ocean it also moves
to the rivers it also actually moves as we'll see through the sea floor in fact water circulates
maybe to much greater depth than you would expect through the seabed itself the water that circulates
into the ocean floor participates in a groundwater and hydrological cycle very similar to one that
goes on on land and so water as we've already seen cycles into the mid ocean ridges remember this
very rapid and vigorous convection cycle I talked about at the mid ocean ridges where hot water is
being pumped out of the mid ocean ridges by by gravity and density processes at the black smokers
and in order to replace that water it's sucking seawater that cold seawater down into the mid
ocean ridges and moving it through the rock the rock at the mid ocean ridges is actually so porous
that in fact the water can move through at very vigorous rates where that that circulation scale
just happens over the course of years or decades and in very small scales sometimes even only days
or weeks meanwhile it's picking up lots of chemical components and moving those ions into the water
and that's the source of many of the metal and sulfate ions and things like that that are present
in the water but even off the ridges water circulates to a great depth in the seabed first of all
water is simply buried and trapped with the sediments that land on the seafloor themselves
their porous materials they're just sort of soft mud there's lots of water present in that material
it circulates down into the underlying oceanic crust as well whenever there's gradients and heat
those drive sort of convection in the rocks and in the pore spaces in the rocks well all
these volatiles that end up in the sediments or end up in the oceanic crust eventually reach one
of the subduction zones and so the oceanic crust is carried back down into the deep interior of
the earth ultimately to be reincorporated into the mantle those water and the other volatiles
actually like carbon dioxide like carbonate and things like that that can ultimately turn
into carbon dioxide get recycled back in the earth mantle and it turns out that those materials
those ingredients when added to the rocks down there at high temperature act as sort of a flux
a material that catalyzes melting and so they make melting of the interior of the earth possible
this is ultimately the source of the fuel for the arc volcanoes that we discussed before so the
eruptions that come out of the volcanoes come from lavas and magmas that are formed and they are
formed directly because water is subducted down with the oceanic plate that originally started out
as water in the ocean it comes out as water vapor gas out of the volcanoes keeping that deep earth
hydrological cycle going and fueling the water back to the ocean so with this volcanic input
subduction of sediments in the water that goes along with it and the subsea floor hydrological
system the ocean water and the plate tectonics are intimately linked to each other it turns out
actually that because of that fluxing plate tectonics can continue we are pretty sure at this point
that plate tectonics would have stopped within the first few hundred million or first billion years
of earth's history if there was no liquid ocean on the planet and we have a sort of an analog
example which is Mars the best understanding of Mars geology is that when the planet formed it had
one big cycle of mantle convection and overturn field the big volcanoes that are actually seen on
the surface of Mars possibly had some liquid ocean at that time but Mars isn't very massive it's
actually quite a lot smaller than the earth about the size of the earth's core and so the water
tended to be water vapor Mars doesn't have enough gravity to trap an atmosphere very efficiently so
the atmosphere and eventually the water vapor and eventually most of all of the surface water on Mars
dissipated into space without that liquid ocean without any recycling of volatile materials like
water and carbon dioxide into the interior of the planet plate tectonics looks like it stopped on
Mars and the volcanism stopped and basically the planet became dead geologically virtually
dead geologically except for a few sort of surface modifications within its first billion years so
almost everything on the surface of Mars is quite old on earth we have a constant recycling of the
surface such that old rocks are actually hard to find even beyond this maybe more interestingly and a
little bit more speculative because this is not completely demonstrated but it's possible to say
that plate tectonics might not exist on earth not only without water in the oceans but also without
life in the oceans because as we've already seen the life in the oceans the biology maintains the
chemistry of the water in a certain way and it also takes a lot of the volatile compounds the water
itself but also maybe just as importantly the carbon dioxide and sequesters it in those sediments
places it in the sediments which are then carried down the subduction zones and add to that melting
and fluxing that replenishes the mantle of the earth and allows it to continue to flow and continue
to melt over geological time so over the last few billion years of plate tectonics cycles we
certainly have needed a liquid ocean on the planet to keep plate tectonics going seems strange how
in the ocean the water affects stuff going on deep in the mantle of the earth but it does and possibly
we've even needed a life in the ocean in order to keep that plate tectonics going well in this
lecture then we've seen that something as simple as the polar nature of the water molecule makes it
the universal solvent and allows for a saline ocean a salty ocean and in fact geological evidence
shows us that that salty ocean has been here and has probably kept that principle of constant
proportions for something like the past 600 million years the ocean salinity has basically
remained constant we know this from minute bubbles essentially of seawater that are trapped in old
rocks that can be analyzed using using mass spectrometers and things like that the ocean salinity
today and through all that time varies in a pretty narrow range 33 to 37 or so per mil and the
dissolved components proportion proportionately are constant all over the ocean the ocean is well
mixed and maintains the same chemistry everywhere and finally that ocean chemistry is maintained
and kept the same over long periods geological time by the presence of life in the ocean biology
geology and physical oceanography or chemical oceanography are all intimately linked in the ocean
