Well, we've just explored the chemistry of the water in the ocean and in fact the special
properties of the water molecule in terms of chemistry and salinity.
So now what I'd like to do is turn to the physical properties of water and discover
that there are even more unique and surprising features about the simple thing, the water
molecule, that are responsible actually for the very existence of a liquid ocean and a
stable environment for life on our planet.
So let's ask the question again, what's so special about water?
Well, for one thing, water is the only substance that exists in solid, as in ice, liquid and
gaseous, as in water vapor, states at Earth's surface conditions.
So nothing else really has this property of going back and forth between all of its individual
physical states.
The heat capacity, as we'll see in a second, is very high for water and that's going to
have an important implication for Earth's surface temperature.
And solid ice, as I will show you in just a few minutes, is really unusual in that it's
less dense than liquid water.
And finally, light can only penetrate a limited distance through water.
These are the key physical features that are going to dominate how the ocean governs the
environment on the surface of the planet.
So let's take up heat first.
First of all, let's make sure we've defined the term.
Heat is simply a measure of energy.
Heat in fact is defined as the total amount of energy stored in some substance as actually
random vibration of a quantity of atoms and molecules.
Maybe you remember that the physicist's definition of heat is just the vibration of the individual
bonds in given molecular structures or the vibration of individual atoms themselves.
Temperature is something different and it's very important to keep the concept of temperature
and heat a little bit separate from each other.
Because temperature, the thing that we can measure with a thermometer, is a measure of
this stored energy specifically through the object's response in terms of changing vibration
state to input or removal of heat.
Now in just a second, we'll see why that distinction is actually important.
Finally, one more basic property I want to define is something called the heat capacity.
The heat capacity of any particular substance is specifically a measure of the amount of
heat required to raise the temperature of one gram by definition of that substance by
one degree centigrade.
So heat capacity is the linkage between energy, heat, and temperature, the measure of the
heat.
And that's a little bit of a confusing concept.
But so for example, for pure water, one calorie raises one gram of pure water one degree Celsius
that's in fact how we define all of those individual things.
Oh, and by the way, as an aside, you know the calories that you consume in food are actually
kilocalories in the metric system.
So there are a thousand of the kind of calories that I'm talking about now.
Well, let's ask a little rhetorical question then.
If we think about two containers of fluid, which one contains more heat?
A single cup of tea that maybe has a temperature of 150 or so Fahrenheit, maybe 70 degrees
C, steaming away, or the Arctic Ocean, the Arctic Ocean with a temperature of 40 degrees
Fahrenheit or even less, something around four or five degrees C?
Well, of course, one is a lot hotter.
It has a higher temperature.
That's the cup of tea.
But the one that contains more heat by far is the Arctic Ocean because it has many, many,
many grams of mass.
And so even though it's at a low temperature, it contains a very large amount of heat energy
because it's the entire ocean.
Well, the thing about water is that compared to other common substances, especially liquid
substances on our planet, water has a tremendously high heat capacity.
It can absorb or release a lot of heat while not changing very much at all in temperature.
The heat capacity of water, that one degree per calorie per gram, is three times the value
for something like ethyl alcohol.
And it's many times the heat capacity of metals, which actually change in temperature quite
a lot with the addition of a small amount of heat.
Or most other common objects, virtually everything has a lower heat capacity than water does.
So what this means is that water is sort of enured to changing in temperature.
It takes a lot of energy to move its temperature up and down a lot.
Now, there's one more complicating factor with heat that we have to take up when we're
thinking about water in the ocean or in fact any water.
And that is that there are two different forms of heat, one that we're very used to and is
very common and another one that we don't think about so often but is actually equally
important.
So we think about heat as either sensible heat or what's called latent heat.
Now sensible heat is exactly what you think of when you think of a change in temperature.
It's the amount of heat that you can sense, meaning sense with a thermometer let's say.
It's the heat absorbed or released during any change in temperature.
Latent heat though is the energy, again the heat, that must be absorbed or released to
change the state of some material from liquid to solid or liquid to vapor.
So for example, freezing or evaporating water requires the input of a lot of latent heat
and doesn't necessarily change in temperature at all at that time.
Let's look at that in a little bit more detail because it's a little bit of a confusing concept.
So the sensible heat for changing the temperature of water is simple, one calorie per degree
per gram of water.
So if we take a little bit of water and let's say we put it in a pan and put it on the stove
and we add heat by putting a flame under it, well as that heat energy, as that energy is
put into the bottom of the pan, it starts raising the temperature of the water and at
one calorie of energy input per gram you get one degree of rise and that goes all the way
up until it reaches the boiling point, right, it reaches 100 degrees C. At that point the
water will start to boil and it starts to turn from liquid to water vapor.
Well if you actually have a thermometer in the pan you'll see that the thermometer would
go up to 100 degrees C and then it wouldn't go up anymore until all the water has boiled
away.
You can't make the water any hotter than that but you're still putting lots of energy in
at the bottom by burning the burner underneath the pan and what you're doing is you're feeding
that energy into the latent heat of evaporation of the water and that's an enormous number.
That's 540 calories per gram in order to convert the water into water vapor or to convert it
into steam essentially, well water vapor.
And so you have to put all that heat in to convert it before you can start to raise the
temperature of it, now it would be a gas any higher than 100 degrees.
Similarly at the other end if we took the same pan of water and put it in the freezer we
could lower its temperature quickly down to the freezing point but then it would take what's
called the latent heat of fusion or of freezing 80 calories per gram in order to turn it into
ice.
So there's this huge sort of hump of heat that you have to get over in order to convert
water from liquid to either gas or a solid.
That's the latent or hidden, that's what latent means right, latent heat of fusion and the
latent heat of evaporation.
That's that energy that has to be put in or removed without changing temperature at all
during those state changes.
Well what all of this means, both the high heat capacity of liquid water and then these
large latent heats of fusion and evaporation mean that the ocean is this phenomenal global
thermostat or global kind of a thermal mass that regulates the temperature of the surface
of the planet.
The high heat capacity means that the water holds a lot of heat in without changing the
temperature very much.
We call that thermal inertia, the idea that the ocean has, it's sort of slow and very
difficult to change the temperature a lot very quickly, it has a high thermal inertia.
The latent heat of fusion and evaporation means that the heat content of the ocean can
change pretty drastically without going outside this temperature range between zero centigrade
or 32 Fahrenheit and 100 degrees centigrade, 212 Fahrenheit, which of course the ocean
never really gets anywhere near boiling in our experience.
But what this does then is it actually creates this thermal mass, this heat sink for the
planet that prevents very large swings in temperature between day and night and winter
and summer and that's true for the entire planet.
If we compare the earth to Mars, Mars has night to day changes in temperature that can
range up to as much as something like 150 degrees Fahrenheit, it'd be pretty awful if the noon
time was 150 degrees warmer than the middle of the night, but that's exactly what it
is like, that's exactly what it would be like on a planet like earth but without a liquid
ocean on the surface to modulate all of that temperature swing.
So we can see this in regional climate too, I happen to live in Madison, Wisconsin, middle
of North American continent, long way away from the ocean.
So that means I have summer temperatures that are relatively high, similar to other parts
of the country, it gets up to 90 degrees or so, but in the winter time of course as everybody
knows in Wisconsin things get pretty cold.
If I look on the same line of latitude, so the same distance north over to the west coast,
I reach somewhere around Portland, Oregon or the coast of Oregon in that region.
If you live in Portland, Oregon you know that your summer time highs are not as high as
in Madison and your winter time lows are not nearly as low as in Madison, even though
they're at the same latitude and that's of course because Portland is sort of benefiting
or at least is being smoothed out in temperature by the large thermal inertia of the enormous
Pacific Ocean and it's heat retaining capacity that's nearby.
Portland's not even on the coast exactly, it's a good distance away from the coast,
but it still maintains that what we call a maritime climate, a climate that is modulated
by the thermal mass and the thermal inertia of the very large ocean.
So this happens globally and it happens regionally.
Well the thing is that this global ocean thermostat has persisted throughout geological
time for as long as the ocean's been around because it's a basic property of the physics
of water, this high heat capacity and the latent heats have kept the global ocean from
either freezing solid or boiling away for several billion years and we saw it before
when we talked about the history of the ocean and the fact that it seems to have had life
going on within it for all of that time.
So it's an enormous stabilizing influence on the earth's habitability and the existence
of the liquid ocean has kept the earth's surface in the kind of comfort zone or what
we already called the Goldilocks zone where liquid water exists and we have to have that
if we want to have life because as we know, the one thing that all life seems to have
in common on earth is that it has to have liquid water in order to keep going and keep
reproducing.
Well we do know that liquid water on our planet does sometimes turn into ice of course, we
have glaciers, we have snow and we have frozen sea ice.
We have the pack ice of the Arctic Ocean for example.
So let's take a look at the properties of ice and this is another place where this strange
polar molecule, this simple H2O molecule has some very special properties that govern the
state of everything on our planet essentially.
And that is that frozen water, ice is a very unusual substance.
Now ice is really a mineral, you might not think of it that way, but it's simply a crystalline
structure.
So if we make the analogy to any rock mineral you could say then that water is like lava,
it's the fluid part right and the rock, the crystal and solid is like the ice.
Well when the polar molecule H2O bonds together to form the crystal lattice structure of ice,
some things happen.
The main one is that the hydrogen bonds go from that interbond angle or interionic angle
of 105 degrees out to 109 and that's just so they could all interlock with each other
and bond to the oxygens of the next molecule over.
But the effect of this is that water expands about 9% as it freezes.
So we all know that if you put an ice cube in a glass of water, the ice cube floats.
Similarly the ice in the Arctic Ocean floats on top of the water, the ice is less dense
than water.
Well this makes it a really, really strange mineral, virtually everything else on the
planet, its molten form is less dense than its solid form and so therefore the solid
crystal would sink and the liquid, the magma let's say, would come to the top.
Okay, so ice floats on water, big deal, what does that do for us?
Well the thing is that if the ice floats on the water then it sits on top and it creates
a kind of a thermal blanket or an insulating blanket over the top of this water.
So any ice that forms in the ocean is going to form on the surface keeping the liquid
water below and this holds true for lakes and things on the continents too.
How do the fish survive in a lake in Wisconsin where I live?
Well the surface freezes pretty solid but most of the lake is still liquid water and
that's because of that density difference.
If the ocean froze solid, that is to say if ice were denser than water then the ice crystals
would sink to the bottom, they would accumulate in the ocean, more would form at the top and
pretty quickly most of the ocean would have frozen solid or at least in any region where
there was the ability to freeze the water and send it down to the bottom of the ocean
because the seafloor is generally pretty cold.
Well earth would be uninhabitable, we would have frozen large parts of the ocean solid
maybe the entire ocean solid at periods in earth's history.
So again we're fortunate that ice is less dense than water and basically floats on top
of it.
Now water density and temperature are even stranger than that in some ways because like
most materials when you warm water up it expands a little bit, I'm talking about liquid
water now, it expands a little bit and gets less dense.
So the density of water decreases with higher temperature but as we get down close to the
freezing point of water it does something very strange.
It reaches a maximum density at about 4 degrees Celsius where it reaches that 1 gram per cubic
centimeter density right, that's the definition of density, is a weight per unit of volume
so 1 cubic centimeter of water, 1 milliliter of water, same thing, weighs 1 gram, that's
how the metric system is actually defined, it's nice and simple.
Water that's warmer is less dense but interestingly water between 4 degrees C and 0 degrees C is
also less dense as the hydrogen bonds start to migrate and we get the first stages of
what's going to become frozen crystal and water, it actually gets just a tiny bit less
dense, a fraction of a percent.
And then when it actually freezes it jumps to a significantly lower density, that 9 percent
lower density.
So water has some pretty unusual properties as a liquid and as a solid.
Okay, well what about seawater?
I've been talking about pure water but we're interested in the ocean aren't we?
So seawater, the dissolved solids, the salinity of seawater has a few important effects on
its properties.
First of all, the fact that you have a bunch of dissolved solids raises the density a little
bit.
If pure water is 1 gram per cubic centimeter, then seawater is about 1.03 or 1.035 grams
per cubic centimeter.
Why?
Well remember what salinity is, it's just the weight of the dissolved inorganic compounds
and so we said that was about 3.5 percent or 35 per mil and so therefore the density
of water is that much higher when you dissolve that stuff in it.
A second property is that the saltiness of the water acts as a kind of anti-freeze.
We all know that you put salt on the roads to try to keep the water from freezing so
seawater with its salinity freezes at a temperature of a little less than minus 2 degrees Celsius.
And so it delays that freezing just a little bit and inhibits the formation of ice.
Finally, when it actually does reach that temperature and starts to freeze, the freezing
of seawater excludes all that salinity, all those dissolved solutes.
So you freeze seawater, you don't get frozen ocean water, you get frozen freshwater.
It's almost like a distillation process.
It gets pure water, pure frozen freshwater.
Well that means what it leaves behind is all the solutes that were in that bit of the water.
So the still liquid water that's adjacent to that frozen bit is now higher salinity.
It's more of a brine and if it's more saline, it has more dissolved solids and therefore
it's denser water.
So it's water that has a little bit higher density than the other water in the ocean
around it.
Well that brings up the question of what's the importance, in fact, of the density of
water.
Well like most substances, as I said, seawater expands and becomes less dense as it warms.
And so it also becomes more dense with a little bit of salinity or with a little bit greater
salinity than otherwise than fresh water.
So the density of water varies over relatively small amounts, just a few percent, but it
varies with temperature and with saltiness or salinity.
Well it turns out that the density of that seawater controls a great deal, as we're
going to see, about the structure of the water column and in particular the layered structure
of the pelagic open ocean.
We have near surface water and then water down to the average four kilometer depth and
it has density variations in it.
Let's look at those in a little bit of detail.
Basically, ocean water forms these stable layers by density.
We say the ocean is stratified by density and there's a surface zone and then there's
a deep zone and there's something in between.
So the surface zone is a region where waves and currents keep things pretty well mixed
together and so there's pretty uniform density property, but the surface zone water tends
to be low density.
It's low density because it's warmed by the sun, it's low density because of the input
of fresh water perhaps from rain and from rivers, but mainly it's low density because
lower density water will rise and higher density water will sink, just like hot air rises and
cold air sinks for the same reason.
So the surface water is the least dense and it's all mixed.
The deep zone, something like 80% of the volume of the ocean, the zone that turns out is
below several hundred to about a thousand meters or so is pretty cold and it's not moving
very fast because it's not stirred up by the waves and much by the wind and ocean currents
and so it's a mass of relatively dense cold water with that standard seawater salinity.
In between the surface zone and the deep zone then is a region that's called the pycnocline.
Pycnocline is a word root that just relates to density or weight of something and then
a client is like an incline, it's a gradient.
So the pycnocline is the region that just is the sharp gradient or the depth zone over
which the gradient in density changes relatively rapidly in the ocean and the pycnocline is
in different depths in most of the world's ocean but it starts at about a hundred or
a couple of hundred meters down and extends down to maybe a thousand meters or so as I
said. But it's a strong density gradient.
Now we know that salt water, seawater has a density that's governed by salinity and by
temperature. So both of those things actually affect the density and therefore the pycnocline
is reflected as a gradient in all of these other properties as well.
The most important one and the most directly measurable one is what's called the thermocline.
Okay, thermo, so heat related, so I'm talking about the depth zone of a strong temperature
gradient. The pycnocline is also very typically a thermocline. Near surface waters are warmer,
they're relatively well mixed, they go through a big gradient over a few hundred meter range
and then the deep ocean is not quite uniform in temperature but pretty close and in fact
the temperature of the water in the deep ocean is from just you know five or ten degrees
C normally down to about one or two degrees C or near the polar regions even actually
slightly below zero again because of that antifreeze property of the salinity.
Well if there's a thermocline then there's also a salinity incline or a salinity gradient
and the name we give that is the halocline. Maybe you've heard that the geological name
for salt is halite, h-a-l, another root that means salt so a halocline is the salinity
gradient in the water column. All of these things are reflection of the same property
that the density is lower at the surface, it's fairly uniform at depth and there's
a steep gradient that kind of separates the ocean into a surface zone and a deep zone
and this is going to have huge implications for ocean currents where life lives in the
ocean and the stirring and mixing in general of the ocean as a whole. So fundamental property
of physical and chemical oceanography is this separation into surface zones and deep zones
with an intermediate steep gradient in all of these properties.
Well if we look at the thermocline we can actually see that the ocean has a strong
thermocline but it varies a lot depending on where we are on the planet and we're going
to return to this story a little later on in the course when we deal with temperature
zones on the planet but basically the thermocline is very strongly developed in tropical regions
as you might imagine the surface waters are very warm but the deep water is still cold
even in tropical regions so you have this very strongly developed large thermocline and along
with it a pycnocline. In temperate regions it's sort of intermediate and then in polar
regions the surface water is cold and so is the deep water so the thermocline is not
very pronounced.
Well let's take up another physical property of water and this one's pretty easy to deal
with that's pressure. Okay pressure increases with depth in the ocean no surprise right?
Pressure is just a function of the weight of the of the medium the fluid medium that
surrounds you. So we're standing here on the surface of the earth of course we're under
a pressure of 15 pounds per square inch everybody knows that and that pressure comes from the
weight of the atmosphere actually the physical weight of the gas the air above our heads.
Now we're under that pressure here at the surface 15 pounds per square inch sounds like
a lot if you put a 15 pound weight on your hand on one square inch it would be quite
a compression but of course we don't feel it because we have that pressure inside our
bodies as well as outside of our bodies. Well gas the atmosphere is not very heavy it doesn't
have much density but the ocean has a lot of density it has that one gram per cubic centimeter
that's one kilogram per per liter of water and that means it's a thousand kilograms
essentially a ton for a cubic meter of water cubic meter is not such a big thing so water
is incredibly heavy and what it means is that the pressure increases as you go down in the
water about one atmosphere one equivalent of that atmospheric pressure for every ten meters you
go down in the ocean. Now that means that at the average depth of the bottom of the ocean of say
four kilometers we're at four hundred atmospheres of pressure. Well a human being let's say scuba
diving can stand to go to a you know a pressure of maybe three to four a little bit more atmospheres
for the really extreme divers but that's it. Our bodies have gases inside our lungs can inflate
anymore at higher pressures than that we're not compensated for the pressure around us once we're
in the water like we are in the atmosphere so we really feel it. If you want to go to a higher
pressure than that you need a pressure chamber that means you need a submersible like Alvin so
when I told you about getting down getting into the Alvin submarine and going to two and a half
kilometers below the sea surface I certainly wasn't under the pressure at the bottom of the
ocean the submarine itself was under that pressure and that pressure chamber was keeping that pressure
off of us fortunately or we wouldn't have survived. Well I'd like to take up finally then the last
piece of this the sort of story of the physics of ocean water and that's the penetration of light
into the ocean and we've already said that well one of the problems with mapping the sea floor is
that light doesn't go through the water and can't you know be used to image the bottom and not even
radar or other forms of electromagnetic radiation get through water. So we can ask the questions
kind of like why is the sky blue well why is the ocean blue and why do we call it the deep blue sea?
Well light penetrates the ocean water to a certain degree and we certainly have a zone of the ocean
that's lit up and we call it the photic zone if you go down to some depth in the water you still
see light of course coming through the water but it's typically a very shallow zone you start to
see changes even just a few meters down by a hundred to two hundred and fifty meters maybe in the
absolute clearest water parts of the ocean up to maybe five or six hundred meters there's detectable
amounts of light penetrating but no deeper than that and of course the ocean is four thousand meters
deeper more on average so most of the ocean is the aphotic zone as we've already discussed. Within
the photic zone light is absorbed by again the polar properties of the water molecule and the energy
the wavelength of the light is coming in and it vibrates those molecules and they absorb and scatter
the wave energy of the sunlight. They do this differentially they differentially absorb the light
by color and because that each color of light in the spectrum has a slightly different wavelength
of the light radiation and so therefore they affect the water molecule differently. So it turns
out that if we looked at kind of a spectrum the light that's most rapidly absorbed are the reds and
the oranges the things that at that end of the wavelength scale and it's the blues and greens
but especially blue light that penetrates the farthest into the ocean. So there's differential
absorption of different colors blue penetrates the furthest and so it's back scattered from the
water and so that makes the water look blue. All the other light has already been absorbed and
doesn't penetrate as far and therefore we don't see as much of it when we look down into the water.
Now the light penetration in the ocean exponentially declines with depth so by only one meter depth
in the water only about 45 percent less than half of the light that's shining on the surface has
reached that one meter depth. Only about 16 percent or so of light has made it to 10 meters and only
a percent or less is making it to 100 meters even in the clearest water where it doesn't have a lot
of particles and things like that in it. So if we look at the light in the ocean we can see it
really graphically just look at a tropical fish swimming on a reef maybe only a few meters down
in the water and if we photograph it in the ambient light that's present at that depth the light
is mostly blue wavelength only and it's really got a deficit of color in it. We flash electronic
strobes so we get a full spectrum light on that and we see all the different vibrant colors of
that organism and in fact many of those tropical reef fish and other organisms have evolved to
have brilliant colors on them to sort of compensate for the fact that the light that they're in
doesn't really show those brilliant colors to their full degree. So we call it the deep blue sea
right but if you go and stand on the beach and you look out at the water usually it looks kind of
green sometimes kind of brownish even and maybe gray but really not that sort of a kind of vibrant
blue that you're seeing in this photograph that I actually took over the side of a ship out in the
middle of the ocean and well the difference of course is the particulate matter that's in the
water so anywhere you're on the coastline you're looking at water that is over the continental
shelf the shelf is pretty far offshore it's maybe in breaking waves and things like that so it's
it's got a lot of mud and also algae or phytoplankton and things like that mixed in making it green but
when you get well offshore especially off the continental shelf into the deep water the ocean
really is a vibrant and brilliant blue and no I haven't modified the colors of the image that has
this fish swimming in it it's actually a mahi mahi that's what the the real true deep blue
ocean looks like virtually anywhere you go on a sunlit day so we've seen in this lecture and
the previous one that in many ways water is the defining physical substance for life in the
surface environment on earth and it's it's really the specific special properties of water our
luckiness that earth just happens to be the liquid water bearing planet because of its distance
from the sun because of its initial composition and because of its amount of gravity that held
the water here that has maintained the earth the way it is and that includes the heat retaining
capacity of water the density of water and the special properties it takes when it freezes and
how it transmits light those are all things that control oceanic processes and we'll be looking at
many of those processes controlled by water over the course of the next few lectures and finally I
just want to kind of leave us with the the fundamental thought that the ocean is the earth's great
heat sink those heat retaining properties are maybe the most important ones of all it's kept the
entire planet in this narrow very narrow really temperature range hospitable to life for literally
billions of years
