In the last few lectures, we've considered the effects of waves on the ocean's surface.
And we've looked at waves from the smallest to the biggest, the capillary waves and wind
waves that have wavelengths of centimeters to maybe meters or even hundreds of meters
for the largest wind waves.
And then even the tsunami, the very long wavelength, hundreds of kilometer wavelength waves that
travel about the entire ocean or large scale travel about the ocean basins.
Now what I'd like to do is consider the longest wavelength waves on the planet of all, the
ocean tides.
You might not think of the tides as even a wave, but actually that's exactly what they
are.
That has a wavelength that's equal to half the circumference of the earth, 20,000 kilometers.
In this lecture, we'll see why that is and why I call them a wave at all, and along the
way we'll do a little bit of sort of theoretical physics to understand the tides.
Ocean tides can be just defined as periodic and short term changes in the height of the
ocean's surface caused by, as we sort of all know, gravitational attraction of the moon
and perhaps by something we don't know as well, the gravitational attraction of the
sun as well, when combined with the rotation of the earth.
And we'll see how that works in just a few minutes.
I just described the tides as a long wavelength, in fact the longest wavelength wave, and we'll
see that the tides like the tsunami are kind of counter-intuitively a shallow water wave
even in the open ocean.
And we'll also see how these fairly simple causes, just the effect of the moon and the
sun and the spin of the earth, produce pretty complex effects due to the fact that the earth
has an irregularly shaped sea floor, it has coastlines and continents that interfere with
the motion of the tides sort of around the planet.
Well tides have long been a part of human history.
I think that probably some of the very first oceanographic observations that human beings
ever made were the rhythmic and periodic beating of the tides, you know, the rise and fall
and the monthly cycles that the tides made.
So much of our interaction with the ocean has been at the coastline, and so the tides
played an enormous role in various kinds of human activity.
One just really dramatic example of this is Mont Saint-Michel in France, if you've ever
traveled to Mont Saint-Michel and seen the fortress built on a rock out on the mudflats
or tidal plains, intertidal region of the coastline there, you know that at low tide
basically Mont Saint-Michel is on exposed land, one could walk out or even perhaps nowadays
one can drive out the causeway to it, but in the old days there was no causeway and
travel directly to the city.
When the tide rises though, tide comes up and surrounds that rock and it's completely
inundated with water, flooded all around it.
So the tides have been important in human history, but let's back up and let's talk
about the fundamental theory of ocean tides and what I'm going to do in this lecture
is talk first about something called the equilibrium theory of tides, that's the simple approach
to how tides work on the planet, calculated from kind of first principles of physics,
and then we'll make that a little bit more complicated by looking at something called
the dynamic model of tides that incorporates the actual dynamics of the motion of water
in the ocean, and then finally we'll kind of take that into the real world prediction
of actual tides in actual places on the planet, and that really uses tidal history as well
as sort of basic calculations or basic theory.
Okay, so the equilibrium theory first.
Well, equilibrium theory just says that tides are caused by gravity and inertia on the planet,
and we know that the tides are somehow associated with the moon, and as I said they're also
associated with the sun, so let's take a look at how that works.
Well, we have to go all the way back to Isaac Newton and some of the basic laws of motion.
Maybe you remember that there is a theory of gravitational attraction, or the theory
of what's called universal gravitation that Newton put forth, and it's actually a very
simple theory, it just says that any two objects that have some mass, whether that's a cannon
ball and a feather in my hands, or whether that's the earth and the moon, or the earth
and the sun, those two objects with mass have an attraction to each other based on the force
of gravity, in fact that is what generates the force of gravity, and there's a very
simple equation that relates the two.
The force of gravity is basically just the mass of one object times the mass of the other
object, so let's say the earth and the moon times some constant number, which is called
big G, the universal gravitational constant, it's a really big number, it doesn't matter
for our purposes what it is, because it's a constant.
So the mass of the earth times the mass of the moon times this number big G, and then
the whole thing divided by the square of the distance between the two objects.
So gmm over r squared equals the force.
So the distance between actually specifically the center of mass of the two objects defines
the gravitational attraction between them.
So the earth and the moon attract each other by a certain amount of gravity, and the earth
is much bigger than the moon, so that's why the moon is in orbit around the planet earth.
Well the tides are caused by the pull of the moon because the moon doesn't just pull on
the planet earth as a solid object, but it pulls on the water of the ocean as well, the
ocean has mass, the ocean is part of a gravitational system, any object that has mass has gravity.
So when we look at the forces on the ocean, just like the forces on the earth, we can
calculate those forces based on the distance to the moon and the mass of the moon.
And we can also do the same calculation using the exact same equation, but just basically
substituting the sun for the moon and calculate the effect of the pull of the sun on the earth.
Well it turns out of course that the sun is vastly more massive than the moon, so the
multiplication of the masses is much larger, but the distance to the sun is much much much
further away than the distance to the moon, the moon is a few hundred thousand kilometers
away, the sun is several hundred million kilometers away.
So the tides are caused or sort of the resolved force of gravity on the ocean at the surface
of the earth is about two thirds due to the moon and about one third due to the sun, but
the sun is a pretty significant factor, you know, it's not just the moon, one third of
it is due to the sun.
So then the key sort of third component to build up our equilibrium theory of the tides
is the rotation of the earth about its axis, the day-night rotation, but also the rotation
of the earth and moon system.
The moon is revolving around the earth and so therefore twenty-eight days go by and the
moon makes one complete cycle around the earth while the earth has spun twenty-eight
times on its rotational axis.
It's not exactly correct to say that the moon just revolves around the earth, actually
the two of them revolve around their common center of mass, it's as if you had a, you
know, a kind of a bar with dumbbells on either end and you set it spinning, but one dumbbell
is a lot bigger and the other is a lot smaller and so therefore it kind of has this wobbly
rotation that is really the two of them wobbling around their common center of mass.
Well, the earth is so much bigger than the moon that the common center of mass is actually
still within the radius of the earth, so mostly it just looks like the moon goes around the
earth, but actually earth wobbles a little bit because of that.
But the ocean itself is being pulled towards the moon at any given time, so the water of
the ocean literally rushes towards where the moon is because of the gravitational attraction
of the moon.
We'll leave the sun out for the moment, we'll bring that back in a minute.
So there's a bulge, literally a bulge in the ocean several meters high on the side of the
earth that's facing towards the moon.
Now because the two are these dumbbells that are rotating or revolving about each other,
then there's also a sort of an equal and opposite bulge pointing away from the moon in the exact
opposite direction of the earth based on centrifugal forces, based on the fact that
the water is trying to rush away as it's spinning around like this.
So if we think about the tides, we think, well, if I'm standing in a particular area
on the earth, you know, the tide comes up and the tide goes down, the tide comes up
again and goes down basically twice per day.
And in most areas, we'll see that that gets a little bit more complicated.
But that's basically what you're seeing is that the tide is coming by twice a day because
you're first going through the bulge that's towards the moon and then second going through
the bulge that's away from the moon as the earth spins around on its daily 24 hour axis.
So really we're thinking about it the wrong way when we think about standing in one place
on the earth and the tide coming in and the tide going out and the tide coming in and
going out.
That's the way it feels, but in a way what's actually happening, what's actually happening
is that the tide is pointing towards the moon and away from the moon all the time and the
earth is spinning around literally underneath the tides.
The ocean is pointing towards the celestial objects and the land is spinning around.
Let's take a look at how that happens in this simple animation.
So you see the moon going around the earth in its 28 day cycle while the earth is spinning
on its 24 hour cycle and the very exaggerated sort of watery envelope around the earth in
the animation is pointed towards the moon all the time.
Now its bulge is shaped a little bit differently because of the effect of the sun and we'll
see that in a second.
The sun is often one direction the whole time.
So the interaction of the lunar tide and then the effect of the sun changes the level of
the tide a little bit as the day goes by, we'll see it.
But since the day is 24 hours long, the tide comes a little later each day because over
the course of that 24 hours the moon has moved one-twenty-eighth of its monthly cycle around
the earth.
So 24 over 28 gives us 50 minutes and so the tide comes in 50 minutes later on average
each day of the month.
So that's a complete tidal day then.
The tidal cycle is that the high tide comes when the particular place in the earth that
you're standing on is facing towards the moon and a day goes by the tide comes in just
a little later because now the moon is often a slightly different position.
That's the fundamental equilibrium theory of tides.
There are a few more pieces of it that make it a little bit more complicated.
The tidal bulges follow the lunar position but the moon doesn't sort of stay over the
equator of the earth.
It actually has a tilt up to 28 and a half degrees either north or south of the plane
of the equator.
So we can have a higher tide in the northern hemisphere at one time and the southern hemisphere
opposite it and then those can switch places.
And what that means then is that as the tide rolls around the earth, we see that lunar
position in complicating the tides a little bit such that if you're at one particular
latitude, let's say in the northern hemisphere, you see a higher tide for the first tide
of the day and then a lower high tide for the second tide of the day.
So a higher high and then a lower high and then a lowest low and then a less low or a
higher low tide.
Sounds a little confusing but the point is that you just sort of have a cycle that isn't
completely symmetrical as the day goes by and that's because the moon is either above
or below the plane of the equator on the earth.
Okay, so I said that the sun affects the tides as well and we need to take a look at the
gravitational influence of the sun on the tidal cycle.
Well, we know that the sun goes from new moon to quarter moon to full moon, three quarter
back to new moon over the course of a month.
And the earth and the moon system of course are going around the sun all year long.
So sometimes the moon is lined up with the same line or plane between the earth and
the sun and sometimes it's sort of at a right angle to it.
When the moon is lined up with the earth and the sun, that's the new moon when the moon
is in between the earth and the sun, we call it a new moon because we don't see the reflected
light of the sun coming from the surface of the moon at all, the moon is dark.
That creates a sort of a gravitational reinforcement, the lunar tidal effect and the solar tidal
effect are lined up with each other and the tide is especially large.
We call that a spring tide, not because it comes in the spring time but because the tide
springs up onto the beach, it's especially large tide.
Halfway through the lunar month then when you get to the full moon, the moon is on the
opposite side of the earth from the sun but still their gravitational forces are lined
up with each other and you have another especially large tidal period at the full moon time.
In contrast to that, at the quarter moon time, the moon's gravitational attraction is at
right angles to the sun's gravitational attraction.
The sun is one third, the moon is two third, so the main high tide still essentially follows
the lunar position but the sun and the moon partially cancel each other out.
So the tidal range is subdued, it's not as high high or low low tide during these quarter
moon periods.
We call those neap tides, the tides that are the smallest range over the course of a month.
So we have tides that are not equal in size over the span of a month but we have a sort
of a beating week by week from spring tide to neap tide and so on.
So the tidal record for a typical month then is that you have constructive interference
of the solar and lunar wave essentially or gravitational tide during the spring tides.
You have destructive interference just as we talked about with rogue waves during the
neap tide period.
Well we have high water then or high tides and low tides so sometimes we can define then
a kind of an average over the course of a month for any given location of mean high water
taking into account the fact that sometimes it's higher and sometimes it's less high and
mean low water, sometimes abbreviated, MLH and MHW, sorry, MLW and MHW, mean low water
and mean high water.
Well we have a further complication and that is that the moon and the earth system doesn't
go around the sun in a circular orbit, right, it goes around the sun in an elliptical orbit
and so there's a seasonal cyclical variation in the height of the spring tides or of the
neap tides and the reason for that is, again, all the way back to Newton's gravity, remember
how the gravity works, the force of gravitational attraction depends on the distance.
Well when the earth is closest to the sun then the tidal range is highest, it's a little
bit stronger, when the earth is further away from the sun the tidal range is a little bit
lower because the sun's gravitational attraction is smaller.
Now earth is closest to the sun, remember, in our northern hemisphere winter time, that's
just the way it works, we don't have seasons because of proximity to the sun and in the
southern hemisphere that's summertime, but the tidal range is highest in the northern
hemisphere winter and so the largest tides that flood the coasts that cause the biggest
tidal range tend to come in winter here in North America.
Okay, well this equilibrium theory of tides then is all well and good, but the real world
is more complicated than that because the water can't simply slosh around the whole
planet in a gigantic wave with a wavelength of half the planetary circumference because
there are things that get in the way and of course those things are continents and coastlines,
we don't live on a water world completely, we live on one that has continents and land.
So the water has to move from place to place, both from deep water to shallow water and
things like that, so there are dynamic effects, the water has to rush into different regions.
If you think about equilibrium theory of tides, it basically says the water has to follow the
moon over the course of a daily cycle and so it turns out that the speed, the celerity
of the tidal wave, so to speak, should be 1600 kilometers an hour just to keep up with
going all the way around the earth.
But the tides are a wave with a wavelength of 20,000 kilometers, so close to 20,000 kilometers,
so they have to be shallow water waves even in the deep ocean and you remember what shallow
water waves do, they have a velocity that's determined by their water depth, not by their
wavelength, so the 1600 kilometers an hour isn't really achieved by the tides, they have
to stream from one place to another, the water has to literally flow and so all of this happens
between that and the continents getting in the way and produces complex water motions
that we have to account for in something called the dynamic theory of tides.
Well dynamic theory is complicated and so I won't go into the physics anymore of it,
but basically it produces a couple of different common types of tides.
The simplest one is a tide we call a semi-diurnal tide and that just means the tide comes in
out two times per day and has about equal dimension for the high tides and low tides,
so it's a very regular sort of sine wave pretty close to our kind of equilibrium concept of
tides there. More common is actually a tide that we'll call a mixed tide which comes
in two times per day, but in non-equal size, again because of the moon is not right over
the equator and so on, so we have mixed tides in many places around the planet that include
a higher high tide and a lower high tide each day and the same for the low tides.
And then there are other places especially when they're around kind of large but still
confined ocean basins like something like the Gulf of Mexico where we have what are
called diurnal tides and it turns out they only come in one time per day instead of
two times per day and the dynamic motion of the water is just complicated enough that
it tends to swirl around these basins in such a way that we get a diurnal as opposed to
a semi diurnal tide in those regions. If you look around the planet, if you look around
the North American coastlines you see a distribution of all these different tides. Most areas, probably
the majority of areas have mixed tides but a number of specific regions have either the
semi diurnal or diurnal types of tides. Well, because tides are moving water dynamically
around large parts of the ocean, we can also talk about sort of the way the tides sweep
through the ocean basins or sweep through smaller basins like the Gulf of Mexico or
confined bays even and even quite small areas, Chesapeake Bay or something like that.
And so there's a thing that is called or there's a concept that's called amphidromic
circulation, kind of a mouthful of a word, but amphidromic just means an area where the tide
sweeps around in some way and an amphidromic point is a no tide location in the ocean, a
node in this tide wave that's sweeping along the coastline. Let me explain what that means a
little bit. So when the tide water enters into any kind of basin, very schematically drawn,
as a sort of a U shaped basin here to explain the concept a little bit, the water enters the
basin to go up to high tide and it leaves the basin to come down to low tide. But the water
doesn't just move in and out because it's affected by something on the planet that's called the
Coriolis effect. We're going to look at the Coriolis effect in a little bit more detail when
we look at ocean currents in a few lectures. But for the moment let's just remember that the
Coriolis effect deflects the water motion because of the rotation of the earth. And so the
water that's entering any basin in the northern hemisphere deflects in a counterclockwise way
and so it tends to turn to the right as it's moving northward let's say. In the southern
hemisphere does the opposite, it turns in a clockwise rotation. So the Coriolis effect causes the
water to slosh into the basin, not in a kind of a straight line, but to enter the basin and move
to the right and make a high tide along one side of the basin and then kind of work its way around
the back of the basin as the tide fills to the top and then as it's streaming back out still
turning the right so it rotates around the basin and back out again. Well that's amphidromic
circulation, this sort of rotational motion of the tide through any kind of circular U shaped
or even roughly U shaped basin like that. Well the center of the basin at some point within
that then, there's a point about which all of this rotation is going on. So if we think of a tide as
kind of this wave sloshing around in the basin there's a central point that doesn't go up and down.
That's the node or the amphidromic point and the high tide lines then come in at and sweep around
like spokes on a wheel around that amphidromic point. So we can think of the node at the center,
not necessarily exactly in the geographic center, and then the tide coming in one hour, two hours,
three hours, four hours and later with the spokes of the wheel are essentially what we call
cotidal lines, lines of equal amounts of tide, but with a range of the tide at zero at the center
and getting larger and larger as we go out the amphidromic wheel as it were.
So in the world's ocean there are actually amphidromic points even for the biggest basins like the scale
of the Pacific basin or the Atlantic basin. And if we look at a map of global tidal circulation,
and this was really developed largely from some of the satellite ranging measurements in the 1990s
and beyond that I talked about in a previous lecture, you can see amphidromic points in the world's ocean
even at this very large scale. Areas of no tidal range at all, mostly out in the center of the ocean
so they're not really detected by a lot of people, but it's why some islands have almost no tide at all
out in the middle of the ocean.
Well everybody's probably also heard about areas that are what we call macro tidal, places that have
especially large tidal range, and confined basins and areas that have the appropriate geometry
for the tidal water that's rushing in to be sort of funneled and concentrated into shallower and shallower
water over a smaller and smaller area are regions that are good candidates for becoming macro tidal,
macro just big tide areas. The most famous one is certainly the Bay of Fundy in Canada,
an area that experiences tides of tens of meters range up and down every day as the tide rushes in
and rushes back out of the actually the small bays that are at the back of the Bay of Fundy
which is between Nova Scotia and New Brunswick in the Atlantic Ocean in Canada.
So there's a famous state park called Hopewell Rocks in the Bay of Fundy.
If we look at just a time-lapse video image taken from a single spot of the tide going up and going down
in this region around this bay, then we can see that the range of the tide is phenomenal.
If you watch the time-lapse video carefully you'll see that there's a bunch of people that go out there
at low tide, you can go explore these beautiful rock formations that have been eroded by the water level
of the high tide coming in and going down every day at Hopewell Rocks.
As the video progresses you see kayakers exploring around the same area that people were walking around,
the tides coming in, and it's something like the height of a two-story building before it goes back down again
in the Bay of Fundy.
Okay, so the net effect of this dynamic theory of tides and the complexities of the coastline
and the complexities of the amphidromic circulation and everything else is that the tides vary a lot
from place to place.
So tidal prediction, the ability to say when and where and how high the high tide will be
or the low tide will be on a given day is based on these equilibrium and dynamic theories of tides,
but it's also sort of tuned to or calibrated to the local history in any given spot.
Because unless you know everything about exactly how deep the water is and all the spots offshore
and exactly the shape of the coastline and a lot of other things like that,
you can't quite predict how the water will rush around.
So in order to compensate for that we have tide prediction tables,
and of course the National Oceanographic Administration of the US and many agencies produce these tide predictions
and they're available for many different sources.
If you go to a region where you're interested in fishing or we're interested in hiking along a coastline,
especially one that's cliffy and where you have to make it around some headlands at low tide,
but you don't want to get trapped and head back,
you want to consult the tide prediction tables before you head out there.
If we look at a tide prediction table, they're pretty simple,
and this is just an example, just like many others for any particular place that you can go online and find them,
but you look at it and list the time, the predicted time for a given day,
and you can look this up for any day, months and months and even years into the future if you want,
and it shows you the time of the high tides and low tides,
and it also shows you the height of the tide in feet or meters,
and the height of the tide is usually calculated as the height above what we call the mean low water level,
or the water level that represents the monthly average or the yearly average low water for that particular region,
so it's either a positive or a negative number, so it might say that there's a low tide,
but it's 0.2 feet, and that means that that tide is not quite all the way down to the average low water,
and then other times it'll actually be a negative number because it's a minus tide even below that level.
Well, tides, because they're dynamic and because they have the hydraulics of rushing water,
produce all kinds of different tidal currents as they rush in and out of bays and harbors
and confined regions like estuaries and river mouths with the tidal change in sea level.
So we talk about tide currents in terms of being flood currents and ebb currents,
meaning the water flooding into the region and there can be very strong currents that affect ship traffic
and boat traffic in and out of harbors for the flood of the water up onto the land
and then the ebbing current as the water heads back out to sea,
and in fact sometimes in the old days sailing ships would head out of river mouth harbors,
trying to ride the tidal current on out until they got to where they could really fill their sails with wind.
And of course the period in between when the tide reaches its higher at slow point is slack water,
water that's neither rushing in nor rushing out. These currents can be pretty strong at times.
The most dramatic example of such a phenomenon is actually what's called a tidal bore,
and a tidal bore is when the tide is rushing in with a flood current,
but because it's entering a very confined say channel way like a river that's flooding with the tide,
the water can't rush any faster than a certain speed up that shallow water environment,
and so the tide kind of piles up on itself and it builds a forced wave that's like a surge of water
that will rush up that river. And during especially strong wintertime spring tides on the Severn River in England,
there's a famous tidal bore that we see some beautiful aerial photographs of here
that rushes up the river and people come out by the hundreds and thousands to actually see it
because it only happens a few times a year typically, but when the conditions are right,
it will make this beautiful tidal bore and actually surfers even get on the front of that tidal bore
and ride that wave as it continuously breaks and rushes up the river for miles and miles.
So it's one of the longest possible sort of surf breaks that anybody can actually get
and that's riding the tidal bore of the Severn River.
Well, I'd like to leave you with just one final interesting thought about the tides
because the tidal water motion is happening on our planet
and it's been happening ever since there's been an ocean on the planet.
And so if you have something in motion like water and it's a shallow water wave,
so just like other shallow water waves, it's dragging along the bottom,
it therefore causes some friction.
The water can't move without generating a little bit of heat.
That's just the nature of physics.
If you move something around, you lose a little bit of energy
and that loss of energy is heat.
Well, that energy has to come from somewhere
and what it's doing is it's dissipating the energy of the Earth's rotation.
The tides are literally slowing the Earth down just a little bit.
The moon and the sun affect on the ocean is dragging the Earth slower and slower.
Now, it's not happening very quickly.
The day is getting longer by about 2.3 milliseconds for every century that goes by.
Barely noticeable, but it is true that the length of the day was shorter
if we go back, say, tens or hundreds of millions of years in geological time.
And this was in part because of the effect of tides
slowly slowing the Earth down and slowing that rotation down.
