We're going to continue our exploration of the pelagic world, the open ocean world,
by moving up in scale a little bit from the plankton forms that we looked at the last time.
And we're going to focus in this lecture on the great mass of life in the ocean,
actually that exists from the surface to great depths, that exists with virtually no hard parts at all.
No skeletons, no shells, the jelly-like organisms that fill up the sea in every depth range
from the surface to the bottom of the aphodic zone.
Now except for the surface dwellers, the ones that you can actually see from a boat or something like that,
these organisms as a whole, this whole class of organisms was little known to science until very recently.
And we'll see why that is in a few minutes.
But basically, you know, they're very hard to sample and they leave little trace in the sediments
in the form of fossils or even in modern sediments just in the form of their dead bodies
because they're so soft and they're basically such delicate organisms.
So there's been an explosion in our understanding of these various kinds of soft-bodied jelly-like organisms
over the past couple of decades and we're going to explore them in this lecture,
as well as some of the predators that live deep in the water column that live off of these organisms.
Well in this lecture, as I said, I'm going to focus on the majority of the ocean environment,
the deep pelagic zone or the middle-end deep pelagic zones that are mostly beneath the surface waters themselves.
So let me go back and remind us of a few basic definitions.
You know, at the surface water there's the pelagic-photic zone or sometimes the pelagic-euphotic zone,
the well-lit surface waters that we're familiar with.
As we go below those in the open ocean environment, then from about 200 or so down to 1,000 meters
is a region that oceanographers will call the mesopelagic zone, the middle pelagic zone.
This is the transitional region that's dysphotic in terms of our light.
Sometimes it's actually called the twilight zone.
Yes, that's the name of it and the word twilight zone originally came from oceanography.
And it's the zone where many of the organisms are living in the mid-water column
where there's a little bit of light but not much.
But from 1,000 meters down all the way down to just above the bottom where we enter sort of benthic realms
is what we will just call the deep pelagic.
There are specialized terms like bathy-pelagic or abysso-pelagic,
but for our purposes we'll group it all together and just call it the deep pelagic zone.
The key is though that this is the totally aphotic, dark, deep water of the ocean.
Well, we're going to look at a whole range of different organisms.
All gelatinous, all mostly unfamiliar.
But perhaps the most familiar ones in this whole class of organisms are the jellyfish.
Everybody's aware of what jellyfish look like and we've seen their beautiful forms in different videos
and we've perhaps even encountered them at the beach.
Perhaps we've even been unfortunate enough to have been stung by one now and then.
So we'll start with the jellyfish and then we'll look at some of the creatures that are similar
but much less well known to us.
Well, the jellyfish themselves are in a whole phylum of organisms that are called Nidaria.
And these are basically the same phylum actually as some organisms that we call Cecil,
ones that live on the bottom and stay in one place, like anemones and corals.
And we'll see the ways in which the same types of cells and the same types of structures
have adapted back and forth between the swimming or open water jellyfish versus the Cecil organisms.
But all the Nidaria share a couple of key things.
One is that they all have the stinging cells called Nidocytes, sometimes called nematocytes
and so the CNID is shared between the name of the organism and this particular actual structure in it.
And those are the stinging cells we'll look at in just a second.
They also share a symmetrical body plan so they're sort of circular in plan with a symmetry all the way around
and they're very simple body plan structures.
They have a simple single orifice that's for both intake of food and then expulsion of wastes
and basically all of the Nidaria are largely carnivorous.
They have these stinging cells for a reason and that's to capture prey
and they generally eat crustaceans and fish and small fish and things like that.
Despite their appearance as a sort of very simple organism, yes they are predators and carnivores.
Well jellyfish we're familiar with are Nidaria that have these Nidocytes
that are tiny sort of subcellular structures that are basically harpoon like barbs
that can be shot out of the cell at extremely high velocity
and extremely high accelerations when something is sensed that can trigger those pneumaticists.
They're used to capture and stun or kill prey because they contain stinging toxins
and they range from sort of just an annoyance to other organisms and annoyance to us if we touch them.
In fact not even an annoyance.
If you touch certain kinds of coral, polyps you just feel that it feels a little bit rubbery or strange
without actually hurting but that's actually the pneumaticists.
But these pneumaticists shoot into the skin or organs of other organisms
and can stun and kill and help capture those prey.
Among the most deadly of jellyfish are actually a jellyfish called the sea wasp,
one class of what are called box jellyfish.
They inhabit the waters near Australia and New Guinea
and are probably the most lethal of jellies to humans.
One of the most lethal organisms that exists in the ocean,
a sting from the sea wasp can put you in the hospital for a long time
and potentially cause heart failure and death.
The toxins that the pneumaticists produce though are specific to different specific individual organisms
so some things that are very toxic to one reef fish will be not toxic at all for example to us
or have only very low toxicity.
So there's chemical pathways that are specific to different organisms.
Well there's a vast array of other jelly-like organisms besides the basic jellyfish or the true jellyfish
and many are really only recently described or discovered or really understood to biology in any significant way.
We're going to look at a sample of a few of these and the most closely related are the siphonophores
that I'll discuss in a moment and then we'll talk about a number of different organisms
that you may have never even heard of like tinophores and salps and pteropods.
Let's see what some of these organisms do and how they make their living in the ocean.
Well the first one I want to talk about as I said is the siphonophore
and these are actually closely related to the true jellyfish.
They are also nidaria but they are a different type because they are actually a colonial organism.
A jellyfish is a single organism in a sense that is multicellular and has specialized cells
for example the ones that create the head, the sort of the large carapace of the jellyfish.
That's made of a material that's called mizoglia which is the jelly-like substance itself secreted by the organism
to create that kind of float and then can be manipulated by the rhythmic motion of the muscles.
By the way you might be interested to know that although jellyfish seem to swim through the water in this rhythmic way
and they do, they move through the water in over short distances,
it turns out that biological study has shown that the pulsing motion that the jellyfish makes
is not so much for propulsion as actually for sweeping water along with the particles of food
and zooplankton and things like that that are in it towards the mouth.
So this is actually, the propulsion is more of a byproduct of the actual sweeping of water towards the mouth
as opposed to the main reason that a jellyfish does that.
But in any case, the jellyfish then are really not self-propelling in any sort of organized sense
but the other siphonophores are.
And in fact the siphonophores really cross the boundary between plankton and necton
because many of them are of a large enough size that they can swim in an organized way through the water.
As I said they're colonial invertebrate animals, they're colonial nadaria and what does that mean?
Well they're made up of individual organisms that are actually separate.
They're called zoids and each one is distinctly an individual animal.
However, they're so tightly symbiotic with each other that they cannot live independently from one another
so they have to form a colony in order to survive.
And interestingly, the zoids are the same species, the same genus, the same organism
but they specialize into different body plans or different body forms that form the colony.
So within one siphonophore colony for example, there's a central stem
and then there are two types of zoids, the nectophores which are the propulsion zoids.
They can't actually consume any food whatsoever but they can pulse water
so they can again help the organism move.
And the nectophore is actually the same type of zoid that is similar to what are called the medusa of the jellyfish
meaning the swimming, propelling part of the jellyfish.
The second type of zoid though in a colonial siphonophore is called a polyp.
Now the polyps can't do any swimming motions whatsoever but they can feed.
They have the mouth parts that allow them to feed on the material that is captured by the siphonophore.
So the nectophores and polyps have to work together.
One can't feed itself, one can't move itself or sweep water through itself.
They're totally independent.
The polyps are like the anemones so anemones have the body structure essentially of the polyp zoids.
Remember they're related to the siphonophores and the nectophores related to the jellyfish.
The siphonophores are some combination of the two living as a purely colonial organism.
Very strange.
It makes you raise sort of the question in your mind of well what is the definition of one siphonophore?
Is it the individual zoid or is it the entire colony?
In a sense the way sometimes people talk about an ant colony being a single organism
even though it has many thousands or tens of thousands of individual ants.
And we could say the same about the siphonophore because there are many different species and types of siphonophore
with many different body plans but they all share this characteristic of being organized colonial.
They grow from an original single zoid.
So one zoid of a siphonophore grows this stem and then buds the individual polyps and nectophores.
So it really is one organism and yet not one organism at the same time.
The fact that it has a central stem and coordinates this activity through specialized body parts
that actually for example the polyps feeding all of the nectophores
is perhaps some kind of clue to the original evolution of the chordates and vertebrates.
Remember that the chordates are all the organisms that have some kind of central nervous system
like a spinal cord whether they have bones or not.
These are not vertebrates or chordates. These are a pre-chordate type of organism
but perhaps they're somehow a clue to the steps in the evolution of those organisms.
Well one type of jellyfish that you may think of is not a jellyfish at all actually
in the sense of being a true jellyfish but is really a siphonophore.
And that's the Portuguese man of war, the famous jelly that has the giant float of jelly
that is inflated with some air, a kind of a gas bladder that gets blown around by the wind
at the surface of the ocean and trails these very long up to 10 or even 15 meters long
tentacles down into the water covered with stinging cells that can capture prey
and then pass the prey or sweep the prey back up towards the mouth that's near the top of the organism.
A Portuguese man of war is also a siphonophore colony and not a single jellyfish.
So they're plankton because they drift through the ocean
but their large size really kind of defies what we think of as plankton.
They're one of the largest organisms that we can think of as a true drifter or plankton form.
Well another type of jelly that you probably have not heard of at all is a tinafore
also known as the comb jellies and sometimes colloquially as sea walnuts
but a tinafore is a different organism.
It also shares this jelly-like, no hard parts kind of structure.
It's not in the nidaria. It has no stingers. There are no pneumatic sites.
So they're a different class of organism. They're also all carnivores.
They're also invertebrates and they're planktonic.
They basically float in the water but they can get to quite large size.
They're macroscopic. They can get to at least centimeters or even tens of centimeters in size.
They have cilia on some of their cells to slowly propel themselves.
They can move through the water a little bit, especially moving up and down a little bit in the water column
to follow their prey which is the zooplankton and phytoplankton as well.
These very transparent, delicate creatures, very beautiful creatures when seen in their native habitat in the open water
make these complex structures, various kinds of big sails, wings, or even balloon-like structures
made essentially of a kind of a mucus that they spin out to filter and trap small food particles
or organisms from the water and then sweep them back into their gut where they can be digested.
Another type of jelly, again, basically very poorly known until they can start to be captured
or start to be observed in their native habitat deep in the water, are the salps.
A salp is a colony. It's another colonial organism but it's not a cnidarians, not like a siphonophore exactly.
It's a colony of very simple tunicate chordates.
Tunicates are just a term for one particular group of chordates.
Again, chordates are a phylum of the kingdom of animals overall.
The chordates include all of us vertebrates but also a number of marine invertebrates.
All of these are purely marine organisms or all of the tunicates in the sea are the purely marine organisms.
Individually, they can actually live as individual bell-shaped organisms that can swim short distances through the water.
They feed largely on phytoplankton, sweeping them through their bell, the cavity of their body, and digesting them.
But they also form very long chains together to basically give them some stability in the water
and ability to move more long distances in an organized way by all clumping together in a colonial sense,
beating their propulsion systems together simultaneously.
One more unusual, let's just say, jelly-like creature in the ocean are the ones called pteropods.
Now, the pteropods are even different from all the ones that I've described because they're a mollusk.
They're in a different phylum within the animal kingdom and these are mollusks.
That means that they're related relatively closely to snails and slugs and organisms like that.
Most of them don't have shells, although a few do secrete a hard shell, but many of the pteropods are completely soft parts.
The single pod or foot that gives it its name along with the gastropods like the snails and slugs
has evolved in the pteropod into a kind of a transparent, almost wing-like structure, very broad, again very delicate and beautiful.
They use this transparent pod to basically beat its wing and fly through the water to sweep it through regions of plankton.
They also cast out a sort of a mucus-like net and spin a web of material or a net of material that's sticky enough to catch plankton on it
and then reel it in and digest all the food that they've trapped in that way.
We've looked at all these different organisms from the deep pelagic zone and I want to stop now and take a look at how we know about all these organisms.
As I said, most of many of these things live in the either twilight region or the completely dark zone of the deep pelagic and were very poorly known until recently.
For a long time, the only way to sample this zone was to drag a plankton net through the water, just as we described in a previous lecture.
Those plankton nets would fill up with plankton and they would also, of course, capture many of these organisms, the tinafores and pteropods and so on,
but they would just be completely, their structures are so soft and delicate as to be completely destroyed just by the action of dragging the plankton net through the water.
So a plankton net toe would always have many different individual organisms including fish and things like that described, and then usually the description was just jelly.
There was a certain amount, a certain mass in each plankton net of what was just described as jelly.
Well, that was actually the bodies of many dozens or hundreds of individual organisms of many different species, but completely unrecognizable and undescribable by biologists until quite recently,
and in fact still true when you use a plankton net.
But instead, the way we've learned about most of these organisms is through the use of deep submersibles, deep submergence vehicles,
and these became available to science really beginning in the 1960s with the development of the submarine called Alvin.
I've showed you pictures of Alvin before.
Alvin went into operation in 1964 and was literally the first sub that was available for deep diving to, you know, sort of beyond hundreds of feet to thousands of feet and in fact thousands of meters even in the ocean.
There's only been one Alvin.
When you see all the pictures of Alvin in National Geographic articles and things like that, it's the same Alvin.
Now, every single part of Alvin since 1964 has literally been replaced at one time or another including the actual spherical, you know, six inch thick, now titanium originally steel hull of the submarine,
all of the porthole windows and the hatches and things like that.
Everything's been replaced, but it's one Alvin.
And it's still in operation today just now in a transition to a new hull and ultimately hopefully a replacement for Alvin that will keep deep submergence research going on to this depth with human beings going to the bottom of the ocean for many years and even decades to come.
But Alvin has made a phenomenal number of discoveries and literally thousands of scientific papers and thousands of individual species have been described based on direct observation using Alvin.
There are other deep submergence vehicles in the world too, but not very many.
You know, there's a French one called Nautil.
There are two Russian ones, MIR-1 and 2, which played a role in some of the great videos you've seen from the Titanic and other places.
There's a Japanese one called Shinkai 6500, which is rated to a diving depth of 6,500 meters, hence the name, and that's the deepest diving manned submersible in the world.
The Johnson Sea Link 1 and 2, the Johnson Sea Links 1 and 2, have been real workhorses of studying the twilight zone of the ocean, the mesopelagic zone.
It can go to about a thousand meters or so, 900 meters to a thousand meters, and has been one of the vehicles that has photographed and sampled many, many of these organisms and allowed entire ecosystems of soft-bodied organisms to be described in the midwater.
Well, modern work today is increasingly being carried out by the ROVs, or Remotely Operated Vehicles, so-called robot subs.
Now, they're not really true robots in the sense that they don't operate independently using their own computer brain.
They're tethered back to a ship with a cable that feeds video back and carries electrical signals so that an operator on the ship using joysticks, literally, can drive the ROV around, illuminate and take video and pictures of different things,
and use even these robotic-style arms, or these manipulator arms, to take samples or do other things in the water or on the sea floor.
They don't carry people to the bottom of the ocean, so they're much less expensive to operate, in fact, less dangerous to operate.
And the trend in the science, as well as actually in offshore industries, is to use ROV in much larger numbers.
And a couple of the well-known ones for science include Jason, which is operated by Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, as well as the ROVs operated by the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute,
the Ventana and the new one, Doc Ricketts, named after the famous character from Steinbeck's Cannery Row.
Many ROVs are also employed. Dozens and dozens of ROVs are employed by the offshore petroleum industry to do the work on the sea floor that they need to do to keep their industry operating.
And many of us in the news saw ROV images from the sea floor during the Deepwater Horizon oil spill disaster, and we're kind of amazed by the degree to which we could have a 24-hour-a-day camera on the seabed
seeing what was going on, seeing the horrific things that were going on, in that case, at the sea floor.
Well, ROVs, among many, many other tools for oceanographers, played a huge role in what was called the Census of Marine Life, this decade-long $650 million global research effort that lasted from 2000 to 2010.
Many of the organisms that I've just mentioned were described and catalogued as part of the Census of Marine Life.
Several thousand scientists undertook more than 540 expeditions to sea and discovered more than 6,000 new species, many of them, again, these soft-part animals, in the water and on the bottom of the world's oceans, from the Arctic zone all the way to the tropics.
They're presently, based on the Census of Marine Life estimates at the end of that operation, something like 250,000 confirmed marine species.
Now, that's species of all types in the ocean, excluding the microbes, though, but there's probably 750,000 more that remain to be described.
They estimate about a million species in the ocean of non-microbial life, and they estimate actually that there are one billion types of microbes.
One billion species of microbes must be in the ocean, not individuals of microbes, but one billion types, most of which have never been described and never had their DNA sequenced or anything like that.
Well, let's take a look at the food web as a whole of the deep pelagic zone.
We've talked about the planktonic organisms, and now we've talked about some of the larger but soft-bodied organisms that live down there, and we can go up from that scale.
Now, at the surface, you have a food web that's essentially the base of the food web is the phytoplankton, and then zooplankton feed directly on the phytoplankton,
and then various larger, higher trophic level consumers feed on the zooplankton or directly on phytoplankton, or both, and build up the familiar food webs.
In the deep pelagic zone, below a thousand meters or so, down there in the darkness, there is, of course, no photosynthesis, and therefore there are no phytoplankton, at least not living, and making food, making carbohydrates in that zone.
So the basis of the deep pelagic food web is actually detritus, raining down from the surface waters and filtering down through the water and being scavenged up by all of these different organisms,
many of the ones that I just described, and also the zooplankton that are living down there scavenging phytoplankton and then being consumed in turn by different larger organisms than that.
So some of the zooplankton, we've already mentioned before, this particular very beautiful copepod is an arctic deep water variety that lives at a thousand meters,
602,000 meters in the arctic ocean. We also have many organisms called amphipods. They're in the same sort of family as krill that I've already discussed, and they're a very, very common zooplankton.
Those are basically the two mainstays of the deep pelagic food web, the copepods and the amphipods, as these small organisms that scoop up all the detritus and then in turn are eaten by larger organisms like fish.
Well there's a deep pelagic necton, meaning a deep pelagic set of active swimmers, and they consume all these detritus scavengers.
Basically we're going to spend a lot more time talking about nectonic organisms in the next lecture, but just to introduce some of these deep pelagic ones,
initially they include a lot of cephalopods, which are the squids and octopus and cuttlefish and things like that.
A cephalopod is called that because cephalos means head, pod again is foot, so it has a head that's divided into a number of tentacles,
and for the most part these mollusks, these cephalopods in the midwater are basically different kinds of squid,
and we even have transparent, very clear, almost jelly-like cephalopods in the mesopelagic zone and in the deep pelagic zone as well.
The deep pelagic zone also includes some of the largest invertebrates, in fact the largest invertebrates that live on the planet,
in the form of giant squids and even what are called the colossal squids, which are a different species,
but similar in body plan to the giant squids and equally large, in fact perhaps even a little bit heavier.
The giant squids are an organism that has been known to exist from tales of mariners and from their partly digested remains
found in sperm whale bellies and things like that over many, many years and even centuries,
but a living giant squid was never photographed until 2004 when a Japanese group put a deep marine camera down and baited it
and in fact captured a photograph of a giant squid.
They'd stay in the deep zone and never come anywhere near the surface in ordinary life.
They're occasionally caught in fishing nets and are brought either nearly dead or dead to the surface
and so a number of samples and examples of dead giant and colossal squids have been found.
But they can be in fact up to 15 meters or 50 feet in length.
This New Zealand specimen shown in the photograph had an eye, once it was dissected,
that was the largest eye of any species on earth, 27 centimeters in diameter, something like that,
even after it had shriveled up a little bit in death, probably 40 centimeters in diameter,
a huge bigger than a dinner plate when it was alive.
The squid are feeding on all kinds of fish down there and of course in turn they're providing food for sperm whales
as we'll look at in the whales lecture a bit later on.
Well, the deep water pelagic organisms have some interesting adaptations to the water depth.
One thing, many of them are colored a deep red.
No red light gets that deep, so any red animal actually appears to be black
even in the twilight zone, even in the partially photic zone.
So you see all kinds of examples of deep water red organisms, giant squid, these red shrimp,
many jellies and octopus are all red in color.
We're going to deal with the fish largely in the next lecture, but let me introduce a few of the deep pelagic fish
as we close in this one.
They feed on the copepods and the krill and other small fish, in fact,
and the deep pelagic fish are some of the strangest forms that we see on the planet.
But they share some common characteristics.
In this zone, they tend to be small.
There's not a lot to live on.
They keep a very small and low metabolism going.
They don't have a very large body mass to support.
They tend to have very large mouths and these needle-like teeth
and very sort of monstrous frightening forms that we've all seen,
maybe in some of these television deep water blue planet type specials and things like that.
Many of them barely swim at all.
They keep their metabolism very low and wait to lure prey.
And in fact, many of them lure prey using a very specific adaptation which is bioluminescence,
the ability to generate light like a firefly,
and they use something called, special organs called photophores as lures.
So if we look at an image of an angler fish, for example,
they have this photophore lure that is blinking or brightly lit
and it hopefully attracts other organisms that think maybe that they want to see what's going on over there
or see some food and then they're captured by the angler fish with its giant teeth.
Now these things look pretty giant and frightening until you realize that the angler fish
is really only about less than two inches in length typically.
These are tiny organisms.
They may be the monsters of the deep, but they wouldn't be very scary
if you actually encountered one yourself.
Some of them, of course, get a bit bigger.
Many of these things like lantern fish and viper fish have really very large mouths
to gulp in these soft organisms or other organisms that they encounter
and basically spend a long time digesting them because a meal doesn't come along very often.
Well, in the dysphotic and aphotic zone, then bioluminescence is an important mechanism for survival.
And it has multiple purposes.
Bioluminescence is to communicate with your own species so you can find a mate, for example,
or find other of your same kind, but also to confuse predators and as a form of camouflage
and even as we just saw, to attract prey.
There are a wide variety of microbes, invertebrates and fish to produce marine bioluminescence
and all of it is by something called chemoluminescence.
It's chemical reaction that produces the light in the photophores
and it's a combination of these vividly named enzymes luciferin and luciferase
that when combined produce light in some devilish way, I suppose.
One of the most remarkable bioluminescent organisms is the firefly squid
which light up brightly with complicated patterns of blue and green light
which are the most common types of light that can be produced by bioluminescent organisms.
When they're caught, they produce an absolutely amazing firefly squid show in the nets and on the docks.
Okay, well we've examined this planktonic basis of the grazing and light-based food web of the euphotic zone
and also now of the detrital food web of the deep pelagic world.
We've examined all of these really mysterious and previously unknown forms of the soft organisms
that represent a whole bunch of different major phyla of the animal kingdom,
not just simply one type like jellyfish, but all the siphonophores and the tunicates
and the cephalopods all representing different soft-bodied adaptations to this deep marine world without walls.
So in the next lecture, we'll take up the really major groups of the necton,
maybe the more familiar ones in a sense, the active swimmers of the sea,
the fish, the mollusks and the mammals, reptiles and birds following after that.
