Many of us love seafood. I do myself. And human beings' interaction with the ocean,
of course, for a very long time, has been dominated by extracting biological resources
from the sea, meaning fishing, whaling, and other ways of obtaining food, shellfish, and
other things like that. What I'd like to do in this lecture now that we've introduced
all of these different organisms that are living in the ocean is take a look at both
the history and the very different present-day industry that is represented by both fisheries
and whaling, and ultimately by farming of the sea, using the ocean as a medium in order
to actually grow the fish and other organisms that we'd like to eat.
Ocean fisheries are a major source of food in the world and a growing source, actually,
of food to feed a hungry world with a growing population. And it's become a highly efficient
industry with amazing technology to actually efficiently extract organisms from the ocean
and catch the fish. But many or most of the species are now being overfished or are very
close to it, are very close to unsustainable levels. And so that's really necessitating
the growth of fish farming or aquaculture and mariculture. We'll take a look at.
What I'd like to do is start with a look at the kind of the big historical industry, the
whaling industry. And we only have time to really talk about a few of the main features
of both the historical and present-day whaling industry and whaling controversies. But it
is controversial today, and yet it was the foundation of so much of the U.S. and European
economy in the 18th and 19th centuries. It was, in some ways, the big industry of its
time. So let's take a look at a little bit of that history that we're all a little bit
familiar with, but maybe don't know all the some of the tenets of and the details of.
Well first of all, people have certainly hunted whales for thousands of years. The native
peoples of the Pacific in particular were adept at catching whales for food and for
all of the different potential products they could derive from whales over long periods
of time through, let's say, the Aleutian Islands, Gulf of Alaska and regions like that.
We know from historical accounts that Europeans began hunting whales, the Nordic peoples began
hunting whales as early as 800 to 1000 A.D. So for more than a thousand years, whale hunting
has been going on. Even the largest whales started to be hunted by the 1500s or so, and
there are accounts of Basque whalers on the coast of Labrador, so Basque from Spain all
the way across in the North Atlantic on the North American side, processing very large
numbers of whales and actually obtaining whale oil in large amounts. The Dutch, the British
were involved and by the late 18th and 19th century with the U.S. involved as well, a
major world industry had been born. Well, the U.S. was the leading whale nation in the
world in the early 1800s and of course Cape Cod and Nantucket were the center of this
global industry. And it was the original oil industry and what I mean by that is that whale
wasn't really being hunted for food, certainly, and it was sort of in a secondary way being
hunted for some of the whale products that could be obtained, like whale bone and whale
baleen that was used for, it's basically as the plastic of its day, a kind of a pliable
material. Famously, ladies corsets were made in part for a long time of either whale bone
or whale baleen. But the real reason to go after the whales in this industry that developed
that was so wonderfully documented by Herman Melville in his novel, Moby Dick, but the
novel that was based of course on a true story or inspired at least by an 1820 true story
of a whaler that was brought down by a sperm whale. The reason for this industry was fuel.
It was oil to burn in lamps and to fuel the lighting up of America and Europe in those
times. The parlors that needed to be lit by gas lamps, those gases were burning or those
oil lamps, sorry, were burning whale oil. And so it was literally the sort of the exon
mobile of its time and Cape Cod was the Houston of its day. And this was a very large industry.
Hundreds and hundreds of whaling ships traveled far across the world's oceans and in fact
were instrumental in the opening up and exploration, especially of the South Pacific. We know
that those late 1700s, early 1800s whalers were traversing all sorts of regions in the
South Pacific. Moby Dick in part is about a whaler who comes from one of the South Pacific
Polynesian islands and ends up back there in Cape Cod.
Well, let's look at a little bit of the history of whaling because all of that whaling industry
caught and rendered and brought back many different whales. Now we have the traditional
use of whales and Inuit hunters to this day in the northern regions of Canada are still
doing some traditional whaling and in fact by convention, by international convention,
are allowed to take a certain number of even large whales that are otherwise protected.
We can see an image of them carving up or flensing as the word is, whales in the Inuit
regions as well as the Pacific Northwestern regions of other Native American tribes.
Whaling as an industry took off in the late 1700s as I said in early 1800s and then took
off again in 1868 with the invention of the harpoon gun. That followed a few decades later
by the beginnings of mechanized ships instead of sailing ships meant that the rate at which
whales were being taken went up exponentially and by the 1930s whale stocks were down to
just tiny percentages of their original numbers. Blue whales down to four percent of their
original stocks almost gone extinct. Same goes for the sperm whales and many other organisms,
many other of the other of the large marine mammals. So the International Whaling Commission
was founded actually in the mid 1940s to try to basically through international treaty
and agreement manage the whale population so that they wouldn't go extinct in fact and
so in fact that they would actually be managed in such a way that they would recover and
allow for the sustainable or sort of responsible harvest of some large whales.
Things the restrictions began to be in place at first they weren't large enough by the 1980s
the International Whale Commission reached the point where it concluded it had to ban
all large whale hunting for the for the big animals and basically all countries of the
world stopped whaling except for some of those traditional uses and the Japanese so called
research whaling for minke whale. Now I say so-called because it was brought in under a
loophole that we know of today as research whaling but large numbers of individuals were
taken individual whales and they were also put on to the commercial food market so it's hard
to call it simply research whaling at least. Well by this time in the 1980s in fact up to
the present day most species are commercially extinct they're not recovering quickly some are
actually endangered summer threatened species but species like fin whale, grey whale, bowhead,
humpbacks and blue whales are at best recovering very slowly in the present day ocean even though
they're not being fished. Minky whales are by far the most abundant whales. Now of all whales in
1900 our estimate is that there was something like four and a half million whales present in the
ocean actually estimating the numbers of any organism or the health of any ecosystem in the
ocean before the industrial era or the large human interaction is a difficult thing to do. How
do you estimate the number of whales in the ocean in 1900? Well it's based partly on a detailed
examination of accounts of how many were taken and how many ships were out there trying to and
estimates of their efficiency. It's based on the genetic diversity of whales and an understanding
of what their DNA tells us about how many there might have been what size of population was breeding
in the period leading up to that time and so it's an inexact science certainly and this carries
through to lots of other organisms as well but an estimated 4.4 million whales at that time
translates into about 1 million whales today. There are a lot of whales in the ocean however
most of them are Minky whales one particular species that represents 700,000 or more of the
probable population numbers today but since the Minky whales were relatively abundant not seen
as threatened or endangered Norway decided to resume harvest of those whales in 1993 and Japan
was already doing it and continued to raise their number of harvest of Minky whales. Iceland joined
Norway and now there's a present catch of Minky whales in the number that number in the hundreds
per year hundreds to a thousand per year. Some whaling some research whaling small numbers are
also is also being done for sperm whales and brides whales but the vast majority of what's
going on the present day and that creates all of the controversy that we see with groups like the
sea shepherds down there trying to stop the Japanese whalers in the Antarctic waters all of that is
based on the whaling fishery as they call it whaling of the Minky whales. Now most marine
mammal experts do believe that the present catch of Minky whales is sustainable there are enough
numbers of them out there and they reproduce fast enough that the rate the Japanese and others
are going right now it's not really a threat to the Minky whale populations. So the question of
whether whaling is sort of a fundamentally right or wrong or one supports it or not is really based
more on kind of a valuation of the whales and whether it's right or wrong to catch them as
opposed to direct threat to these particular mammals. Now many marine mammal experts also
believe that if the doors are opened by the International Whaling Commission to much more
whaling of other species that might drive some of them back the other direction and to the brink
of extinction once again. But it's interesting that the present catch probably is sustainable
despite its sort of deep unpopularity at least on this side of the Pacific Ocean.
Well let's look at fisheries then. Ocean fisheries are a major source of food as I said a growing
source of food in the fishing industry. Interesting thing about ocean fisheries perhaps the most
interesting thing is that of all the things that human beings eat on this planet and commercially
expend energy to produce and sell as food it's the only significant source of wild captured
animal food. Most of the fish that come from the ocean are still wild fish. It's as if we were
rounding up Buffalo and selling them in the supermarket from the open plains in very large
numbers today. Now something like 79% of all fish from the ocean is wild capture so that's most
of them but 21% of the fish from the open ocean or from the ocean that is seafood is
mariculture that is fish farming of the ocean and so much of this is actually in pens but held in
the sea some of it as we'll see is even done in different ways. It's a growing proportion but
it's not the majority by far of the of the saltwater fishery or saltwater fishing industry.
By contrast the land-based freshwater aquaculture so the growing of fish for food but in freshwater
and using freshwater species is a rapidly rising rapidly growing industry something like 46%
of the total supply of all those fish and quickly changing and quickly changing in different parts
of the world where the protein from fish is in high demand and so is continuing to grow.
Well what's happening globally to catches of fish though is that through all this pressure and the
efficiency of the industry fish are being caught of course at phenomenal rates and they are largely
not reproducing fast enough for the wild fisheries to keep up. There are some exceptions but most of
the wild fisheries are being fished to a point where no more can in fact be found and caught
and their numbers are at very small proportions of their apparent sort of pre-industrial or historical
levels. If we look at data from around 1992 so a couple of decades ago we see that the commodity
fish the whitefish like cod, hake and haddock represented a pretty big proportion something
greater than 10 or 15 percent of the total catch of wild fish. Tunas and things like that were only
about 4 percent the tunas and bonitos. All the various fish represented about 87 million metric
tons of weight in that particular year. If we look to the present day we see that the total
wild capture fisheries have largely kind of plateaued and not grown in size much since that
time so there was increasing catch, increasing catch up until the late 1980s or early 1990s
and then with fluctuations it's largely flattened out. Now actually most of the world has somewhat
decreased its catch of open ocean capture fisheries but China has become a major player
over that time going from very little almost insignificant proportion of the world's total
capture to the largest single catcher of fish of all wild captured fish of the entire planet
but that's only maintained at sort of fairly steady level. The interesting thing about this
steady apparent you know sort of continuous number or fraction of total fish that are
captured which still remains around 90 million or so metric tons per year is that it's not the same
species over time. One will come in to replace another whose population is declining then is that
formerly less desirable fish species also starts to decline a new one will start to be caught and
so we've seen over the last few decades different fish come and go literally on restaurant menus
and in supermarkets as they become more available and then less available as they were overfished
to the point where their populations were not sustaining themselves. So if we look at the
catch trends by individual groups we can see that those ones I referred to as the commodity fish
the biggest grouping in the early 1990s have been in a sort of inexorable decline since the 90s
and now only about something less than 8 million metric tons a much smaller quantity of the cod
hake and haddock and all of those fish are being caught today and unless the amount of
fish that are being caught declines that decline will just simply continue to go down because
they're not reproducing at the rate they're not being caught less because people don't want to
catch them they're being caught less because the fishing industry the fishing fleets are working
harder to catch as many as they can and still finding declining productivity of those fish or
declining catches. By contrast the catch rate of things like tuna bonito and the other tuna like
fish are going up rapidly as are the invertebrates like squids and cuttlefish and octopus these
are growing in popularity and they're replacing the big the big fleshy fish fin fish because
those fin fish are getting harder to catch and so the the squids and things like that are becoming
more popular fish to to obtain. The tuna story in particular is largely one of changes in taste
taste meaning fashion that is and popularity of those fish over time.
Scarcity you know shapes these trends in the sense that the white fish are going down the
pollock the cod and haddock are just simply not available in the same kinds of numbers.
The fashion though of basically the world discovering Japanese sushi and starting to eat it all over
the planet and the popularity of sushi in America and in Europe and South America and everywhere
else has led to an incredible increase in the rate of fishing for bluefin tuna yellowfin tuna
bonito and all those tunas and one that has been growing through the through the early part of the
21st century but appears to be on an absolute collision course with a rapid decline as this as
these populations are overfished as well. Well aquaculture and especially the inland or freshwater
fish aquaculture has taken up the slack between the growth of ocean fish worldwide capture fish
and the increasing need for fish food as the world population grows and so
we see a sort of diverging trend of flat ocean capture fish but a growing trend of generation
of aquaculture and inland aquaculture is the most the most growing part of the fishing industry
overall. We could ask the question what's driving all of this growth in the fishing industry what
is driving the the pressure on the open ocean capture fisheries and the answer is fairly simple
it's one that was talked about a lot a few decades ago but really isn't being talked about
quite so much anymore but hasn't gone away and that's human population growth. The number of
people on the planet is continuing to increase at an exponential rate there are twice as many
people on earth today as in 1965 and the rate of doubling for the next doubling on the planet
is going even faster now the population may level off at 9 billion or 10 billion or some
number like that but in the meantime there are many many more people on earth and they need food
fish is relatively obviously high quality food and relatively inexpensive to produce in aquaculture
so it's taking up the slack. If we look at an even longer trend in world population we see that
you know we live again in some sort of singularity and change of the way the planet works because
there were very very few people much less than a billion for tens of thousands of years we look at
10 000 bc of the present we see the rise in population with the agricultural revolution
and then ultimately with the industrial revolution we see the sudden rise to the six and a half billion
and counting that are on the planet today. Well we can ask the question where are the fish where are
all the big fisheries in the world and for a long time it was the north atlantic was the biggest
fishery with the pacific second to that but decades ago that transition to the point where
the pacific ocean as an aggregate is the vast majority of fishing on the planet the northwest
pacific itself the region of high productivity and the high latitudes in the northwest represents
something like 25 percent of the total global fishery global capture fishery global wild fishing
and other parts the pacific ocean added together come up to something close to or well over
half of all the ocean fishing and of course this is partly the historical trend of just fishing
having been developed in different parts of the world earlier and then later and then the great
growth of the chinese fishing industry as well as other countries including the united states
intensively fishing the northwest pacific and bering sea. So what are the trends in global
fisheries well the atlantic catch is declining rapidly at this point many of the different
fisheries peaked in the early 2000s if not much earlier than that for certain fish like cod
but now they're declining rapidly in recent years and most recent assessment in 2010 by the UN FAO
says that 13 to 30 percent declines in the catches of important atlantic fin fish the large fish
that we think of as the major the major players in in what we buy in the supermarket or at the
restaurant the pacific trends have been growing rapidly over all those years but are now leveling
off and catches are not increasing despite increasing effort by increasingly technological
fishing fleets the indian ocean catch is sustaining but patterns are changing especially with that
declining tuna cat or with a declining tuna catch. So let's look at how open ocean capture
fishing is actually done for a few minutes. Well by far the largest tonnage is trawling for fish
trawling with big nets with nets that are their mouths are held open the net mesh and size is
is configured to to catch particular species or particular groups that that one wants to catch
there are fundamentally two types of trawling that we can look at the midwater trawling which is
simply dragging a trawl net through the middle of the ocean as you might you might imagine
and then bottom trawling which involves a trawler with heavy weighted wheels literally to roll across
the bottom of the ocean and scoop up everything in its path with the mouth of the net hugging the
bottom very closely so that it catches bottom dwellers but also water dwellers for some distance
up above the actual benthic environment. So we have sort of pelagic fishing and benthic fishing as
it were. So this stern trawler netting is the majority of commercial catching and it involves
nets that are very large open nets that can stand hundreds of feet in height they catch a great
number of fish but they also catch a great number of fish that were not the fish they were intending
to catch this is called bycatch and it's a very large problem in the fishing industry because up
to 25 percent of all the fish that are caught are non-targeted species they're caught they're even
edible perhaps but when they're brought on deck of the ship if the ship is set up for processing
of a certain type of fish then those are the ones that are kept and everything else is literally
just swept over the side unfortunately dead by the time it gets there because they've been caught
in this net and brought to the surface so it's a fish kill that's unfortunate because it's a
completely a byproduct of the actual food industry that's involved. Now a second major
type of fishing that's used to target the large open ocean fish like tuna and sword fish is what's
called pelagic longline fishing long up to 10 kilometer or more long filament lines are stretched
out from ships or are deployed from ships with floats along them to keep them in the near surface
and then just simply individual baited hook lines hanging down off of them to catch those those
predator fish that that like to go after that bait. They have relatively small amounts of
bycatch but unfortunately the bycatch that they do come up with tend to be sea turtles and marine
mammals and so organisms that we have we place a high value on and that often are are endangered
so even catching a few of them is kind of bad news. Now one type of open ocean fishing for
these same organisms that was essentially banned with the big move to come up with dolphin safe
tuna was open ocean drift net fishing similar to the long lines by deploying very long nets that
actually act more or less like fences in the sea fish are caught by their gills as they try to swim
through these nets the nets also catch of course anything that run it runs into them and unfortunately
when a marine mammal runs into one of these open ocean drift nets a dolphin or seal or sea lion
they'll drown before the net is reeled back into the ship to take the fish off because of course
those are those are mammals they have to breathe and so we see many many examples of dolphins and
seals caught in these open ocean drift nets. Drift net drift netting has been banned but it
doesn't mean the process the practice has completely stopped because it still is economically valuable
so so fishing industries from some countries will still practice open ocean drift netting despite
international treaties banning that practice. Well when we look at fisheries management then
we can talk about something called the maximum sustainable yield right how much of any fish
species can be harvested each year in a given fishery region without depleting stocks for
future years so there's a current estimate you know of all fish in the global ocean of something
between 100 and 135 million tons per year but that includes all of the fish farming
activities as well the open ocean fishery appears to be right at the maximum sustainable yield or
perhaps even on the high side for the wild capture fish that we're currently fishing economically
in the ocean and many of the specific species in the ocean are certainly overfished and estimated
something like 72 percent of all fisheries are being overfished today and many of the others
are right at their maximum sustainable yields so they're what is called fully utilized or fully
exploited fisheries and very few fisheries that are economically viable are under exploited the
industry is good at getting out there and finding the fish and perhaps you've heard about you know
the the scale at which the open ocean fishing industry operates out in deep water especially
away from the exclusive economic zones of different countries then large fishing fleets
operate with individual trawlers fishing a given region finding the fish using satellite imagery
using specialized sonar and all sorts of things using spotter boats trawling up large amounts of
fish and then actually bringing them to factory vessels that are big industrial essentially
fish canneries that operate at sea that are processing those fish right at sea literally
down to the point of putting them in you know tuna cans or anchovy cans and shipping those back off
to uh to land with um with cargo vessels the factory fishing ships sometimes don't leave the
ocean literally for years at a time they're resupplied uh and and and restaffed uh periodically
but they stay out at sea in the productive fisheries well the fisheries that are over exploited
the numbers are starting to rapidly dwindle and the fisheries are in a danger of collapsing and
this isn't a new story this has already happened to a number of fisheries over the course of the
20th century if we look at uh a recent scientific estimate of the total biomass of what are called
the high trophic level fish in the north atlantic over the course of the 20th century cod perch
anchovies and flatfish the big fish that are the were the familiar ones uh that represented seafood
for for most of our lives um estimates of the total biomass that existed in 1900 compared to 1999
show a really disturbing trend and these are where the big you know um uh newfoundland banks uh
fisheries were the new england fishers uh all up and down the atlantic seaboard where cod was big
and all of these other fish there were there were many tons of fish per square kilometer many large
areas with 10 tons or more of fish per square kilometer based on computer simulation catch rates
in those days and all sorts of complicated analysis in 1900 and then if we look at how that evolved
to 1950 and then ultimately to 1999 the shrinkage of those fisheries and the collapse of those
ecosystems is remarkable there are now virtually no areas with 10 tons of fish per square kilometer
in the entire north atlantic region and even the few areas that are viable fishing grounds anymore
are down to three to four or so so it's been a collapse of a major chunk of the world's ocean
fishery over the span of a century and the same thing is now playing out with different organisms
but in the pacific ocean and indian ocean and other places around the world the bluefin tuna is the
is the current example that's maybe the poster child but the most frightening one bluefin tuna
catch as we saw was rapidly increasing it peaked in 2007 and just in the years since then there
have been rapidly declining stocks it's not yet an endangered fish but it's pretty clear it's on
its way rapidly and it's because again of all of that sushi sushi and sashimi that are on the
plates of diners all over the world with a taste for bluefin tuna and it's not surprising that they're
being fished to this level when an individual highly prized atlantic bluefin can sell on the
tokyo fish market as makes the news regularly in excess of 200 000 dollars if they're really high
quality bluefin tuna and so this really brings us to the problem of the question of why does the
fishing industry over fish well it's fundamentally something that's referred to often as the tragedy
of the commons the idea that if there's a resource like a wild fishery that's available to a large
group of people in common it benefits each individual member to maximize his or her use
even if it would be better for everyone to get together and agree to limit their own catch
the story comes from the commons meaning the open grazing areas in in the british aisles from the
the medieval period where everybody had the rights to graze sheep on the common ground so it was
always to your benefit to graze more sheep than you used to or than your neighbor does because
you get more of the benefit back from the resource that's held in common the fisheries work this way
too and without government regulation a few fishing industries a few groups of associations of
of fishing boat owners have been able to voluntarily limit their catch but largely this
has not been possible in the world and again it's not a surprise because the personal economics that
each of those fishing boat owners face really forces them in the face of a declining fishery
to redouble their efforts if the catch is going down they already have a large investment in
fishing boats and nets and they have to support their crew they have to support their families
and so they'll go out and of course for each individual they want to get the most of whatever
is out there for themselves relative to all of their competitors in the region and so in the
face of that declining catch they try harder and harder and when individual fish are worth a lot of
money there's a good chance literally down to the very last one or at least the very last
viable breeding population will be caught one day of many of these fish unless real intervention happens
well so the replacement for most of this is aquaculture and today something like 37 percent
of all fish for human consumption is represented by um freshwater or what we call inland aquaculture
and a large amount of this is tilapia. Tilapia is an african freshwater fish that happens to be very
well suited to uh to to growing in fish farms and it's showing up on restaurant menus everywhere
it's a large part of the growth of that Chinese aquaculture industry and maybe this will ultimately
take some of the pressure off open ocean fish. The other form of fish farming that is becoming
more common but growing more slowly is mariculture and that's the farming of marine seawater organisms
so shrimp are cultured and Atlantic salmon are cultured in large numbers oysters are another
example but still only about 20 percent of saltwater fish and most fish species are just not amenable
to culturing in enclosed pens. With salmon there's been some success with actually what people
have referred to as salmon ranching like a ranch on the wild west spawning the salmon in pens but
then sending them out to sea and relying on their natural homing instinct to come back
when it's time when they're fully grown so they can be harvested once again but all this mariculture
is probably not going to replace the open ocean fishing industry in the way that inland aquaculture
is going to. Well in closing of this sort of overview of fishing I want to say that maybe
there's some things that we should all think about doing and that in particular is make the
environmentally responsible fish choices. The overfishing is a stark reminder of the limited
nature of resources in what used to seem like a limitless ocean. We can make choices of fish that
are being sustainably harvested or being cultured in a sustainable way. It's very confusing often
there's so many different kinds of fish that show up on the menu at the restaurants but there are
some resources. The Monterey Bay Aquarium in particular publishes an excellent pocket seafood
selector you can print out and actually take with you or look at as an app on a on a you know mobile
device or something like that and see immediately which fish to avoid and which fish are sort of
given the green light to enjoy as as seafood from the ocean.
Well we've seen that the global wild fish populations are under this intense pressure
driven by economics and demand for food inland and marine aquaculture will have to carry more
of the burden if these wild stocks are to recover. So in the next lecture we're going to follow those
fish perhaps inland in some sense and head up to the shoreline and look at the processes that govern
its development ultimately to lead us back into the benthic realm and starting in shallow water
and going deeper and deeper and looking at all the habitats at the bottom of the ocean.
