Well, another aspect of the coastal region is the place where the rivers meet the sea.
River mouths, deltas, tidal inlets, fjords and enclosed bays, these are all regions where
freshwater and seawater are mixing, and they form a complex and dynamic environment of
very high biological diversity and productivity.
They're important because they're the place where the seawater and the freshwater actually
mix, so the place where the interaction takes place and the chemistry is exchanged, but
maybe even more importantly, they're the locations where many marine organisms carry
out parts of their life cycle.
There are a number of larval stages of crustaceans and fish in different species that are lived
out in the brackish water of estuaries.
There are even, of course, anadromous fish like salmon that go from the sea all the way
up to completely freshwater environments up rivers and streams in order to spawn.
So we're going to take a look in this lecture at estuaries, and we're also going to look
at river deltas and other areas where the rivers meet the sea.
Estuaries, first of all, are bodies of shallow water that are partially surrounded by the
land but with some sort of open connection, although limited connection, to the ocean.
So you end up with water that's diluted to less than seawater salinity but is not fresh
as river water is.
Estuaries are typically affected by the tidal range, and they're certainly marked by exceptionally
high biological productivity.
Shallow sunlit waters, nutrients from both the land and the ocean mixing together produce
a sort of a very fertile region on the planet.
One example of an estuarine region is the Chesapeake Bay and the flooded river mouths
that enter it, like the Susquehanna River.
Another example is San Francisco Bay, opposite coast, very different setting in a way, but
also a shallow water estuary.
Rivers that drain most of actually the area of California, feeding into San Francisco Bay
and producing a very fertile ground for the growth of all sorts of different organisms,
including many formerly important fisheries.
Well the types of estuaries, as is sort of exemplified by Chesapeake Bay and San Francisco
Bay and some of what we learned in the previous lectures, are defined by their origin.
So some are drowned river mouths, the Chesapeake Bay, Delaware Bay kind of origin.
Some are fjords, in the continental U.S., the Straits of Juan de Fuca or the Puget Sound
region are basically drowned fjords, Alaska is certainly filled with them as well.
Some are what we call tectonic estuaries that are formed by the action of faults in the
up warping and down warping of the crust.
San Francisco Bay is an example of a tectonic estuary defined by the San Andreas Fault on
one side and the Hayward Calaveras Fault on the other side.
And then the fourth type is actually the bar built estuary, meaning behind the barrier
islands and sandbars where you have lagoons and salt marsh regions like Pamlico Sound
in North Carolina for example, you develop an estuarine system where waters mix.
These geomorphic features determine how the waters mix and they define sort of the overall
shape and depth of the water in estuaries, but in a sense they don't serve to define
their characteristics as habitat and in terms of the water and nutrient exchange.
So we're going to think of four types of estuaries in a little bit different terms, instead
of the container, the estuarine basin, we'll think of it in terms of water mixing.
So these four types are basically divided into categories based on how the salt water
and the fresh water mix with each other.
Now all of them are essentially sort of artificial divisions of a continuous spectrum of different
types of water mixing.
We're talking about literally a fluid environment with fresh water and salt water coming together,
but we can break them down into at least some sort of end members or typical cases.
So the first one is the salt wedge estuary.
And this is a region where there is very strong river flow, so a large volume and strong
flow of river water into a confined basin that leads out to the ocean.
And what you see then is that it's dominated by this fresh water flow.
So there's a salt water is denser than fresh water, so this dense salt water is trying
to move up the estuary with tidal cycles and things like that.
And so the dense salt water wedges in literally in a shape of a kind of a wedge underneath
the fresh water that's flowing out over the top of it.
There's a sharp boundary between the two water masses actually in a salt wedge estuary.
And there's relatively little mixing.
There's so much density difference between the cold dense seawater and the river water
that the river water just flows out on top of the seawater.
One process that takes place in salt wedge estuaries is something called one-way mixing.
And that is that there's a sort of entrainment of the salt water with some turbulence at
the edge of this boundary up into the fresh water.
So the fresh water becomes more brackish as it heads towards the ocean.
But the salt wedge itself is actually not, doesn't get much, fresh water mixed into it.
So some typical examples of this sort of end member or extreme case estuary of the salt
wedge is the mouth of the Columbia River or also the mouth of the Hudson River on the
east coast.
Columbia River has incredibly large amount of flow, a relatively deep river basin heading
out to the sea.
The salt wedge actually comes many, many miles, as much as 20 miles inshore up the Columbia
River Valley or up the Columbia River River bed beneath the fresh water that's flowing
over the top of it in a real salt wedge estuary style.
Well, a second type that we can describe in the second sort of end member or main case
for estuaries is what we call a well-mixed estuary.
This is really a complete contrast in a sense to the salt wedge because it has relatively
low river flow, so you have a less active, strong river system and strong tidal mixing
going on.
And so up the estuary, you see that the waters coming in from the sea and the waters coming
in from the river are kind of balanced with each other in some way.
And what happens is then that the waters mix actively and mix quickly.
And so there's sort of a salinity gradient that doesn't have that sort of depth stratification
we saw in the salt wedge, but is nearly uniform over depth.
Instead, it just makes a gradient from more saline out at the ocean outlet to fresher
as you get up towards the rivers that are input to the estuary themselves.
So many of the really shallow water, but large scale, relatively open to the ocean estuaries
along the East Coast, the drowned river valleys like the Delaware Bay, the Chesapeake Bay,
certainly at least seasonally, and other bays like that are really well mixed estuaries.
Now in sort of in between these different end member categories, we have partially mixed
estuaries, regions where there's a strong flow of river water and also a relatively
strong influx to the sea that produce even more sort of turbulence and what's called
two way mixing then.
So entrainment of some seawater up into the river water, but transfer of some of the river
water down into the seawater by turbulent vortex mixing at the boundary between the
two.
Areas where there's cold, dense seawater on the one hand, but also strong river flow,
so sort of some of the characteristics of both of our salt wedge and well mixed estuaries
typically have this kind of characteristic of being partially mixed.
And so some of the deeper estuaries with more water depth and in more active colder ocean
like the San Francisco Bay region or like the Puget Sound in Washington are of this
partially mixed type.
And even more extreme case perhaps of something a little bit like the partially mixed morphology
but a very different kind of mixing in the estuary is what we call a Fjord type estuary.
So we've described the fjords already as these deeply incised glacial valleys that
come out and meet the ocean.
Well fjords very commonly have deep water in them, the glaciers at low stands of the
sea level in the past carved out deep basins even hundreds of feet deep.
But they often when they reach the sea, the glaciers themselves, they would stop there
and then eventually receded.
So they left behind a marine right a deposit that was pushed in front of the glacier that
is close to the edge of the land to sea transition.
And so those marines may be covered by water but they sort of form a kind of a door sill
on the estuary itself or on the fjord itself.
So they have a shallow water almost barrier at the front end of the estuary and then deep
water back up the fjord.
What happens in that case then is that the deep water is filled with a pool of fairly
dense sea water, salty water.
The river water comes in but it remains at the surface and it mixes very very little
with that deeper pool of salt water.
That deep water often stagnates, often becomes anoxic and you get very cold deep salty water
conditions that just sits there while river water runs over the top of it.
And many fjords actually have this very strong inversion where the surface water is almost
purely fresh and if you just go down to some depth you get completely saline water.
Well let's look a little bit at one of these well mixed examples and I'll use the Chesapeake
Bay as an example of this.
The salinity as we look up the estuary varies a lot from the ocean outlet to the in the
Atlantic Bight all the way up to say the inlets of the many many streams and Susquehanna River
and other things that feed into the Chesapeake Bay.
If we look at the salinity mapped out over the surface waters or over the waters through
the work of lots and lots of measurements made by scientists around the region you see
that the entire Chesapeake Bay is brackish to different levels.
The salinity measured in per mil remember sea water is about 35 per mil so the peak salinity
down near the entrance is in the sort of 24-25 per mil range and then it goes up to almost
completely fresh water at the upper reaches of the Chesapeake Bay.
If you look at this map you notice that the pattern of salinity is not particularly symmetrical
in the bay and that's an interesting feature.
It actually turns out that as the salt water enters with the tides and conversely as the
fresh water comes down from the rivers the Coriolis effect affects the motion of that
water on the planet and so it literally causes the salt water to bend to the right as it
enters the Chesapeake Bay and conversely causes the fresh water coming down towards
the ocean in the bay to also bend to the right and so the fresh water hugs the essentially
west coastline of the bay and the salt water hugs the right or east coastline of the bay
as we look at it.
So that's a pattern that's governed by global scale forces but on effecting the salinity
directly of this relatively small feature called the Chesapeake Bay.
The mixing of fresh water and seawater nutrients in this shallow and well-lit and protected
environment provides as I said this fertile habitat for animal life that's specific to
the estuarine waters so we have many many different forms of animals that are evolved
to take advantage of this environment in particular crabs, oysters, many different fish that dwell
in the estuarine environments and have provided incredibly good fisheries and food sources
for not only an ecosystem in general but for human beings over a lot of time.
As I said also they serve as nurseries for the juvenile stages of many major oceanic
species so examples of this include perch, anchovy and pacific herring and the larval
stages or the young stages you know fundamentally while they're very small live in the estuaries
in part for protection from the open ocean waves and currents that would carry them along
when they're when they're too small a size until they grow to a reasonable size to spend
time out in the open waters of the ocean on the continental shelf or even or even off.
So the estuaries are fundamentally important for their sort of protective nature to these
major oceanic species.
An interesting organism to look at in the estuary in the Chesapeake Bay is the famous
blue crabs very tasty product of the Chesapeake Bay region well blue crabs have a life cycle
that that's absolutely fascinating they mainly live in the low salinity areas relatively
high up the estuary.
They mate actually only once in life a female mates only once in its life with with a male
blue crab and then carries that male's sperm but needs to create eggs and then fertilize
those eggs.
Well it turns out that creating those eggs fertilizing them and spawning the larval stage
of the blue crabs depends on getting to a high salinity region and having lots of tidal
water cycling.
So the females move long distances to the mouth of the estuary to spawn the eggs they
will move literally tens and tens of miles down over the course of the season over the
course of several months from the the highest reportions to very close to the Atlantic Ocean
entry to the estuary.
They spawn their eggs by the millions at a time and then the larvae are actually planktonic
these are forms that take take the appearance of of at first something that looks very much
just like small krill or something like that and then eventually mutates or changes into
a form that looks more more crab like and then goes through a whole series of molting
to become an adult crab initially are completely planktonic they float in the water and what
they do is ride the tidal currents back up into the upper reaches of the bay.
So the blue crabs follow the salinity gradient on a kind of a spawning cycle to take advantage
of their appropriate chemistry and also water movements to support the life cycle that has
evolved in the Chesapeake Bay region.
Well if we look at the kind of high estuarine environment then well up into the upper reaches
of the of the inner tidal zone where water reaches and creates brackish water conditions
but also very slack water conditions then we see regions that are coastal salt marshes.
These don't have to be that far from the ocean.
Lagoon and as we'll see deltas can be dominated by coastal salt marshes as well but the upper
reaches of many of these estuarine basins is dominated by these by these ecosystems.
In coastal salt marshes we have salt tolerant species of many vascular plants so ordinarily
what we think of as land based plants but that have evolved the ability to excrete salt
and many aquatic organisms that live in that thrive in that same environment the mussels
and many other things that go along with living around the protected waters in the root zones
of all of these plants.
So salt marshes are an important part of the estuarine environment for dominating the kind
of the the uppermost reaches the highest tide reaches of the system.
Well so far I've been talking about estuary so regions that we think of as sort of encroachments
of the sea onto the land rivers that come down but flow into flooded valleys or downdropped
valleys if we're talking about tectonic action that produce a kind of an involution of the
coastline or an influx of the sea onto the land but many rivers that come into the sea
under the appropriate conditions actually sort of do the opposite they form a river delta
they form a region where where products of the land essentially build out into the ocean
and dominate the coastline in a sort of an inversion of the estuarine concept.
So river deltas are formed where specifically where rivers with heavy sediment load reach
the sea especially in a region where the continental shelf is relatively broad and there's relatively
low wave energy action to carry that sediment away once it's been brought down to the sea.
So it requires rivers that are very different perhaps from something like the rivers of
the east coast that produce the Hudson Valley or the Chesapeake Bay or the Delaware coming
into the Delaware Bay estuarine system.
It requires rivers that are carrying very large amounts of sediment in the continental
U.S. that could include the Mississippi River where we're draining a third of the continent
and putting that all of that sediment into the water that's coming out the Mississippi
Delta and building out off the coast of Louisiana the whole Mississippi River fan or delta system.
In the Mediterranean we see the Nile River draining North Africa draining the dry regions
of North Africa carrying a heavy sediment load to the sea every year and actually building
out the Nile Delta into the Mediterranean.
The fertile grounds of the Nile Delta are green in a satellite image and we can actually
see where the delta got its name.
It's literally the shape of the Greek letter delta this triangular shaped region where
the river comes down from the land and then as it meets what was formerly the coastline
builds out a whole network of distributary channels as they're called regions where the
river dumps its sediment load in one area for a while and then as that builds up it
moves off to a different region to the side dumps its sediment there and sort of over
tens of thousands of years fans back and forth putting the sediment out just like a fire hose
spraying sediment onto the coastline and building this delta out into what was formerly coastal
waters on the continental shelf.
Well if it's dumping all that sediment but there's really heavy oceanic wave action
and a narrow continental shelf like where the Columbia River which also carries a lot of
sediment meets the sea you don't really build a major river delta you might build a deep
water deep sea fan and submarine canning system but not a delta.
But the combined effects of waves and tides and river flow and the sediment load then
determine the delta shape and we can think of two different fundamental shapes of deltas
that are kind of we can categorize them into on the planet.
One is the river dominated deltas that are fed by a strong flow from the land a strong
flow of sediment from the land with large distributary channels and then we can think
of tide dominated deltas that are molded more by the ocean tidal currents and so those tidal
currents are reworking or moving about the sediments that are being dumped by the rivers
on the land. So again it's an interplay between the river on the one hand and the sea on the
other and how they interact with each other that determines the shapes of these deltas.
Both of them though can be the sites of major wetlands and salt marsh regions, estuarine
systems that can be extensively developed along the coastline.
If we look at the example of the Mississippi River delta building out into the Gulf of
Mexico off the coast of Louisiana or at the coast of Louisiana it's dumped sediment out
over this large area and so we have huge hundreds of thousands of acres of coastal wetlands mud
flats essentially that are tidally that are interacting with the tides on a daily basis
and are flooded by sea water but also affected by the freshwater coming from the land. You
see the actual channels that form that feed the water from the Mississippi River out over
what's called the bird's foot delta for its remarkable shape in satellite imagery and
then the salt marshes that surround the channels and the sort of flood bank levees that are
around those channels. Now levees are a natural feature of rivers that are dumping sediments
on their side and they're also an artificial feature of human activity when we build levees
to try to keep rivers in those channels. But a river dominated delta has these characteristics
that look like the Mississippi delta where the distribution of salt marshes and the channels
are well defined by the fact that the river is putting that sediment and that water out
towards the sea. By contrast a delta like the Ganges River delta is a tide dominated
region and so yes the river is still coming down to the ocean it's still delivering a
lot of sediment to the ocean in the case of the Bay of Bengal and the build out of the
Ganges and Brahmaputra River deltas that are you know the region of Bangladesh for example.
But they're delivering a little less sediment spreading it over a broader and flatter region
and the tidal cycling is strong enough that's actually taking all that sediment and kind
of redistributing it. You still see in satellite photographs of the Ganges River delta the
channel ways that are from the rivers meeting the sea but they've been modified by all
of this tidal flow. And we see tide dominated deltas with different kinds of wetlands and
especially well developed in tide dominated deltas are regions dominated by mangrove trees.
So large areas that have mangroves growing in them, mangrove trees are rooted down into
the saltwater and the mudflats and marshes of a saltwater dominated estuarine system but
you know there of course their leaves are up in the air they're a plant that's partly
marine and partly sub aerial but the mangrove regions trap the sediment hold it in place
and build the land out in this tide water dominated delta region like the Ganges.
If we take a look at mangrove trees those actually represent a whole type of coastline
that we haven't talked about so much so far in the course and that is coastlines that
are dominated actually not just simply by erosion and sediment transport but also by
the actual biology that lives on them. Now at the fundamental sort of geological level
all these coastlines start out as depositionally dominated or erosion dominated but the actual
shore region and the environments of the shore and in particular the estuarine environments
around the shoreline can often be substantially modified by the existence of ecosystems of
various kinds of organisms and the main distinguishing feature in this case is their organisms that
hold the sediment in place through one type of structure or another or sort of physically
create a strong and almost armored coastline.
Mangrove trees are one of the best examples of that because of their extensive network
of almost impenetrable complicated roots and roots that grow down in and the mud in filters
into that region and doesn't wash out as easily as it would in open water regions so mangrove
trees sort of trap that sediment that's coming from the river areas and they start to actually
build up land areas over time. You can see the mangrove branches grow out and then drop
down hanging roots that will eventually meet the water, meet the mud and start to create
their own root structures and so the mangroves can spread laterally by this kind of growth
and they will build new land literally in many places around the Gulf of Mexico and
the Gulf side of Florida but also all over subtropical regions of the world, the Indian
Ocean regions for example, many other places around the Caribbean, mangrove trees really
dominate the coastline. They can build huge areas of biologically dominated coastline by
trapping so much sediment and providing habitat for all kinds of different organisms that
then colonize this estuarine environment and use it productively.
Mangrove forests also then as I said essentially armor the coastline, make it less susceptible
to things like storm surges and over washing by very high tides and by tsunami, hurricanes
and things like that because they provide a buffer zone between that and the main part
of the land where perhaps construction is done where human beings are living. Unfortunately
globally speaking mangrove itself as wood is potentially a commodity, is a product
and also the mangrove regions like many wetlands around the world are being taken over for
various kinds of development perhaps for mariculture and aquaculture in many regions or simply to
create channels or new land to live on. According to the UN FAO once again globally there's
been about a 20% reduction in the total area of mangrove forests since 1980. 20% one-fifth
of all the mangrove forests around the planet have been lost since 1980.
There is a little bit of good news though in that the rate of that change or loss of mangrove
forests is rapidly diminishing. Many countries around the world have recognized that mangroves
are an important buffer zone and resource for their coastlines and so have banned the
practice of replacing them with other constructed features. Bangladesh for example has essentially
protected all of its mangrove forests or most of its mangrove forests and slowed down this
rate of mangrove loss really wonderfully and in a success story for kind of maintaining
coastal structure. Well one more type of biologically dominated coastline is what we call
carbonate banks and platforms. Now coral reefs build large structures of carbonate and the reef
itself is the living carbonate as we'll see in a lecture to come. But the reef also is broken
down all the time and it produces huge volumes over geological time of just carbonate sediment
essentially limestone and it builds up this rocky substructure that's incredibly strong
and becomes the actual sort of coast main coastline feature over a lot of time. If you look at the
Florida Keys or the Bahamas those are islands those are now on land exposures of coral reefs
that built up over the past few hundred thousand and few million years in fact. Well why would they
be islands? We know that corals live under the water so why are the Florida Keys exposed as
islands? Well if you remember back to the sea level curve you remember that there was a time in the
last period between the glaciation several tens of thousands of years ago where actually a hundred
thousand years ago where sea level was six meters higher than it is today and so many of the coral
islands around the world were corals that grew up to close to sea level when it was substantially
higher than today and then as the sea level drained back down they were left high and dry the
corals died but left behind islands. Sea level has come back up but left them just enough exposed
to still be inhabitable islands and wonderful places to visit like the Florida Keys. These are
regions where the coastline is is rocky and it becomes dominated by erosion as opposed to
deposition even though they're a long coast that ultimately were originally depositional coasts.
Well we've looked at a whole bunch of different regions around the world now and we've seen that
these estuaries, deltas and biologically dominated coasts are among the most biologically productive
regions on earth. They have in fact supported a huge amount of the organisms that live on the
planet and their productivity rivals the tropical rainforest but maybe even more than that these
kinds of regions in the world have in fact supported the flourishing of the major world
civilizations throughout human history and you could make the argument that estuaries have been
critical to the development of our modern civilization. I can give you lots of different
examples you know the the lower reaches of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, the Nile Delta itself
of course, the mouth of the Ganges River, the mouths of the rivers that flood into the
South China Sea where the Chinese cities have developed over time and of course modern examples
were also built around estuaries over the course of the past few hundred years in the USA. New York
City at the mouth of the Hudson River is one great example. San Francisco Bay is another example.
These were places where people lived and actually Native Americans lived in large numbers in
relatively high population concentrations because of the availability of all the resources, all the
food that was available in those estuaries. They became concentrations of people, they became cities
over time and grew into the very modern cities that perhaps ironically take on as a major activity
the filling in of the wetlands and salt marshes and things like that and basically eliminate
much of the health of the estuary itself that was once the underpinning and the reason that that
city actually exists in that location.
