We've looked at beaches, rocky shorelines, estuaries, tidal marshes, and tidal flats.
And what all of these have in common is that they're tremendously dynamic environments.
Their natural state is one of change, things are changing all the time.
But of course they're also the locations very often where people want to live or build structures.
And so we have this desire to stabilize those regions for very good reasons.
We want to have real estate and things like that, and we want to have stable locations.
We expect the earth to kind of stay the same.
But multiple factors are really modifying our coastlines all the time.
And so we're going to take a look in this lecture at what some of those factors are.
Well the most basic one is that sea level has been rising slowly for many decades now
as a consequence of really two different things.
One is simply long term, perhaps natural climate change.
But the second is an acceleration of that process in recent decades due to global warming.
And that affects the estuarine habitat, that affects the locations of beaches and barrier
islands, that affects the erosional processes on cliffy and rocky shorelines as well.
So if we look at sea level, we've seen already the sea level curve in general that at the
high point of the last ice age sea level was much, much lower, 125 meters lower than today.
And since 18,000 years ago it's risen rapidly until it came up to the present day level.
But it hasn't done it absolutely continuously.
What happened was sea level rose very rapidly as the earth came out of that ice age period.
And over several thousand years it rose at a rate of about two millimeters per year.
Doesn't sound like a lot, but every decade that gets you a couple of centimeters, close
to an inch per decade, something like that.
And so over thousands of years that's a substantial change in sea level.
Now several thousand years ago, between 2,500 and 4,000 years ago or so, it really stabilized.
All that process slowed down, the glaciers had essentially retreated, their present positions
more or less.
And so it slowed down to what looks like a few tenths of a millimeter per year, just
a very small amount.
Now just over the span of basically the amount of time that we've been accurately measuring
these properties though, it's pretty clear that sea level's been rising faster than that.
And that may be a part due to just the natural cyclicity of climate change initially, and
certainly it appears to be accelerating in recent years, as we'll see in a later lecture,
to a much more rapid pace.
The present day rate of sea level change is about three millimeters per year, or actually
even a little bit faster, significantly faster, than the rate that sea level changes we came
out of the glacial period.
So something's going on and something's really changing things on the planet.
Well as sea level rises, communities of course want to protect coastal real estate, they
want to preserve beaches that are their main source of recreation, and often for coastal
communities also their main source of income.
And so they use a lot of different methodologies and engineering, coastal engineering, in order
to try to achieve these goals.
So these engineered structures vary in their efficacy.
Some work well, others do not.
Sometimes it's because of the location, sometimes it's because of the types of engineering.
We'll take a look at all of that in the course of this lecture.
Many of these things are extensively modifying the natural deposition and erosion processes
that I've already defined for you on the coastlines.
And so they cause loss of beaches, or cause loss of sea cliff areas, in the very places
where they're actually intended to protect those things.
So the natural processes are being modified by engineering processes, sometimes to very
good effect and sometimes to not so good effect.
Well, let's talk a little bit more about sea level, because it's a little more complicated
than I've led on so far.
I've defined the term eustatic sea level for you before.
So that's global change of sea level, something averaged out over the whole planet.
We actually know that there's even variations in what global sea level means because of oceanographic
effects and things like that.
We've seen the maps of surface water height around the world's ocean already.
But let's say we have something defined as eustatic sea level or global sea level.
Well, how does that play into local sea level?
There's an interplay, as I described or mentioned before, between the eustatic change with local
changes in the land elevation due to a variety of processes.
One of these processes I mentioned before was tectonic activity, the uplift of the land
through fault action.
First the uplift of the land through glacial rebound.
There's also the converse, land subsidence.
Regions that are underlaid by soft sediments can be subsiding due to the actual compaction
of all of that mud and sand and sediment.
The squeezing out of the water that's trapped in its pore spaces, along especially let's
say the Gulf Coast and Mississippi Delta region, is causing land subsidence.
So sea level at the local scale, right in a particular area, is a balance between these
different things, what the land is doing and what the sea is doing.
Let's take a look at some examples of changing sea level around the U.S. coastline.
First of all, we'll take a look at Sandy Hook, New Jersey.
If we look at the mapping of the actual level of sea level, this comes from the tide gauges
present on that shoreline, and look at it going back with data to 1933 or so, we see
that it fluctuates sort of annual and storm and tidal and all sorts of different cycles
making it a spiky signal, but there's an overall trend that's very much a linear increase
in sea level, and it averages out to about 3.9 millimeters per year since 1933, actually
slightly in excess of that apparent global average.
That's about a foot of total sea level change since 1933, so it's already been substantial
over this time.
There's no question that in this region, local sea level is rising.
Let's compare that to Galveston, Texas now.
The Galveston, Texas record goes back even further.
We have about a century of data since about 1908 or so, right after the big storm in Galveston,
in fact.
And what we see is, again, a sort of variable and spiky signal, but a much higher rate,
a much higher slope to the curve, and in fact, since 1908, the average has been 6.4 millimeters
per year or so, almost double the rate that we just saw at Sandy Hook, New Jersey.
Well, what's the difference?
Why do we get about two feet of sea level change over this 100-year period?
In Galveston, we have a region where the coastline is actually actively subsiding due to the
land compaction that I just talked about a minute ago.
So the region is basically the sediments of the edge of the Gulf of Mexico, and those
sediments in the absence of introduction of lots of new sediment will just gradually
subside as the sediments compact over time.
So we have a larger, apparent sea level rise in Texas than we do in New Jersey.
It's not because the sea is doing something different, but the land is doing something
different.
But it doesn't matter because it's still local sea level rise.
It still affects the coastline and the coastal processes in that particular region.
Here's another example.
This is from Seward, Alaska.
So we're up in the Gulf of Alaska right along the coastline, and we see a very strange-looking
sea level curve.
If we look at it going back from the present day to 1964, we actually see that sea level
has been dropping a small amount over all of that time, about one and three quarters
millimeters per year decline in sea level since then.
And then something very strange happened in 1964 because we see a huge jump in the sea
level.
What is that?
Well, that, in fact, is the 1964 earthquake, one of the largest earthquakes that's ever
occurred, that took place in that region, and actually shifted the land in the same way
I described when I was talking about tsunami in Japan or in Indonesia.
And before that, sea level was more or less constant in Seward.
So we see a region that the tectonic activity of the land moving upward is dominating sea
level because even though the sea is coming up, the land is going up faster, and so the
relative sea level is actually going down very slightly in this region.
So a tectonically active coastline can have very different signature of sea level change
than a more passive margin coastline like the Gulf Coast or New Jersey.
Well if we look at all of these then, we have various effects of local sea level rise.
The eustatic sea level doesn't matter anymore.
We really just want to think about what's happening locally in a given region if we're
worried about coastal structures and coastal engineering.
Most places around the world are not benefiting from rapid tectonic activity, so most places
sea level is going up, and it's going up quickly.
It's going up at that rate of several millimeters per year from three to six or more around
most of the North American coastline.
So what that means then is that the sea comes up just a little.
It doesn't sound like much.
It does add up over time to a foot, another foot, maybe another, and we'll see more sea
level rise over the course of the next century if present trends continue.
But it causes problems at the coast because first of all, coastal flooding is just higher
during the highest water events.
That means the storm surges, the big waves, and the highest of the tides all cause coastal
flooding to higher and higher levels.
Many coastal communities, especially along the East Coast, are seeing that the highest
tides, places even roads along the coast that were once high and dry at all times are now
flooded at the highest tides.
We also see storm surges and erosion of beaches when big waves come up and erode the beaches
back, drive the beach berm further up, erode the sand and take it offshore, and move the
sand out into longshore bars and deeper water because of the stronger action of the waves
acting on the beach.
So the erosion deposition balance is upended or modified by the higher sea level and stronger
wave action.
So barrier islands migrate towards the mainland because you erode the beach on one side, but
on the other hand, the waves overwash the barrier islands and drive some of that sand
up right over the berm and into the back dune region or into the back berm region, moving
the sand landward.
So higher sea level pushes the sand over the barrier island into the marshes, the marshes
migrate towards the mainland, the front side or the ocean side of the barrier island migrates
towards the mainland as well, and the whole thing will slowly march towards that side.
Now this is a natural process, but if we want to fix real estate in place, fix houses in
place, then it causes more beach loss because you're eroding from one side.
Additionally, local sea level rise causes the balance in estuaries and wetlands to change.
They're flooded by seawater to a greater and greater extent if sea level is higher naturally.
So the salinity zones tend to migrate inland.
That changes the habitats for different organisms, a place that for example was a nice place
for a blue crab to mate at one time, might turn into a place where they have to move
upstream and upstream might already be inhabited or might already be blocked off by development
or other things.
So habitats change and can't always migrate along with the changing salinity zones and
the changing mixing zones in the estuaries themselves.
Well so, human beings then, we as a society like to respond to and eroding shoreline in
different ways.
Obviously what we tend to want to do is to stabilize that shoreline.
Nature would be perfectly happy to allow the barrier island to migrate and in fact a barrier
island will have a healthy beach on its seaward side even as it over the decades migrates
towards the mainland even by several miles eventually closing up those lagoons.
But if we have a lot of expensive real estate along the barrier islands coastline then we'd
prefer to try to keep it in place.
So we practice a number of different responses to this eroding shoreline.
First response is one that we'll call hard stabilization, the construction of sea walls,
breakwaters, groins and jetties and things like that, engineered structures to try to
stop the sand from moving around too much.
Second is one we'll call soft stabilization and that's what we describe as beach replenishment
or beach nourishment.
And then finally the other response is simply to move, relocate or retreat from the shoreline
as the shorelines erode and sea level rises.
So let's take a look at all those in a little more detail.
Well first hard stabilization, if we look at it there are a number of different protective
structures I just named them quickly, let's define them a little bit more.
So first of all jetties are you know rock structures, walls essentially that are built
out perpendicular to the shoreline specifically to protect harbor inlets so jetties are fairly
large constructions and their purpose is fundamentally to block or deflect the long shore drift
that's naturally occurring.
If you remember what we talked about with the long shore drift and what happens at a
harbor entrance or a bay is that the sand that's moving along the coast in the long shore
drift reaches that region where the bay mouth exists, the water motion, the wave energy
is a little less because a mouth of a harbor is typically a little bit deeper water and
so the sand that's suspended and turbulent carried by the water is dropped down to the
bottom.
You build out a sand bar or a sand spit that will ultimately close off the harbor entrance
so people will build a jetty out to protect the harbor entrance to stop the long shore
drift.
The problem is that that prevents the long shore drift from continuing to deliver sand
to the sort of down shore side, the distance on the other side of the harbor further along
which needs that sand to replace the long shore drift that it in turn is handing off
to the next part of the beach.
Jetties are one structure to protect harbors, groin is the name of a structure that is like
a jetty just some kind of seawall that's built usually periodically along beaches or in periodic
distances along beaches to again prevent the loss of sand from the long shore drift happening
along the beach.
This is actually not really even dependent on sea level rising or falling at all it's
just simply trying to stop the kind of fundamental process of long shore drift going on.
If we look at the construction of these jetties we'll see that they interfere though with the
long shore drift and it's caused really major changes in some Atlantic coast shorelines
even over the course of recent decades or the past century or so.
Here's an example from Cape May, New Jersey where you see a series of individual groins
that were built to keep the beach in place where the beach was eroding and you can see
that on the you know the long shore drift is going from the bottom of the photo towards
the top you're looking sort of towards the south and you can see that you know on the
up drift side of each groin there's a thick beach a wide beach where the sand has been
trapped in place and then a sort of a deficit of sand on the on the down drift side of each
one of those individual groins.
So that works okay as long as the groins keep getting constructed all along the coastline
but you can see the effect of the last groin at the edge of the of the city region at the
top left of the photograph where then beyond that there's a sediment or a sand starved
region and the coastline has eroded back a long distance inland so preventing the sand
to move is actually preventing the natural process that replenishes the beaches over
the course of the entire essentially over the course of the entire Atlantic seaboard
in this case.
Well another structure that are constructed very often are called breakwaters these are
actually parallel to the beach and in shallow water offshore to provide an area protected
from the waves as small boat harbor and things like that.
Here's an example in these historical photographs the region around Santa Monica Pier in 1931
as it appeared and then a breakwater was constructed sometime after that by 1949 when the second
photograph was taken you can see that that breakwater has caused slack water behind it
and therefore the buildup of a large amount of sand adjacent to the pier and a kind of
a congruent deficit of sand again down the drift direction in this case the drift is
coming towards us along the west coast there and so we see this very large buildup of beach
and the interruption of sand transport in this region.
Actually the breakwater there was allowed to deteriorate over time in this 2007 kind
of era image overhead shot you can see that the coastline has now with the waves washing
right over the old breakwater has now basically returned to something very similar to its
original shape.
Well this kind of process then causes wholesale changes in the ocean or in the coastline given
enough time and one fantastic example of that is the difference between the developed shoreline
of Ocean City, Maryland with the relatively undeveloped shoreline of Assateague Island
and the adjacent natural area that's been left undeveloped and part of the National
Park System.
If you look at Ocean City which is protected by a whole series of groins and then ultimately
a very large jetty structure protecting the inlet to the lagoon behind it it's in the
same position essentially that it was many decades ago.
Meanwhile the starving of sediment supplied to the Assateague Island region has caused
that barrier island to migrate many hundreds of meters actually the whole width of Ocean
City as you can see towards the mainland closing up the lagoon and allowing the barrier island
to do what it will do when its sediment starved which is essentially migrate landward.
Now this same process this process here is due in part to the artificial disruption of
the sediment supply but that's essentially a view of exactly the process that will be
taking place and that is already beginning to take place with rising sea level as it
washes sand over these very very low relief barrier islands it will move that sand especially
in big storm events on shore and build up the inner side and break down the outer side
and migrate the whole barrier island.
Well another type of structure that's designed on the coastline to protect buildings and
basically keep the beach from eroding away or keep the sea cliffs in fact from eroding
away are called sea walls just any kind of hard structure that's meant to armor the coastline
and make it more resistant to the eroding power of the waves.
As we're going to see ironically these can actually make beach erosion worse at times.
If we look at a hard barrier construction you can see so many examples all over southern
and northern California of places where expensive beachfront real estate is being protected by
very large scale massive engineering projects concrete and what's called riprap which essentially
just means very large boulders or other heavy objects piled up at the base of the cliff
to try to prevent the undercutting of the waves that I described in erosional coasts
from breaking down the bottom of the cliff such that the cliff eventually slumps down
and becomes sediment essentially to turn into part of the sediment deposition process
on the coastline.
Well these hard barrier constructions have a few different problems and one is that they
are typically eventually battered against by the waves enough that they become undercut.
When the wave energy comes in instead of dissipating on an open sandy beach instead bangs into a
seawall it will undercut that seawall it will cause turbulent water energy to actually erode
away at the base of the seawall.
What this does is actually undercut the seawall region cause greater offshore erosion and
eventually undercut it so much that the seawall will collapse.
It can also of course if waves overtop the seawall then they erode in behind it as well.
Now a second problem with seawalls or a second type of seawall construction actually is when
they are constructed right on a beach proper as opposed to in a sea cliff region where
you are trying to prevent erosion just to be the margin or to provide a hard barrier
so that man made objects like houses and hotels and things like that can be built very close
to the shore.
Resort hotels like to be right on the beach so they will place a seawall on the beach.
If this is done in the right part of the beach well into the back shore region above
the highest of the potential berms then that can actually be a reasonable structure.
You sort of fix the ground in that region and at least until eventually sea level rise
takes over then that will provide a kind of a good foundation and a good superstructure
or substructure for the construction project.
Unfortunately because people want to maximize their real estate and beachfront real estate
is of course tremendously expensive they will build the seawalls just a little too far out.
They want to get a little bit more in terms of square footage out there on the water front.
If the seawall is built out into the active berm region or into the foreshore region then
the waves will wash up to it at high water and storm surges and again will reflect off
the seawall will undercut it and will actually exacerbate beach erosion as opposed to prevent
it.
Now sometimes these were built in places that were not the foreshore decades ago but as
sea level is rising are rapidly becoming part of the foreshore region so that the sea level
change is affecting where those seawalls are effective versus not effective and the only
real answer to that ultimately is more construction to try to keep hardening it and then eventually
retreat as sea level rise overwhelms whatever structures we want to build on these kinds
of coastlines.
Well what we call soft stabilization is another process that's actually become much more popular
in recent decades and that's beach nourishment or replenishment essentially importing sand
to the beach to replace sand that has disappeared through the active erosional processes associated
with either sea level rise or long shore drift.
So beach nourishment can take the form of simply dredging up sand from the long shore
bars offshore and placing that sand onto the beach or mining it from somewhere else bringing
it in literally in trucks and dumping it on the beach in order to build up the amount
of material simply build up the amount of material on the beach.
Beach replenishment has been done in many many places all along especially the Atlantic
seaboard of the US it's a popular activity with local communities because as they lose
their beaches to beach erosion and to sand moving offshore with greater wave action or
with the cut off of long shore delivery of sand then they lose their livelihood if it's
a beachfront community that's typically what the community is dependent on.
So many tens and even hundreds of millions of dollars have gone into beachfront replenishment
of limited areas of the shoreline in well-developed communities.
It works very well for a time but depending on the local region and basically just depending
on luck in terms of when the next hurricane is or the next really significant storm event
a beach replenishment project can last 10 or 20 or more years or it can last literally
a season or two before that sand tends to be taken back offshore because the same process
that was eroding the sand in the first place of course continues after the replenishment
project is carried out and it's not going to stop sea level rise it's just a way of
basically putting more material for the for the sea to take away or for the sea to move
along in the longshore drift.
So in some places there have been real success stories in other places it's been not so successful
and a lot of money has been spent to either assist a very small community or to assist
a community for a very limited period of time but ultimately all of these are going to have
to succumb to rising sea level if the present trend continues of sea level going up at the
pace that's going today.
There are also all the estuarine regions of the planet and so when we look at marshlands
and mangrove forests and things like that in many cases the loss of sediment supply or
the loss of the mangroves themselves is leaving many coastal areas also more susceptible to
storm damage and to loss of land area basically because of rising sea level once again but
interacting with the input of material from the land and what I mean by that is exemplified
best perhaps in coastal Louisiana.
Coastal Louisiana is this very large tidal marshland area fed by the sediment of the
Mississippi River Delta.
Mississippi and Atchaflaya River deltas contribute huge amounts of sediment to the coastline
and have over lots of geological time so the rivers come down as they spread out over
their deltas the water slows down it dumps its sediment load eventually the water makes
it to the sea.
The sediment is left behind and so replenishes all of those marshland areas.
Well development has led to channelization of those rivers such that the rivers are now
directed with their sediment load at a higher velocity all the way out to the edge of the
delta so that people could stabilize the land behind the artificial levees and build structures
in a nice coastal environment.
The unfortunate side effect is that now those distributary channels are not delivering sediment
and spreading it out in periodic floods over the marshland anymore.
The mud flats of all those regions are gradually subsiding as I described before due to the
compaction of those sediments and then that upshot is areas that were initially completely
high and dry and areas that were tidal regions that were periodically flooded but partly
dry regions are subsiding and are becoming completely inundated with seawater at all
times so they're going from tidal or high end of the tidal region to below low water
below low tide.
That is essentially the loss of coastal land area and it's also the loss of the buffer
against the storm surges that come periodically with hurricanes into that region.
Well private property rights, insurance companies, government agencies, public interest of course
these things all often collide over these issues and I would not make light of those
issues because if you own a piece of beachfront property you've invested a lot of money in
it of course you're very interested in understanding how you can stabilize it and we have an expectation
as human beings I think that the earth stays where it is that if you plot out a plot of
land it's not going to go away.
The fundamental problem is not so much exactly sea level rise as the fact that the coastline
itself is just in its natural state a dynamic environment where the landscape is shifting
at all times and beaches would continue to exist whether the barrier islands migrate
landward or whether sea level drops and they migrated seaward they would continue to exist
in all of those cases but it's the trying to fix them in place and keep them in one
spot and sort of deny the fact that they are dynamic structures on a geological basis
that causes virtually all the problems.
These sand beaches and these barrier islands and the estuaries themselves are all in natural
dynamic equilibrium meaning stuff flows in, stuff flows out and the material that's present
today is not the material that's present tomorrow even if the beach looks the same.
The beaches are in dynamic equilibrium with longshore drift, the estuaries are in dynamic
equilibrium with the river water, the sediments and the sea water, the deltas in the same
way build out and build back depending on sea level but all of these things are going
to be affected by the present condition which is rising sea levels.
As sea level rises they are going to inexorably change and in the case of the barrier islands
they are going to migrate landward eventually engineering will not be able to stop it because
sea level will continue to rise and we are going to see in a later lecture exactly why
that is.
Now the government funds beach nourishment projects for these recreational beaches at
expenses of up to hundreds of millions of dollars and as I've said that's essentially a short
term solution so society can certainly make that choice by directing that that money be
spent for the public good of having these recreational beaches in place but we can also
look at solutions that look a little bit more long term perhaps not literally moving people
back from the beach but as things are destroyed in large storms not going in and reconstructing
in the same areas but making provisions for retreat from what is surely a retreating shoreline.
Well we've looked at the coastal environment now in a fair amount of detail in a few lectures
so in the next lecture we're going to take that physical environment and we're going to
populate it again we're going to start at the shoreline and go back offshore from our estuaries
in our beaches and we're going to consider the benthic communities the bottom dwellers
that inhabit the near shore environment from beaches to coral reefs and to the kelp forests.
