Well, so far we've built up an understanding of the containers of the ocean, the shape
of the ocean, basins and what the seafloor is like, and we've looked at the life that
populates the pelagic zone, all the water above that, and then we took a kind of a trip
up to the coastline where the sea meets the land and the estuaries and the beach environments
and everything that goes with them.
So now it's time to essentially wade back into the water and take a look at the organisms
and the ecosystems that inhabit the most complex and varied part of the ocean of all, which
is the benthic zone, the bottom dwelling creatures that live on the bottom of the sea
and inhabit these physical environments that we've now developed such a nice understanding
of.
So in this lecture we're going to take a look at all of the regions that are in the shallow
water benthic zone or the subtitle benthic region.
The ocean floor from the rocky intertidal zone or the beaches out to the edges of the
continental shelves hosts the most complex and varied ecosystems to go along with the
complex and varied sort of substrate or bottom features, all the locations that life can
inhabit on the sea floor.
These ecosystems vary greatly, tremendously from coral reefs to kelp forests to just
open mudflats based on the kind of substrate, the access to light and the wave energy and
all sorts of other factors in the ocean.
These regions are the benthic, tidal and subtitle zones of our definition of different
habitats that we set up early on within the sea.
Well, let's do some defining of terms once again.
So benthic remember is on or near the bottom and that means benthic communities are ecosystems
of whole organisms and we considered organisms largely in terms of where they were in the
trophic pyramid before when we were looking at the open ocean, but now we're really going
to look at interlocking and internet working ecosystems of communities that interact in
very complex ways.
The habitat for these benthic communities range from rocky tide pools to coral reefs,
sandy beaches, and then ultimately to the abyssal deep vents and the vast areas of the open
sea floor of the abyssal plains, but we'll leave the deep zones for the next lecture
and in this one I'll concentrate on the euphotic zone, the well-lit region in the shallow
water areas.
Okay, let's just remind ourselves of a few terms that relate to ecosystems in general
because I've already talked a little bit about some of these, but they're going to become
important when we really look at the benthic communities as a whole.
So first of all, I just used the term community, but a community is basically a whole bunch
of different types of organisms that inhabit a particular location or environment.
By contrast, a population is a group of organisms of the same species that occupy a significant
area.
So communities are made up of a variety of populations.
Habitat we defined before is the specific environment in which any given organism or
any given population lives, and then we use the ecological term niche.
The niche is the specific role that organism plays in the community, so it has an ecological
niche which is distinct from its physical habitat.
Well, let's look at some of the different environments then starting right essentially
just offshore or even at the shoreline.
First of all, the beaches themselves and the near shore environment of the beaches, including
the sand transport just offshore.
Diversity and rocky beaches are actually relative biological deserts.
There aren't vast numbers of organisms.
They aren't very productive in terms of diversity or in terms of overall biomass productivity.
And in fact, they're dominated as we'll see by burrowing organisms.
Well, why is that?
Why would that be?
Well, the answer is probably pretty straightforward.
If you think about what it would take to actually live in a sandy beach environment, you'd have
to admit to yourself that it's pretty inhospitable.
First of all, there's waves swashing back and forth, always knocking you off your foundations
perhaps, making it difficult to get a purchase and get a foothold in that particular region
and stay in one place.
Secondly, there's a loose and sharp substrate.
Now, we might not think of sand as sharp, but of course it is.
We use it for sandpaper.
It's abrasive.
If you're very small, the size of a microorganism or the size of a small arthropod or worm
or something like that, then sand is actually very sharp edge, terrible material to be around.
It's hard to stay in place.
You get abraded by the sand that's being moved around by the waves, and it's hard to
keep from getting eaten if you're constantly being washed out of your particular habitat
and into some other zone.
Now on the other hand, beaches are washed over by the waves constantly, so even though
they're relatively poor substrate regions, there is a lot of organic matter that washes
down into the pore spaces in the sand.
So with every wave, it carries some organic material, and it carries some plankton, it
carries bits of seaweed and everything else, and all of those tend to infiltrate into this
pore space down in the sand.
And so that provides food for organisms that can take advantage of it.
And that means the burrowing organisms like crabs and clams, actually ones you may not
know about, like polychaete worms and so-called sand fleas, arthropods that live in this environment.
All of them share the characteristic of basically actively burrowing, including clams of course.
They dig their way into the sediment, and they can burrow to get at some of the food
resources that are down in the sand, but they can also burrow for protection.
So if you're in a region where the substrate is soft, like a sandy beach, but the waves
wash periodically over it, in fact the tide rises up over it and then goes back down,
then you may emerge either on land or underwater, whether you're at the high tide line or the
low tide line, and then when the waves are washing back and forth, burrow in for protection
in order to basically maintain your position and not get washed around, and also not get
eaten by, say, an opportunistic seagull or something like that.
So the organisms that dominate this environment, that do well in this environment, are either
very well armored and mobile, like the horseshoe crabs that are good at swimming around and
have this carapace that protects them from virtually anything that can come over the
top.
They tend to stay in the shallow water offshore region.
We see them up on the beach area in the tide flats only when they're in mating season actually.
More things like clams, like this example of razor clams, very large clams, that burrow
down into the substrate, into the mud or the sand, and extend their siphon, which is just
the body part that they then use to filter feed, plankton out of the water, plankton
in bits of detritus and things like that, and then they can move around and actually
will burrow their way deeper during low tide and shallower during high tide and things
like that.
So beach environment really is inhabited by a relatively small number of organisms.
But for many other environments at the coastline and offshore, we see great diversity and profusion
of individual types of organisms and populations that make up a given community.
If we continue to look at the intertidal environment for a second longer, we can look at mangrove
forests, we've already examined them in some detail already, and then the rocky tide pool
habitats, which are so much fun to go and take a look at and go tide pooling and look
for all the variety of organisms that you might find in these areas.
The big challenges for living in a rocky coastline environment in a rocky tide pool is coping
with the fact that you're periodically dried out and then submerged in water by the tides
and constantly washed over by waves that are very energetic and moving all the material
around in this environment.
So the organisms that live there have developed a great deal of sort of hardiness and strategies
for coping with with all of this sort of high energy and rapidly changing environment.
The payoff for those organisms is that in the rocky tide pool, you have waves continuously
bringing in nutrients from the sea, and you also have streams and other ways that material
from the land is coming down.
And so nutrients from the land and nutrients from the sea are mixing in the tide pool setting.
So a typical tide pool, perhaps a Pacific coast tide pool that you could see all over
the Northwest and in California, you know, involves numerous different individual organisms
and populations of organisms in a very complex community where they're all dependent on the
different parts of the ecological process that the other ones are carrying out.
They're fueled by these nutrients and food from both the sea and the land.
It includes fish.
It includes the the the sessile organisms like like mussels.
It includes the crawlers like snails and kites and limpets.
It includes algae like seaweeds, the starfish, hermit crabs, even the gulls.
And the sea urchins, of course, all interacting in such a way to take advantage of every little
bit of detrital food that comes in.
Also photosynthesize whenever that's possible to generate food from sunlight and then a community
of organisms at different trophic levels that are that are eating those primary producers
or detritus consumers.
So if you look in a tide pool, you know, the big thing is change, right?
And many of the tide pool organisms, even the ones that are sessile that stay in place
like a sea anemone, have developed the ability to handle periodic drying.
So the sea anemones in the water, remember that sea anemones are related to the to the
jellyfish there and they're related to corals as well as we'll see their nendarians.
They open up their polyps and they waft water or filter feed, detritus, plankton, etc. out
of the water into their mouths.
Muscles do the same thing.
Muscles largely do the same thing.
They're all various kinds of filter feeders.
When the water dries out and the tide pool periodically dries, the anemones are efficient
at closing in, having a harder sort of exterior thicker skin that allows them to close up,
maintain the water content inside the anemone until it gets wetted again and protects it
from sort of damage from the sunlight, the ultraviolet of the sunlight and everything
else while it's dried out.
The barnacles close up and so on.
The organisms that can handle this kind of environment are the ones that are good at
remaining in place.
So if you've ever tried to pry a Pacific starfish off of the rocks during low tide, you know
that they're extremely firmly attached through all of their, all of their, their suckers
that hold them onto the rock surface and really difficult to get off of the rocks.
Same goes for the chitins and limpets and other organisms like that.
Staying in place is important.
Well if we look at the tidal community, you see that in these rocky tide pools, there's
an incredible vertical zonation, meaning different populations, different, in fact, parts of
the ecosystem and have very specific zones relative to low tide and high tide lines.
So Dr. Ed Ricketts, this is the same guy I mentioned before who was the inspiration
for Steinbeck's Dock in Canary Row, actually published a zonation that's down to the level
of just tens of centimeters from going from low, low water.
So basically the place that's always wet during all low tides right up over the span
of just two meters, six or seven feet, to the area that's only wetted at the most extreme
high tides.
And so you see the curve that shows the amount of time, the percentage of the time that a
given zone is wetted, and it's zoned in terms of the organisms that populate it.
So the highest zone one just has lichens and cyanobacteria living in it.
Zone two is dominated by the red algae seaweed, the rotophytes that I'll describe in just
a minute.
Zone three contains the mussels and barnacles, the ones that periodically are wetted but
like to be in the water more of the time.
And then finally the lowest zone four, sea stars and anemones that I showed you in the
images just a moment ago.
So only the span in a vertical span of just the height of a person has all of these different
biological zones within the rocky tide pool.
Well as we go a little bit deeper offshore we get into the zone that's well below actual
low tide.
Then we want to look at the euphotic zone and for many areas especially in rocky environments
in the temperate zones of the world below the intertidal region is dominated by seaweed
and kelp forests of various kinds.
These anchor enormously productive ecosystems, the kelp forests and seaweed dominated ecosystems
rival rainforests on land for the biomass production per square meter.
So let's take a look at how they work.
The most famous perhaps are the California kelp forests or the kelp forests of the Pacific
Northwest or Alaska for us.
These zones where the kelp that fixes itself down to the bottom and that's why it's of
a benthic organism is because it's attached to the bottom and requires that bottom attachment
then grows up into the sunlight for vast distances.
These are examples of a particular kind of kelp called brown kelp or brown algae and the
scientific name is their pheophytes.
Well let's look at what they are because kelp are seaweeds and the first thing to say is
that they're not plants.
They're not plants at least in the sense of being part of the kingdom of plants in terms
of biological kingdoms and in fact they're protistans.
They are a form of multicellular algae so some of the phytoplankton we talked about were
single celled algae, these are multicellular algae.
Kelp can rain, seaweeds I'm sorry, can range from microscopic to hundreds of feet in size.
Those California giant kelp can grow to as much as 50 meters, you know, 150, 180 feet
in length given enough time to grow in the right conditions.
They're all autotrophs, they are photosynthetic of course and they photosynthesize within
the euphotic zone and they're basically their construction or their body plan is largely
to put as much photosynthetic material into the upper parts of the water as possible.
There's three types of seaweeds, the green seaweeds, the brown seaweeds and the red.
The green are the chlorophyta, the brown are the pheophytes and the red are the rhodophyte,
rhodo being a Greek root that means red of course.
And all of them have different adaptations to different environments of the ocean region
and the amount of sunlight available and the ultraviolet damage and all of that.
So if we look at the giant kelp as an example of all of these different seaweeds we can
look at its basic structure.
I said they weren't plants and the reason is that they don't have the complex vascular
system that land plants need to move water from their roots up to their outer regions,
they have much simpler internal structures.
Basically there is a holdfast at the bottom which is a set of features or small sort of
tendrils that anchor down to a rock or into the rocks themselves and then a series of
stripes which are essentially tubes almost like straws for water.
They're often completely hollow in the interior and water can percolate through them without
actually having to be actively transported or pumped the way a real true plant does.
They have blades which are the big wide things that are akin to leaves on a plant that hold
a lot of the photosynthetic material and then they have gas bladders, these air pockets
that you can see if you find kelp lying on the beach, which float them up so that they
can keep the blades in the shallowest part of the water.
The kelp have the amazing ability to photosynthesize at quite prodigious rates and so they actually,
because they're in the water and they're infused with water in the algae, they literally exude
carbohydrates, simple sugars into the water.
The entire kelp in a California kelp forest when it's actively photosynthesizing is essentially
bleeding food into the water all around it and that's why it's supporting this very rich
community of plankton and then the fish that feed on the plankton and all of the other
organisms that go along with that to feed on the fish and also to feed on the kelp itself
that are part of this kelp community.
So sea urchins, bivalves and fish all live in this food-rich environment
and then sea otters live in the region and actually benefit from both the kelp and the
stuff that lives on the kelp. The sea urchins themselves are actually the bane of the kelp
because they crawl around the sea bottom and chew away at the holdfast and the stipes and so they
separate the kelp and in fact when the kelp forest becomes unhealthy it's usually due to
an overabundance of sea urchins in that region. On the other hand they're helped along by the
sea otters who use the kelp as a kind of a protective zone they'll literally wrap themselves
up in a kelp front stay in place as a kind of an anchor and they dive down and scoop up sea urchins
as well as abalone and other shellfish and and and eat those organisms so the interaction of
the ecosystem is that is that all of them are keeping each other in check in such a way with the
food fundamentally being provided by the anchor which is the kelp itself.
Well if you live on a sandy beach region let's say on the east coast you might not
think of kelp as as a big deal but actually kelp communities dominate especially rocky coastlines
all over the world and mangrove communities dominate many of the regions that kelp don't so
if we look at a global map many of the tropical to subtropical regions that aren't sort of sandy
beach areas and very depositional coastlines are dominated by mangrove but the temperate
regions in the high latitudes the west coast of the u.s across to japan or down in australia new
zealand um southern africa are dominated by kelp forests and these kelp communities actually are
very significant proportion of the total coastline of the world. While i talked about there being
many different types of seaweeds and in fact the rhodophytes are another type that are even
hardier actually than the than the brown seaweeds they're not as effective photosynthesizers but
they're better at utilizing dim light the coloring that they have the pigment aids them in using
the dim blue light that filters to deeper in the water and also protects their their cellular
structure from um uh from ultraviolet radiation so that the red seaweeds can live where the
brown ones and the green ones don't which means deep and also shallow in the tide pools and so
they live in the sort of more marginal zones and photosynthesize in those places actually most
seaweeds are red seaweeds and they're the majority of all of them on the planet.
Well there are also marine vascular plants true plants that live in the water and we've already
talked about the seagrasses and in fact those are flowering plants they actually have a flowering
structure that lives offshore or i mean the flowering structure that flowers underwater
offshore they're descended from land plants so much like the marine mammals they moved back
into the water from the land and we've already discussed the mangrove as marine because they
root into the tide water zones even though they put their leaves and flowering structures out in the
out in the open air all of these are essentially land plants that have colonized the coastal
shore region so i wanted to mention them as well. Now the other offshore environment besides the
mangrove forests and the kelp forests of course that were that are so productive are the coral
reefs the coral reefs and atolls built up in the photic zone by colonies of coral polyps.
These are animals that actually as we'll see farm or host photosynthesizing single-celled algae
within their bodies so the corals are another incredibly complex environment where there are
interactions between a number of different organisms to keep the entire reef healthy.
Let's look at the fundamental basics though of of the coral reef that so many of us might enjoy
snorkeling or diving over if you look at the coral itself you may not realize it but the coral is
an animal the coral is not some kind of plant it's not some kind of algae and in fact the coral
likes to be in the light not because it photosynthesizes itself a coral is a nendarian related to the
anemones and related to the jellyfish it has the stinging cells the coral polyps open up and they
wave in the water to waft zooplankton or to entice fish and zooplankton in then sting them with their
nematocytes and pull them in for digestion so most corals are colonies of individual polyps each
polyp is actually a separate animal the coral head is a colony of many thousands of those individual
animals ultimately those corals if they build up reefs we call them a particular type of coral
which is hermatypic they build up a herm or a big massive structure uh so they're hermatypic reef
building coral animals but the success of corals actually depends critically on a symbiotic
relationship that's very very close because these coral coral polyps can be carnivorous they eat
things that come along that they trap in terms of floating plankton and even small fish but they
also at the same time host specialized microscopic dinoflagellates that are called zoosanthellae
it's just the name of that particular dinoflagellate these are the photosynthesizers the photosynthetic
algae i mentioned already and they essentially farm them the the dinoflagellates live in the coral
they're protected by the by the polyp and the internal structures of the polyp from you know
the surrounding wave motion and things like that so they very effectively can photosynthesize and
then their food is basically diffused into the coral polyp itself and feeds it or the corals
actually digest some of the zoosanthellae they're hosting but not enough to to destroy the colony
so corals have to be in the light because because the zoosanthellae need to photosynthesize and the
corals open up during the daytime the microscopic dinoflagellates photosynthesize away the corals
close down and uh and then digest what they've gotten during the day at night well this is a
very efficient exchange between primary producer and consumer they're basically living together
the coral creates the habitat to maximize the benefit for the zoosanthellae it creates a very
strict habitat need for the coral so they first of all they need bright light they have to be within
a couple of meters of the surface down to several tens of meters deep with the optimal zone between
about five and ten meters deep in the water so coral reefs keep growing up for example if sea
level changes to meet that depth zone they need normal to actually slightly high salinity just
to keep the coral polyps themselves in a good osmotic situation they're not osmo regulators
even a little bit of fresh water will kill them and in fact that's why they can't come right to the
surface because literally rainfall will freshen the water so much as to kill them and they need
temperatures above 21 degrees c but for some reason temperatures they don't rise too much
above that as well so corals have a very sort of delicate uh life zone that they live in and that's
causing corals problems today the reef structure itself is literally this limestone that's secreted
by the coral polyps so it's strong specifically to withstand the high energy wave action because
corals build out on the shoulders of seamounts and on the outer continental shelf in regions where
fresh clear water is always abundant and available and brings nutrients in but also where the the
zoazanthellae can best live so the coral reef is always breaking down it's getting busted up by
the waves all that material piles up and accumulates and ultimately builds up this very large reef
structure the reef has nooks and crannies everywhere it hosts many different coral varieties typically
in a reef that are competing constantly with each other and a teeming community of other organisms
in all sorts of complex predator and prey relationships but again ultimately fed by
the zoazanthellae and the coral polyps that host them so all the fish you see on the reef and the
eels and all of the various kinds of urchins and everything else are are in this you know every
square inch kind of uh matters competition for habitat and for good ecological niches for themselves
well as we know corals are under increasing environmental pressure and one of the things
going on with corals that is really an incredible challenge but is a little bit unclear even in
our understanding of why it happens is this phenomenon called coral bleaching and so you've
you've heard of it or seen pictures perhaps healthy corals suddenly turning into essentially
completely white corals and then maybe ultimately getting covered by by algae that's a real sign
that the coral is truly dead what's going on with coral bleaching well it results from a small
temperature rise in the water for reasons that are unclear but even a one degree c or one and a
half degree c change in water temperature can cause the corals to spontaneously expel all the
zoazanthellae that are in their polyps so the polyps show there and they basically spit out all of
these photosynthesizers that they're partly dependent on for food and for living so the coral
turns white because all of a sudden the the pigmented photosynthetic algae is gone from the
coral and when it does that the polyps are still there and the polyps can continue to live for a
while just based on their sort of normal um uh uh consuming of food but if they're if the zoazanthellae
are are out in the water then they're not in the coral and they're not feeding the coral anymore
if this goes on for a little while a couple of weeks and then the temperature comes down
they seem to be able to repopulate with zoazanthellae but if it goes on for a month or more so the
coral may permanently die and that particular portion of the coral reef and coral heads uh
will not you know come back and those polyps will will not be able to return to their former healthy
state while coral bleaching is a big problem all over the world and in fact in areas like the
u.s virgin islands something like 60 percent of the corals that were formerly healthy are now
have now succumbed to coral bleaching there's even larger impacts potentially coming on corals
that will look up a little later in the course with the change in global water uh temperature
and even more importantly with the change in global water dissolved carbon dioxide the acidity
of the water corals may not be able to continue to build reefs into the future but for now we have
many different types of corals and we see that the coral reef distribution is in very specific
areas of the planet and it's as you know a tropical to subtropical region that most of the coral
reefs are in and that's because they require this 21 degrees sea or about 70 degree water
in order to live it turns out there are other types of corals on the planet um and that includes
many that are called a hermitippic corals there actually are corals that are soft corals that
don't build reefs and many of these also don't include the zooxanthellae so they don't have to
live where the light is filtering down through the water so there are actually deep water corals
and especially deep water soft corals in regions that are much colder off the coasts of northern
europe for example or way down off the coast of anartica and uh new zealand and australia
these are much less common and much less abundant than the hermitippic corals of the classic coral
reefs well i mentioned very early in the course a long time ago that charles darwin is known to
science in part for his discovery or his identification of the the the ways in which coral
atolls built up many of the south pacific islands today are just rings of corals and we know that
they are what we call them coral atolls and thanks to darwin we understand pretty well how they
formed and i introduced this once before but i just want to remind us that there's sort of three
types of reefs in the world the fringing reef the barrier reef and then the atoll and these are
based on how the corals start to form around a sea island or even perhaps along a continental shoreline
like the barrier reef around australia the corals grow up along a coastline initially and so they'll
grow up along the the seamount or the or the coast of the continent as a fringing reef as time goes
by um if the land is eroded but the corals continue to grow to stay in the light and if the land
subsides in particular as a as a seamount in the ocean does then the reef will become a fringing
reef and separate from the land with a lagoon in between take that far enough the land or the seamount
subsides all the way beneath the waves and all that's left is the fringing reef and that's the coral
atoll and we see many of these beautiful blue lagoon pacific environments are the final stages
of atoll formation as described by charles darwin way back in the 1830s well we've taken a look
then very briefly uh hardly doing it justice for such a complex and interesting environment
at the shallow benthic zone and we've seen that it's the most productive environment
overall in the ocean great complexities in the ecosystems and the numbers of different organisms
that live in tide pools um that live in kelp and mangrove forests and that live in the coral reef
environment the ones that have to deal with tide pools and beaches have adapted to these very challenging
conditions of being periodically dried or wetted um while the coral reefs have to adapt to a
different set of environmental conditions where the symbiotic relationship requires that they
stay in a very narrow kind of environmental temperature and light zone in order to remain
healthy which also makes them ecologically delicate so that's the shallow water benthic
environment and now in the next lecture we're going to dive right down into the deep ocean
and travel right off the continental shelf again down the continental slopes and into the abyssal
plains and ultimately even the mid ocean ridges to look at the deep benthic zone
