Well, now that we've taken a look at the major circulation of the atmosphere, and in particular
the persistent and prevailing winds of the atmospheric cells, like the westerly winds,
the trade winds, now we're going to see how those same winds are also driving the major
ocean surface currents.
We would like to understand how the ocean circulates as a whole, and in order to do
that we have to link the prevailing winds to the sea itself.
We're going to look in this lecture then at ocean currents, and we can break down ocean
currents into surface currents and then much slower deep water transport.
The deep water transport will take up in a later lecture, but the really big currents
that we think about, like the Gulf Stream, are surface currents of the ocean that are
caused mainly by wind friction directly on the sea surface, just as the waves are, and
then also by differences in the density of different water masses and difference in the
heat and density characteristics of those water masses.
So the surface currents themselves affect the uppermost just 10% or so of the world's
ocean, basically above the thermocline and above the picnocline, remember those two equivalents
of temperature and density that change rapidly in the ocean.
So the shallow, warmer, lower density waters are the places where the surface currents
actually live.
Well surface currents are induced primarily by the prevailing winds, so the westerlies
and the trade winds are the most important ones for understanding the big currents on
the surface of the ocean itself.
And we've seen that the trade winds blow from the northeast towards the southwest, the westerlies
blow more from the southwest towards the northeast, and they're in different latitudinal bands.
And so the wind changes direction every day, but because these winds are prevailing winds,
they set the water in motion, they set the waves in motion in all sorts of different
directions that change from day to day.
But the averaging out of the flow of air in the westerlies and the trade winds sets the
water in larger scale motions that move it across the ocean surface as a whole and ultimately
set the surface currents in motion.
Well the water moves with the trade winds, but it doesn't move in the direction that
the trade winds blow, and the same goes for the westerlies.
And that again is because of our old friend Coriolis.
As the trade winds blow, they tend to blow at an angle in latitude from, again, northeast
to southwest, and they curve with the Coriolis forces, but they drag across the water surface.
Now water doesn't move nearly as quickly as the winds.
When the wind blows at tens of knots over the water, it just sets the water in motion
at maybe at most a couple of knots, usually much less than that.
So the water is moving much slower than the wind.
Well if the wind is affected by the Coriolis bending then, remember that the Coriolis
bending is as something moves either north or south, the earth rotates beneath it and
causes the bending.
So if it's moving more slowly, the earth is rotating more for a given unit of time and
causes it to bend much more than the thing that's setting it in motion or than something
that's moving faster like the wind.
So if the wind blows in a given direction, the water actually is deflected and starts
moving at about a 45 degree to the overall surface wind direction.
So the wind sets the surface water in motion, but it sets the water in motion at an angle
to the overall wind direction.
Now the water movement actually is even more complicated than this due to a sort of strange
phenomenon but one that's active all over the world where wind sets water in motion
and that's something called Ekman transport.
What happens in Ekman transport is that if we look at the very surface water, it blows
with the wind, but it blows at this 45 degree angle.
But as we look deeper and deeper in the water, over about the upper 100 meters or so of the
water, each successive depth is actually moving in a different direction and it's moving in
a different direction that keeps changing in a characteristic way that produces what's
called this Ekman spiral.
Now the water itself is not actually spiraling, there's no spiraling motion of the water,
but the vector or the direction that shows the way the water is moving starts out at
an angle to the wind and then with successive depths gets to be moving in slightly different
directions at each depth.
And that's because essentially the surface layer of water starts moving and it drags
on the water below.
So that water moves a little bit slower than the surface water so its coriolis deflected
to the right and then that in turn drags on the water even below that and so that in turn
is deflected a bit more to the right and so on right down through the water column.
The overall effect then is that there's this sort of spiraling direction of transport of
the water such that at something like 100 meters depth, the water is moving much more
slowly than at the surface but it's actually moving literally in the opposite direction,
the net direction or the direction of water transport at that depth because of the wind
blowing over the surface plus the coriolis effect can actually be exactly in the opposite
direction.
It's very strange isn't it?
But if we actually sort of integrate the water over that whole 100 meter depth or average
out its motion and come up with a net direction of transport of all of this water, we find
that for the surface waters down to 100 meters or so, the net direction of that transport
is exactly perpendicular to the wind direction.
Not exactly but it averages out to 90 degrees to the wind direction.
Again, very strange.
The wind blows in this direction, it actually causes the water to move off to the right
at a 90 degree angle but this is what sets the surface ocean currents in motion.
Because as they move then they bend to the right and they bend to the right very sharply
and it causes the water in the, let's say in the underneath the trade winds in the regions
that are at sort of 15 or so degrees north and south to get moved westward, westward
across the ocean basin and pile up against whatever continents or obstacles are in the
way and then turn even more sharply to the right and move up along the coastline and
out towards the sea and back towards the east again.
This develops these loops that we call the oceanic gyres, the major loops of the ocean
circulation pattern of the surface currents that are persistent and also are very large
scales such that there's just a few in the whole world.
Because they're centered on 30 degrees approximately north or south, so there's one big gyre for
the north Atlantic, one big gyre for the south Atlantic, just a couple of big gyres in the
Pacific Ocean and then some complications in some other parts of the world in smaller
ocean basins that we'll look at.
So the north Atlantic gyre system, for example, is a link up of the flow of all of the various
surface currents.
We'll take a look at those currents in a moment.
But it involves flow that's north of the equator along the trade wind belt but at a high angle
to the trade winds that brings warm water into the Caribbean region, then flows it northward
along North America, ultimately over towards Europe, and then back down southward again
to get picked up by the trade winds again.
Well, in fact, with these gyres happening, the current flow and the Coriolis effect combined
with this combined in the form of this Ekman spiral actually drives all the water towards
the center of the gyre.
If you imagine the flow is always turning around the gyre, then it's pushing the water
at that high angle to the wind direction and high angle to the overall current flow direction
into a kind of a hill in the middle of the ocean.
Now it's not much of a hill.
It has a height of just a meter or a few meters at most relative to regions that are thousands
of kilometers away.
A ship would never notice it as a hill.
But it's a dynamically balanced sort of high in the water.
Dynamically balanced means that the water is piled up by the Coriolis forcing of the
currents, but it wants to flow back down because gravity, of course, wants to even the water
out and maintain a nice constant water level.
So the competing effects of the Ekman transport and the gravity balance out, such that the
net water transport direction is along the hillside.
So the net water transport is actually right along the sort of line of constant elevation
of this very subtle but very real hill of water.
The oceanic gyres that are in this sort of balanced flow system that causes the flow
to go right around the gyre and stably maintain this dynamically balanced hill are called
geostrophic gyres.
And that's just the terminology for these large scale globally driven gyre systems in
the global ocean.
Well, we can actually see these hills.
They exist and they're visible in satellite data.
For example, the satellite I mentioned a long time ago when we were mapping altimetry of
the sea, the Topex Poseidon satellite, image the hill of water that sits in the Atlantic
Ocean.
It's called the Sargasso Sea.
It's a region where the water is relatively calm.
In fact, the winds are very calm.
It's in between the trade winds and westerlies in the horse latitudes.
And it's named Sargasso Sea because there was great amounts of what was called Sargasum
seaweed that grow floating in this relatively stable region of the ocean.
So this oceanic gyre in the North Atlantic is actually got an elevation two meters high,
higher than average sea level for the Atlantic as a whole.
Also there are a number, in fact, five major geostrophic gyres like this, plus one oddball
that we'll talk about in just a second.
And that's it for the whole planet.
These are huge scale, planetary scale surface current features.
So there's the North Atlantic gyre, the South Atlantic gyre, as I mentioned, the North Pacific
gyre and the South Pacific gyre.
And then there's the Indian Ocean gyre.
And all of them behave in exactly the way I just described and we'll break them down
into their component surface currents in just a second.
But the one oddball is what's called the West Wind Drift or the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current.
And the Antarctic Circumpolar Current is driven also by the westerlies, hence the
name the West Wind Drift.
But it's driven in a region of the ocean where there's no land to get in the way.
And so there's no piling up against anything because the southern ocean between Antarctica
and South America or Australia or Africa is open ocean, as we've already seen.
It's the place that generates the biggest winds and the biggest storms on the planet
because the wind can just blow continuously right around Antarctica.
That West Wind Drift, that continuous West Wind also whips up this strongly flowing current
in the ocean.
And so one of the strongest ocean currents is this Antarctic Circumpolar Current that
just ceaselessly and endlessly circles around Antarctica in a particular direction.
Okay, well so within these oceanic gyres then there's a number of major surface current
types.
We can actually break them down into their individual components.
We have the western boundary currents.
We have the eastern boundary currents.
And by west and east now, remember we're talking about west and east parts of the ocean.
So the east coast of the US, just offshore, has a western boundary current because it's
the western side of the Atlantic Ocean.
Linking the western boundary currents and the eastern boundary currents, which largely
transport water either north to south or south to north in each hemisphere, linking them
are the transverse currents, the currents that basically just hook them up and move
water between east and west.
So first let's take a look at the western boundary currents.
Well, these are the fastest and deepest currents on earth, and we'll see why in just a second.
They move warm water from the tropical regions to higher latitudes.
So they're a major component in the heat redistribution on the planet, redistributing
that heat generated in the equatorial regions to the high latitudes.
The largest and most famous to us of the western boundary currents is the Gulf Stream, of course.
The Gulf Stream, mapped by Ben Franklin way back in the 1760s and still ever present year
in and year out, all the time in the ocean.
The Gulf Stream is truly phenomenal.
It moves at something like two meters per second or as much as five miles per hour.
It's literally like a river out in the ocean.
It's narrow and it's relatively deep and it's relatively well defined in terms of its boundaries.
It's about 70 kilometers wide, typically, and if you're on a ship at sea, you can be
outside the Gulf Stream and in water that's barely moving at all and then just cross just
a few knots and suddenly be in water that's moving five miles an hour.
It's about 400 or up to about 450 meters deep, so it's relatively narrow, but it's a relatively
deep trough extending down to the lower most parts of the kind of thermocline and pycnocline
in that region.
The Gulf Stream is a phenomenal volume of water.
It flows at a rate of 55 million cubic meters of water per second.
That's such a large number.
Cubic meter of water is a large volume of water, right?
And 55 million of them per second passed any given point if we sort of put a screen across
the Gulf Stream and measured the flow.
In fact, that's such a large number that one million cubic meters of water per second
as a measure of volume of flow has been given an oceanographic name, 55 Sphere Drips, in
honor of a famous oceanographer.
The Sphere Drip is one million cubic meters of water per second, so the Gulf Stream is
flowing at a rate of 55 Sphere Drips.
Just for perspective, the entire global input of fresh water from all the rivers in the
whole world to the ocean is approximately one Sphere Drip.
The Gulf Stream is moving 55 times the flow of all the rivers on the entire planet, and
it's doing that year in and year out.
Well so we can see this Gulf Stream flowing and its sharp boundaries mean that the rapid
flow and the big temperature difference keeps the current mostly intact.
So when we look at a thermal image, an infrared image of the surface of the ocean, we can
actually see the Gulf Stream in these satellite images very well defined very often.
We can see that it comes up from the region of the Caribbean and offshore Florida, moves
up the southeastern coast of the Atlantic's seaboard, and then around Cape Hatteras detaches
from North America and moves out across into the North Atlantic Ocean.
As it goes, it tends to form meanders, and those meanders can bend and open up loops and
ultimately even form turbulent eddies that detach from the main stream as either the
cold water gets entrained into the warm water of the Gulf Stream, in which case we get something
that's called a cold-cored eddy, or conversely some of the warm water of the Gulf Stream
gets wrapped up in a loop that circulates in the opposite direction, typically north
of the Gulf Stream, such that we have a warm-cored eddy, meaning warm water that was originally
in the stream gets swirled in by the cold water coming down from off of Labrador in
the North Atlantic.
These eddies can spin off of the off of the main western boundary current and persist for
weeks at a time, even in the ocean, before they finally dissipate and remix.
But this is a major way in which the waters of the ocean, the surface waters of the ocean,
get mixed across large areas of the sea surface as the formation of these vertical or spinning
eddies, and then they're mixing of different water masses together.
Well, you might wonder, you know, how do we study these major surface currents of the
ocean?
And there's an interesting current studying story.
One way is to simply go out there and make measurements with a ship, lower a CTD down,
remember the CTDs that measure current velocity and temperature and salinity and things like
that with depth.
Another way is to actually put special kinds of essentially floating beacons or sensors
out in the ocean that will drop down to a particular depth but aren't attached to anything
and to pop back up to the surface and to be recollected by a ship.
Most modern way is actually the use of true robotic vehicles in the sense that they're
called AUVs, Autonomous Underwater Vehicles.
One example is something called a Slocum Glider.
These are special devices that have battery powered and a bunch of sensors so they can
measure temperature and current speed and a lot of other things.
And they can dive down to certain depths in the water, they have chambers that can either
fill with gas or move weights around such that they can change buoyancy in the water
and they can change their attitude, they have wings so that they'll fly upward or downward
within a given zone of the ocean.
They're dropped into the water and then steer themselves essentially measuring everything
along the way but periodically are programmed to rise up to the surface and beam the information
they're carrying to a satellite back to the oceanographers on shore.
So the oceanographer can sit in his or her office and get the data every few days from
one of these gliders that may spend weeks or even months at sea measuring data.
They use a very small amount of power so their batteries can last a long time.
These have really revolutionized our understanding of currents in some ways.
Well let's return to the western boundary currents one more time and look at a few more
around the world.
The sort of second biggest and most famous example perhaps to us of western boundary currents
is the Corocio Current off the coast of Japan.
It's famous in the Taiwan-Japan region, Corocio means the black current and it carries this
very dark looking nutrient rich water up from the Philippines and Taiwanese region and again
flows up along the Japanese coastline and ultimately detaches and heads across the open
Pacific Ocean.
The Corocio Current is actually important for tuna fishing and for all of the fisheries
of the Japanese islands too because seasonally it carries so many nutrients that it becomes
a fertile feeding ground for a lot of different materials.
Now these western boundary currents are important oceanographically, they're important for understanding
the mixing in the ocean and many other features so they've been the subject of some really
intensive work with detailed computer simulation.
What I'd like to show you now is actually a simulation of the Corocio Current in the
Pacific Ocean where it's been flowing over a lot of time, there's a lot of data for a
period in the 1990s and using one of the largest computers in the world the temperature and
pressure and wind gradients of the ocean were used as input and then a simulation or a calculation
of the Corocio Current was run.
As you look at this simulation you'll see that it shows us the temperature of the water
surface in the color coatings, you see warm water in red and warm colors.
The surface elevation looks like it's changing because in a very exaggerated way it's actually
showing us the surface elevations of the water and then the spinning and moving current which
you can see meandering and also spinning eddies off just as we described for the Gulf Stream
is constantly in motion and it speeds up and slows down with the seasons but it shows you
the degree and power over these sort of month by month simulations that we're seeing of
these major surface ocean currents like a fire hose moving warm water from tropical regions
to much more temperate regions of the ocean.
Well if there's western boundary currents then there have to also be eastern boundary currents
and there are many eastern boundary currents in the world some examples include the Canary Current
in the Atlantic or the California Current in the Pacific Ocean that move water from
northern regions towards southern regions along the west coasts of the continents in that case.
So they move mostly cold water equator word and they're quite different actually from the
western boundary currents. The eastern boundary currents are shallow and they're very broad and
they're more diffused slower moving currents they occupy a larger area of the ocean surface
but they don't have the kind of concentrated power that fire hose power of something like the Gulf
Stream or the Crocio. So they you know might be as much as hundreds to thousands of kilometers wide
but just hundred meters or so in depth. Individual parts of them carry less water than the western
boundary currents but overall of course they have to match the western boundary currents the water
doesn't you know gradually build up in one area or another it has to all balance out in the geostrophic
gyre. So if we look at the major eastern boundary currents of the world we have the Canary Current
in the North Atlantic the Benguela Current of the South Atlantic California Current the Peru
Current in the South Pacific the Western Australia Current all of them representing that return flow
path on the oceanic gyres. So let's take a look at why the western boundary currents like the
Crocio like the Gulf Stream like the Benguela Current or the Agulis Current are so different
from the eastern boundary currents. Well there's a process that we call westward intensification
you remember the map of the the Sargasso Sea and you noticed that it wasn't in the center of the
Atlantic Ocean it was actually hugging more the North American side of the Atlantic Ocean so it
was displaced towards the west and the reason for that is as the water flows around these geostrophic
gyres it pulls up to form the western boundary currents because of a very strong intensification
or flow of the water towards the west side of the basins. Remember Coriolis forcing it's less
strong at the equator equatorial regions in fact it's zero right at the equator but it's relatively
weak forcing in the in the low latitudes and it becomes a very strong Coriolis forcing in the
high latitudes high to the north or high to the south and so what happens is the trade winds push
the water over to the west side of the Atlantic Ocean let's say and the Coriolis doesn't turn
them very rapidly so they tend to actually move all the way west and accumulate and there's so
much warm water pooling there that it pushes the thermocline down it builds up that deep current that
400 plus meter deep sort of source for the Gulf Stream but it runs into the continent the continent
gets in the way so as the continent gets in the way then the current turns and it's it's kind of
sloshing over and then where it meets that obstacle starts to move northward as it moves
northward it picks up very much stronger Coriolis forces so it starts to turn in the north Atlantic
and the Coriolis is strong so the water spreads out and turns more efficiently towards the south
again so what happens is then it starts turning before it ever gets over to Europe it doesn't pool
on the east side of the basin in the north the way it does on the west side of the basin in the
south and this produces the broadening and shallowing of the overall current to move the water back
so the westward currents are intense and fast and deep and the eastern currents are spread out
and it's all again because of Coriolis interaction with these geostrophic gyres
well if we have the boundary currents on the west and the east then we have to have something that
links them up and those are called the transverse currents moving water east to west and west to
east at the mid-latitudes the westerlies drive the transverse flow and then in the equatorial
region things are a little bit different so if we look at the transverse currents in the
westerly regions in the northern parts of the ocean or the high southern parts of the ocean
we have things like the northern pacific transverse current or the north Atlantic transverse current
which is really the gulf stream just kind of turns into or gradually grades into the north
Atlantic transverse current which then quickly turns into the the return flow of the canary current
in the southern ocean things are dominated by that west wind drift so that the the far southern
transverse currents are not so strongly developed although they're certainly present in the equatorial
regions the trade winds actually drive the north and south equatorial currents and those are actually
not at the geographic equator they're offset somewhat from the geographic equator to the north
so the the north and south equatorial currents don't just hug the equator at equal latitudes north
and south but they're moved northwards such that the south one is right about at the equatorial
position um and the north one is significantly further north in the kind of uh five to ten
degrees north range and that's because basically that there's a meteorological equator on earth
that's different from the geographic equator and this has to do with the fact that there's a lot
more land mass in the northern hemisphere and a lot more ocean area in the southern hemisphere
and so that when the airflow patterns based on the seasons and everything are kind of unequally
distributed and without getting too complicated about it we'll just say that the meteorological
equator doesn't really correspond to the true geographic equator. At any rate the uh north
and south equatorial currents move a lot of water about 30 sphere drifts are transported in the
atlantic and also in the pacific and they move water right across the equatorial region they
don't turn very sharply due to coriolis forcing because again coriolis forcing is relatively
weak at the equator so they pile water up at the western side especially in the pacific ocean
the western pacific around indonesia has a kind of a pile of water that's being pulled away
from peru and the equatorial south american region in the atlantic a little bit less so
because the ocean ocean basin is not quite as big but in both cases actually the west side
of the tropical regions of an ocean basin have a sea level that's several meters higher than the east
side of the same basin so sea level in indonesia is not really the same level as sea level in peru
and that's because of the drawing of this water dynamically maintaining that across the pacific
ocean well because that water piles up at the western side then it drives something called the
equatorial counter currents and so these are currents that actually are flowing water back
across the ocean in the direction utterly counter to the main equatorial currents and it's almost
sort of like you sloshed all the water in your bathtub in one direction and then a bunch of it has
to flow back except that they're all happening at the same time again in a kind of a dynamic balance
and the pacific equatorial counter current in particular is a very important phenomenon that
we're going to take a closer look at in the next lecture when we talk about el nino a little bit
but we want to look at ocean currents in general and so we have our neat oceanographic tools like
the floats the ctds even the slokum gliders measuring these surface currents and mapping
them out all over the world but there's only so many of those and technology is expensive and
oceanographers time is also expensive at times and so oceanographers will use all sorts of information
whatever is available to learn something about the ocean currents and so for a very long time
actually over the course of a century there were sometimes controlled releases of what are called
drift cards little wooden cards that float and have you know printed or painted on them
some information that basically says if you find this card on the beach send it back to
let's say university of washington school of oceanography and gives an address and says write
down the exact location you found it and the date you found it on those are ways of basically
being released in the ocean almost like a tracer die into the water and then and then found in
different locations to talk about where they drifted even bottles literally notes and bottles were
used for a long time but sometimes it's just serendipity that finds us these oceanographic
experiments on may 27th in 1990 a big container ship was traveling across the sea and if you've
ever had to ship something by container this may be disconcerting but actually because ships at sea
encounter big waves and storms all the time containers fall off those ships actually fairly
regularly and in 1990 this particular ship dumped several containers that happened to contain 61 000
pairs of brand new Nike tennis shoes overboard in the middle of the pacific ocean the exact location
where they went overboard was known and the exact date well six months later huge numbers of shoes
started showing up on pacific northwest beaches around the the u.s and canada and in fact beach
comers started literally getting together to try to find pairs that matched up left and right of the
same size so they could use the shoes were in great condition although they've floated at sea for a
long time well some oceanographers caught wind of this and started to uh to actually talk to them
and map out where the shoes had showed up it turned out to be a significant experiment in
understanding the exact state of current flow in the north pacific ocean at that particular time
because 61 000 individual markers many of which were actually recovered uh came back from that
experiment well in 1992 another spill actually put 29 000 bathtub toys into the pacific ocean
spot uh starting another sort of flurry of activity to study how they were oceanographic
markers ultimately leading to the publication of a recent book called moby duck chronicling that event
well all of these very important surface currents as we're going to see influenced the climate of
the whole planet because they're really moving heat around on the planet wholesale and they're
obviously influencing and making the large-scale mixing of the surface ocean water possible they
mix the ocean at relatively rapid time scales giving us this even distribution of salinity
they move water all about the surface of the ocean all of that horizontal flow interestingly enough
also drives some very important vertical flows and we're going to see how these horizontal currents
create vertical distribution of water which is incredibly important to the productivity in the
sea as well as coastal climates all over the world
