Well, now we've come to the point where we can ask the question, what does the future
hold for the ocean?
And I think everything that we've seen in all of these lectures shows us that in some
ways the answer is more of the same, which is constant change.
The ocean is ever changing over so many different timescales, from human timescales and seasonal
cycles of phytoplankton to geological timescales of plate tectonics.
Human activity, though, is accelerating those changes, possibly even at those much longer
timescales.
So, the recognition of human impacts has led to important steps being taken to maintain
the long-term chemical and physical balance, the stability and ecosystem health in the
ocean, as we saw in the last lecture, but certainly major challenges still abound.
One group of oceanographers and marine biologists attempted a kind of comprehensive global scale
study, which was published in 2008, that they mapped out the human impacts on the entire
surface of the global ocean, and they included all sorts of impacts from local overfishing
or, you know, toxicity by pollution, right up to global scale effects, like the introduction
of carbon dioxide and acidification.
And their map shows that no area of the global ocean is unaffected by human influence at
all, and that's, fortunately, for a lot of the ocean, that's mainly the influence of
the global scale features, like acidification and warming of the waters, that are not locally
acute necessarily, but they are certainly real impacts that can concern us about the
whole ocean.
But 41 percent of ocean areas they found are strongly affected by multiple impacts, especially
overfishing, especially toxicity, coral bleaching, etc.
So 41 percent, that's a huge area of the surface of the earth.
There are these large areas of relatively little impact, mainly in the polar regions
and in the far more remote corners of the Pacific Ocean in places like that.
But really, our impacts are being seen on a global scale in a way that was probably
unimaginable 50 years ago to, you know, Jacques Cousteau and Rachel Carson and the early kind
of explorers and advocates for the marine environment.
But what we've seen in all of this course and all the different ways we've looked at
it is that change really is constant in the ocean.
Over geological timescales, sea level rises and falls, coastlines and barrier islands move
and change, ice ages come and go, species rise and become extinct, and they're all
natural processes.
Seasonally and decadeally, animals grow and phytoplankton bloom, and all of these different
processes go unnested within one another, all in an ocean that is continuously present,
the tides rising and falling, the waves breaking on the beach.
But we can ask the question, what's different about the present day from all of those other
epics before this large-scale human impact that we see today on the ocean had taken place?
The answer is, of course, that we're the difference.
We build on the coastline, we gain food from the sea, we enjoy its beauty and bounty.
And so we've developed a vested interest, a perfectly normal, laudable human interest
in keeping things more or less the same, meaning allowing change to take place, but in the
way that it naturally goes on.
Now, sometimes that comes in conflict.
We want to keep things really, truly the same, like maintain a coastline even though nature
wants to move the coastline back and forth or something like that.
And the problem is kind of exemplified by that, but applies to all sorts of different
things in the ocean, because the pace of present day change, in most cases, vastly exceeds the
natural pace of change.
The things that human beings are doing is pushing the ocean environment to change more
rapidly.
Ecosystems are changing much more rapidly than naturally because we're fishing out lots
of the top predators, for example.
Organisms are changing more rapidly because of warming and rising seas.
So it's more difficult in an environment where human beings are trying to maintain certain
things the same for the natural ecosystems to respond.
For example, in climate change over geological time, organisms just move their habitat.
They slowly migrate to different regions as the planet gets warmer or cooler or something
like that.
Climate migration is much more difficult now.
Studies are ongoing today of coral reefs and looking at how they're colonizing areas
further and further north as the water begins to get warmer.
In some cases that actually seems to be happening successfully, but in other cases they don't
seem to be keeping up.
It's an active area of research today.
Certainly other kinds of organisms can't move in habitat as quickly as they would need
to to respond to these kinds of changes in the ocean because they're very slow growing
and it takes a long time, for example, for a coral reef to build up.
We're removing the top predators.
We're causing pollution and other upsets to ecosystems that can cause whole systemic
collapse of these ecosystems.
And we don't fully understand them, but we're certainly seeing the effects of them on the
planet.
We saw the impact of the asteroid on the Earth 65 million years ago that paleontologists
and geologists tell us cause the extinction of the dinosaurs and actually less well known
50% of the species in the ocean itself.
The mass extinction went on underwater just as much as on land.
Well, I don't think we want to cause the next mass extinction on Earth, but in fact we may.
Actually it may already be underway.
The rate of species extinction today, the pace appears to exceed anything since the
last of the great mass extinctions.
Well, another thing about human beings, I think, and what we look at is we tend to focus
on the big events.
Perhaps we focus on the wrong impacts that we're having on the ocean.
In a book called The Sea and Flames, Carl Safina, a marine ecologist, in fact a MacArthur
Genius Award winner, drew some really interesting conclusions one year after the 2010 Gulf
Oil Spill.
As a marine ecologist, as a marine biologist interested in the health of the ecosystem,
he went in and was, certainly in his book, he doesn't pull his punches, he's very critical
of the corporate and government entities and their response and the fact that oil drilling
goes on offshore, perhaps without enough safeguards to prevent such spills.
But he also saw that many of the worst case scenarios for the ecosystem actually hadn't
come true, fortunately, and he also offered us some surprising perspective on what actually
is going on out there in the Gulf of Mexico or in the ocean in general.
For example, he saw that when the spill happened and so fishing and shrimping were banned for
a period of time, that actually likely helped the wildlife in the Gulf more than the spill
heard it because without the shrimping going on, there was more food in the food chain
for all of the organisms around and they actually had a chance for populations to recover.
It was a good year for growth for the marine wildlife in the Gulf, paradoxically.
This point actually makes it that fertilizer runoff in the dead zone do far more harm perhaps
than the spill itself.
The loss of wetland area from subsidence because channelization of the Mississippi and other
rivers has taken sediment away from the wetlands area, sediment deposition away, and so the
wetlands are subsiding and we're losing land area to the sea, a very productive, rich estuarine
land area.
That effect may be far worse than the area that was actually fouled by oil coming into
those wetlands.
Lead lines are the oil coming into the wetlands.
But perhaps our focus tends to be misplaced.
The chronic and systemic effects we have on the marine ecosystem actually far outweigh
the damage by singular events like the oil spill, bad as it is, and I tend to agree with
Saphina's point there.
One more interesting thought actually from Carl Saphina before we leave him behind is
he said in his book, a whale might think, thank God for petroleum, now how's that?
After all, if petroleum hadn't come along to replace whale oil as fuel, many species
of whales would surely have been hunted all the way to extinction a hundred years ago
or more.
So petroleum replaced whale oil in lighting our cities and that perhaps is one thing that
really truly saved the whales.
Well we've already touched on the fact that we're reaching a point where the human population
is just fundamentally different on this planet than it's ever been before.
There were very small numbers of people, much less than a billion people throughout almost
all of human history.
And if we look at the overall time scale, we see this curve of human population growth
which is pretty familiar, which just is this enormous exponential only in very recent years.
In 1930, two billion people were on the planet, 1965, three and a half billion people were
on the planet and now in 2011, something like seven billion people are on the planet.
So even compared to 50 or 70 or 100 years ago, our impact on the ocean is fundamentally
enormously different because there are just so many more people trying to derive food
from the ocean, having their impact in terms of what we're putting into the sea, pulling
oil and gas out of the sea floor and just simply driving ships around on the surface,
putting sound pollution into the water and affecting marine ecosystems in that way.
Our impact is pervasive because we've become pervasive and we've only become pervasive
in the most recent incident in both human history and even geological history.
So we dominate the planet now, including the ocean.
We've eaten 90% of the big fish in the sea in 50 years in terms of the population of
large, large fish, 90% are gone compared to 50 years ago.
As I've said before, we've lost nearly half of the coral reefs on the planet and we don't
know whether they can come back or whether that will continue.
In 150 years or so, we've built up the coastlines all around the world, rich countries, poor
countries, the like, and so we've impacted all those coastal marine ecosystems and the
physical environment of the coastlines in enormous ways.
We've impacted almost every place in the shallow ocean in some way, even places we
haven't explored particularly well.
But maybe the deep ocean is still the wilderness.
You know, in 1960, I told you about Jacques Picard and Don Walsh, the two aquanauts who
went down in the Bathescaf Trieste and they visited the bottom of the Mariana Trench,
the deepest place in the ocean, 11,000 meters below the surface of the water.
And they stayed there for 20 minutes.
They saw a couple of fish out the window, so they noted that there was life there at
the bottom of the deepest place in the ocean.
And they came back to the surface.
They were actually pretty worried because a crack had developed in the window.
Well, since 1960, no one, no human being has ever been back down there.
In fact, no human being has ever been back down anywhere in the bottom of the Challenger
Deep or any of the other deep trenches in the ocean.
It's the most unexplored part of the planet and in some ways, it's a more unexplored part
of even the solar system.
I've told you about how poorly mapped the ocean floor is compared to other planetary
bodies.
95% of the ocean floor has never been seen by human eyes directly.
So the great deeps are still the great unexplored environment, and at least on a relative scale,
they're the place where we're having the least impact.
Warming of the surface waters is not yet affecting the temperature of the very deep waters at
the bottom.
It seems pretty clear.
It may in the future, but it isn't now.
Those deep marine ecosystems are largely untouched and unaffected by human activities.
Let's try to keep it that way.
Well, what do coming decades hold then for the ocean?
Let's talk about the future ocean at a couple of different timescales.
First of all, some things are going to continue to happen.
More warming of the ocean is certain at the current pace of warming.
The temperature of the water is going to go up, the heat content of the water is going
to go up, and sea level is going to continue to rise.
At an accelerating pace, there's certainly going to continue to be this chemical change
of the entire surface water of the ocean in the form of acidification, and we just fundamentally
don't know what the effects of acidification are on the life forms that live in that shallow
water environment.
With the input of fresh water in the Arctic and Antarctic regions from melting of sea
ice, there's the possibility that we may even modify that great oceanic conveyor belt,
the deep water formation that moves the water around the entire sea, and that really would
have an impact potentially on the deep oceans.
We don't really know, but that's certainly within the realm of possibility.
We're conducting this great geophysical experiment in modifying the environment of the surface
of the earth, and that fundamentally means the ocean, and we don't know yet how it's
all going to turn out.
Well, more things that coming decades hold us.
More resources become ever more stretched, we're going to see more utilization of the
ocean.
There's certainly going to be increased aquaculture of freshwater species and mariculture offshore,
so the kinds of fish that we eat will go more and more towards fish that are farmed in one
way or another than wild caught.
That's partly because it's just simply going to have to be that way.
There won't be as many wild fish to catch as those resources are used up, and also because
of a conscious choice that maybe catching wild fish is not the best idea compared to
culturing them.
We'll see more mariculture in the ocean, and we'll see the practice change and evolve
over time to be more perhaps responsive to the local ecosystems, even where the mariculture
is going on.
We'll certainly see more offshore oil and gas drilling, spills notwithstanding, the
industry is likely to go on, probably mining in the ocean will begin.
One interesting new area that we really haven't tapped to any significant extent yet is energy
from the ocean or energy from offshore.
Let's take a look at a few of the examples of things that are currently in development,
and as prices of oil rise, as concerns about nuclear energy continue to be there, new energy
from the ocean may be a really important source.
One is wind power.
Wind mills are already being placed offshore, it's nice to get them out into an environment
where it tends to be windy all the time or a lot of the time, and in shallow water you
can mount them on the seabed.
They're not without controversy because people standing on the shore maybe don't want to
look at wind mills on their otherwise pristine horizon environment as they look out at the
sea, but on the other hand this is an alternative source of energy that can be placed in the
offshore region and generate electricity and doesn't take up land, so that's a good thing
as well.
This is really likely to grow, it's happening more in Europe today than in North America
but in both areas we'll probably see more wind power generated offshore.
Another new one that's certainly been done in a number of pilot projects and even some
small scale projects in Europe is the use of tidal energy or wave energy, and basically
this means the placing of some sort of fixed structures mounted to the seabed or perhaps
even floating that have turbines on them that will turn as ocean currents or tidal rush
comes in and out of coastal environments.
There's a lot of energy in that motion of all that water, the volume of water is so
great, and so those ocean currents and tidal currents can be tapped to generate electricity.
Wave energy just simply the up and down of the wave is a form of energy that can be presumably
or that can be potentially tapped to generate electricity as well.
Another interesting form of energy is something called ocean thermal energy conversion or
OTEC for short, and OTEC is a very simple concept.
It basically says if you have an area where you can tap the deep water of the deep sea
environment, you can draw cold water up to the surface, and because of its temperature
difference with shallow surface waters, you can drive heat exchangers or turbines that
will allow you to pull the energy out of the difference in temperature between the surface
and the deep water, and again make electricity.
In fact it has some secondary values like it's a way to condense on the pipes that carry
that cold water, condense fresh water out of the air, and make desalinated water, fresh
water generation as well.
So this has been done again on pilot scale projects, and if energy becomes significantly
expensive and if the will in society is there to do it, OTEC is a potential real new energy
source that can be done in many places around the world that have access to deep water,
like off the Hawaiian islands for example.
One more use of the ocean that is certainly going to continue to grow is shipping.
We still transport most goods around the planet, and trade around the planet is an increasing
thing by ships.
We've been doing it since the days of the Phoenicians, and we'll still be doing it into
the future.
And you might be surprised to think that a very large cargo ship, diesel burning, smelly
cargo ship, is actually a very efficient low carbon footprint way of moving things around
the planet.
These per unit of goods transported have incredibly small amount of fuel that needs to be burned
to get things, say, from Asia to North America.
So shipping is a good thing, and certainly the alternative is stuff like flying them,
which isn't going to happen.
So sometimes the carbon footprint, for example, of a good that was brought to, say, the East
Coast of the US, New York, by ship from Asia, is actually smaller than the same thing, say
a bottle of wine, for example, that's brought over land by truck from California, let's
say, to New York.
It seems strange, but the carbon footprint can be smaller for much more long distance
transport.
Well, let's look at the future of the ocean in terms of ocean science, because we clearly
have learned a great deal about the ocean.
We've explored various aspects of it to the greatest depths, all over the planet, from
the poles to the equator.
And yet there's so much more that we don't know.
I talked about the census of marine life, and it's 10 year cataloging of everything
about life in the sea.
And they published a map at the end of the census of marine life that shows their, you
know, the amalgamation of their 30 million different records of individual organisms
and species and things like that from that 10 year study.
And on this map, they colored a dot for every half degree area of latitude placed on the
planet, basically a thousand square miles for each dot, where they have at least some
data.
And the reds and blues and yellows are just how many measurements they have in each individual
area.
And what you see is that vast areas of the ocean are white.
There's no colored dot.
So even with a 10 year study, the largest marine biology study that's ever been done,
vast areas of the ocean have never been sampled literally for any kind of what's out there,
what's living out there.
And the census of marine life in the broader sense has to continue, and we still have an
underexplored ocean for sure.
Well, one of the ways that human presence in the ocean is going to increase is by moving
offshore with permanent research stations of various kinds.
There's a major initiative underway called the Ocean Observatories Initiative.
And the idea is to put a whole series of sensors both at the bottom of the sea and up through
the water column and connect them back to land with offshore fiber cables, something
like our communication cables, so that data is coming in real time.
And a series of these, first off the northwest coast of the U.S. and then other areas, but
in deep water, out in the open ocean, to tell us about what's going on in the sea.
And the Ocean Observatory Initiative includes autonomous underwater vehicles that includes
buoys in various parts of the sea all over the planet.
So to start putting essentially a kind of a network of sensors out there that becomes
our stethoscope on the entire sea, this is going to be the future of oceanography in
many ways, is making our presence there not just an expedition at a time, but all of the
time.
Well what do coming centuries and millennia hold in the ocean?
The effects of this enormous sort of accidental geophysical experiment, the release of carbon
into the atmosphere and the ocean, is going to be felt for centuries, guaranteed.
The carbon dioxide has gone from the ground to the atmosphere, but actually as we recall,
mostly into the ocean, most of the excess CO2 is being taken up by the water.
It's making that warmer and higher water.
We'll have more acidity and we'll have less ice in the ocean.
What kind of state that's going to get to is unclear so far.
We've said that the present day carbon dioxide balance at the surface is different than
it's been in at least 10 million years and maybe longer.
A few years ago there was an expedition to drill cores in the Arctic Ocean.
The very first samples of that ocean's paleoceanography, the history of the ocean basin came out of
the core samples from ice breaking ships that went up and drilled the first core samples
in the Arctic.
And what they found was that at the time that those sediments were laid down, 55 million
years ago, the Arctic Ocean held blooms of tropical algae.
It's not just plate tectonic drift, it actually was high to the northern latitude.
So the north polar region had an environment that was like the tropics today.
Are those kinds of conditions going to return once all the sea ice melts?
We don't really know.
It still would be a very long process to get there, but maybe over centuries and millennia,
that may be exactly where the ocean could be going.
Well eventually some sort of new equilibrium will be reached and if we stretch it out to
centuries, millennia, even longer kinds of timescales, then the ocean will still be there
and the ocean will reach a stability that's, you know, in keeping with the environment
at that time.
Plate tectonics will continue, evolution will continue, the four billion year old waters
will continue to crash on the shoreline, they'll move in currents and they'll move in thermal
hailing convection for many, many millions of years to come, whether we're here or not
in fact.
Well one hopeful sign in terms of reeling back to our impacts in the present day is
that we can come up with increased international agreement on what should be done in the open
ocean, especially away from territorial boundaries that have been defined and the definition of
those is a major international sort of cooperative coup as well, so that we can achieve sustainable
yields in the open ocean.
The international whaling commission I talked about is one example, another thing that's
the Atlantic Tuna Intergovernmental Organization called ICAT.
The law of the sea treaty and convention itself is, you know, a major effort in this direction
and it allows countries to decide or to understand that they have a particular zone that they
control the waters in, it's certainly not without controversy, there's lots of controversy,
but that the rest of the ocean is governed by international law of various kinds.
We have to strengthen those international laws to really avoid the kind of tragic overfishing
that we're seeing that's causing ecosystem collapse in the sea today.
And all of this is because of course we have, you know, a return to what we think of or
what I called before the tragedy of the commons.
These ocean resources and sea level and these general conditions are international goods
for us and they're international problems.
And the thing is that the tragedy of the commons is not a metaphor, it's really the truth.
The commons, just like the sheep pen that those English villagers had, is the entire planet.
We really do share the open ocean, especially away from the exclusive economic zones of
the coastline.
So the challenge is how to reasonably balance our competing needs and desires in open sea.
Well, I'd like to just briefly remind us of a kind of a cautionary tale that has been
popularly told, you may have heard already before, it was the highlight of Jared Diamond's
book called Collapse and that's the story of the Easter Islanders.
Just briefly, archaeology tells us that the Polynesian Easter Islanders arrived there,
navigated there about 350 BC and they lived in a rich and fertile forested island.
Trees were prevalent all over Easter Island and they were used to build ocean going canoes
and to go fishing and everything else.
Population rose to 10,000 or more people.
But as that happened, overfishing grew in the region.
Food started to become scarce.
More and more trees were cut down just to be burned for cooking or to build more things
or just to clear land for agriculture.
At some point, the last tree was cut down.
I can't imagine what it was like to cut down that very last tree.
But there was no more resource, there were no more canoes for fishing, resources dwindled,
the society literally collapsed and fell apart and when Captain Cook arrived in 1774, less
than 200 people were there, they had crude technology, meager canoes that were barely
seaworthy at all.
So the collapse of this happened because of the overuse of a common resource, whether
it was the fish or the trees that we're talking about, something happened in the limited resource
environment of Easter Island and the people there were not good stewards of their resources.
The entire planet, with its bountiful ocean, is our common.
So is it going to be our Easter Island or is it something that we're going to be able
to avoid with foresight into the future?
Well the first thing is, in order to protect something, you have to know about it.
So to avoid that fate for the world's ocean, first we have to know the ocean realm.
We've seen a great deal of how much we know in this course and perhaps we've also glimpsed
a little bit of how much there still is to explore.
A really well-known marine biologist, Sylvia Earle, has exhorted us in recent books and
speeches to explore and protect the wild ocean.
Explore and protect, you have to know, you have to explore in order to protect.
One is equally as important as the other.
But one really hopeful sign is the establishment of marine sanctuaries and marine conservation
areas, by the U.S. and also by many other countries around the world.
Areas where fishing is either not allowed or is tightly controlled that permit refugia,
places for fish to spawn in populations to recover.
You know there was a PBS series that called the National Park System, America's Best
Idea.
Perhaps we can take that best idea offshore to a greater extent.
Because we have marine sanctuaries, marine protected areas, since the early 1970s and
there's been quite a few named in recent years.
But on land, globally speaking, 12% of the whole land area of the world is protected
in national parks, 12%.
In the oceans today, 0.8% is protected as marine sanctuaries or marine conservation areas like
that.
Maybe that number should be more like 10, 12, 20% or more to provide enough refugia for
the fish stocks to recover, for the ecosystems to thrive.
Well, now that you know much more about the ocean, this, as Sylvia Earle calls it, the
blue heart of the planet, in all its facets, I hope you feel some deeper appreciation for
it.
Both for its vastness and complexity and paradoxically also for its fragility.
We each individually, I think, have the responsibility to help ensure that future generations have
a healthy ocean ecosystem.
And there are things that we individually can do and make choices.
One is as simple as being a good advocate, supporting the formation of things like marine
sanctuaries.
Another is the personal choices that we make.
Sylvia Earle actually takes the position that eating wild seafood as tasty as it is
is just fundamentally something that's not okay for the ecosystems, no matter what seafood
it is.
She's eating, you know, tilapia and catfish, aquacultured fish only and nothing else.
I'm not sure that my position is exactly the same, but I certainly think that it behooves
all of us to look at those seafood selection charts and make responsible choices about
what seafoods we eat and what seafoods we decide that we don't eat in order to preserve the
health of these very fragile ocean ecosystems.
An interesting way to think about our stewardship of the ocean is to say, well, what's my personal
responsibility to the sea?
And this is a bit reductionist, but it kind of is instructive at the same time to say,
okay, there are seven billion human beings approximately on the planet.
The ocean is 361 million square kilometers.
It holds 1.3 billion cubic kilometers of water.
It's a lot of water.
So if we divide those numbers, we could say that each one of us is responsible for one
patch of the ocean that's about 50,000 square meters or 12 acres, 12 acres of ocean area.
It doesn't sound like a huge amount, but that's for every single person on earth.
From India, Africa, the United States and Europe, all of it combined, we each get 12
acres of ocean area that we should go out there and take care of.
Not really, of course.
Maybe even more instructive is say, well, ocean area is one thing, but the ocean is
deep and it's full of volume.
Each of us, by the same calculation, is responsible for 49 billion gallons of seawater.
That's a lot of water to take care of.
So we each have to do our part at some level.
Well, the ocean is literally the life support system of the earth, which we've seen most
of the oxygen comes from the sea, from photosynthesis going on in the ocean.
Most of the biomass that's generated year after year after year comes from the sea and
it's 97% of the earth's habitat.
Once again, Sylvia Earle, her buzzword for that is if there's no blue, there's no green.
We've seen what it's like to look at a planet without any ocean, like Mars, for example,
lifeless and barren.
The ocean truly remains the final wilderness and the frontier of our inner space, more
unexplored than explored, and yet finite and limits are being reached.
We've come a long way in this course.
We've explored all the ways we know the ocean and what lives in it, and it shows us that
it's a vast and interconnected place, not only a food web, but also a web in terms of
science, where if we try to study just the geology or just the biology, we find that
if you pull on one, all the other ones come attached to it.
There's no way to understand its complexity without looking at the whole.
If we want to know about life in the ocean, we quickly discover we need to learn about
the physics of the water and the chemistry of the water, and even the plate tectonics
and why the hydrothermal vents are so important as the original founding place, perhaps, for
life on the planet.
I use a cartoon in my college courses that I feel like encapsulates what a course in
oceanography is all about.
It shows this shipwrecked sailor, perhaps, sitting on a desert island, writing in his
journal.
344, still stranded, nothing but flat empty water as far as the eye can see, but of course
in the cartoon, underneath the water, we see jellyfish and kelp forests, submarines, giant
squids and sperm whales, coral reefs, all the things of the teeming life of the ocean,
and that just exemplifies it, that although we can't see it, it's all out there, and once
you know about it, you have a new appreciation.
Next time you go to the beach or go sailing or something like that, think about the shape
of the foreshore and the berm on the beach.
Think about the refraction of the waves around the headlands and into the coves, or what
organisms might be living their whole life out right there next to you, perhaps under
you in the sand or just offshore.
For me, 22 years after that first trip to sea on the research vessel Charles Darwin,
I still feel this great thrill heading out from port on an expedition, or even maybe
helicoptering out to a ship that's already at sea, just a small kinship with those explorers
of old and Captain Cook and the Challenger expedition, because I know that even today,
every expedition still brings new discovery, opens up new areas of science, brings us surprises,
and brings us a new level of understanding of this watery planet.
In fact, when we're at sea like that, even as we're studying the under sea geology, our
ships actually become mini oases for marine life.
We get surrounded by schools of mahi mahi sometimes, flying fish coming up onto the deck.
All of the organisms in the sea seem to treat a ship at sea as a little mini reef.
The albatrosses are overhead soon when there's fish in the water like that.
And so all of it is just linked in an intimate and day to day way when we're out on an expedition.
And so the ocean is truly all around us.
The continents are islands surrounded by one world ocean.
I want you to go out and explore.
If you go to the coastline, look around you and open your eyes.
If you live far from the coast, you can learn so much about the ocean through so many means
today and get there when you can.
Maybe this course has piqued your interest in some particular area that I've touched
on, whether it's marine geology, physical oceanography, meteorology, marine biology.
Learn more about whatever of those subjects catches your fancy after going through this
oceanography course.
And maybe most important of all, be a steward of the future ocean for our children and their
children to come.
