The Japanese like food. Lots of different kinds of food. And while I'm sure most of you know
the basics of Japanese cuisine, sushi and sake, today I'd like to move beyond those basics to the
enormous diversity and complexity of Japanese cuisine or what many now call today Japanese food ways,
the culture of food. So we'll talk first about contemporary Japanese food culture and then we'll
trace it back through cycles of Japanese isolation and globalization.
Now something striking about Japanese food ways is the sheer number of restaurants in Japan.
In fact, Japan has twice as many restaurants per capita as the US. One restaurant for every 260 or so people.
In the US, it's more like one per 560. In Tokyo alone, there are an estimated 160,000 restaurants.
That's 10 times as many as New York. In fact, there are more ramen noodle shops in Tokyo than total restaurants in New York.
And what's remarkable is that this isn't new. Tokyo has had thousands of restaurants for hundreds of years.
So, this long-standing density of restaurants, what can it tell us about Japanese culture? Why are there so many restaurants in Japan?
Well, one answer is that the Japanese like to eat out. That may sound obvious, but Japanese homes are small.
And until recently, Japanese kitchens were extremely simple, perhaps one or two gas burners.
And in fact, ovens are still somewhat rare in Japan. That's why the Japanese invented the bread machine.
Now, because homes are small, having people over for dinner, hosting a dinner party, simply isn't as common in Japan as it is in the US.
On the contrary, people tend to choose specific restaurants where they go to relax informally and others where they go to entertain.
Now, Japanese restaurants are rather small. It's not unusual to find a shop with only 10 or even 5 seats.
So, a restaurant can actually feel like an extension of one's home.
If you're a regular, you get to know the owner, you get to know his or her family, the other patrons, and they get to know you.
So for me, at my regular places, the host might ask, has your family come to join you yet? Or they might say, we have your favorite dish today.
Now, restaurants and drinking establishments in Japan often have clear identities and distinct clientels.
For example, a friend in broadcasting once took me to a bar where the clientele was entirely people in broadcasting.
And the bartender knew the details of the business. And he could respond thoughtfully to patrons when they talk shop.
This is also true of hostess clubs. Those are drinking establishments with a large female staff who pay lavish attention to their male clients.
Now, in some cases, hostess clubs fall into a gray area, fading into escort services and prostitution.
But in many cases, the appeal is largely conversation.
I know someone who worked at a hostess club patronized by firefighters.
And she learned enough in conversation at work that she could explain in detail different strategies for firefighting in Japan.
And the key point here is that in Japan, when you invite someone to your favorite restaurant, you're inviting them into your social sphere.
These small restaurants and bars feel very personal.
Now, a second consequence of lots of tiny restaurants is that they specialize. They serve one type of food.
If you eat Japanese food in the U.S., you'll often be presented with a thick menu that includes sushi and sashimi and udon and soba and tempura and okonomiyaki and teriyaki salmon.
But in Japan, a big extensive menu like that is commonly associated with big chain restaurants.
Colorful laminated menus with pictures, maybe near a highway interchange, mass produced food at a low price, but of middling quality.
And most Japanese consumers just don't think that you can do that many types of food well in a small restaurant.
If you're a sushi chef, you make sushi. Soba shops make soba. If you're a tempura restaurant, you make tempura.
It's not considered likely that in a small independent restaurant, you could be good at all three.
So Japanese restaurants commonly do one thing. Sushi, that's one thing. Soba and udon are considered one thing.
Soba is buckwheat noodles and udon are wheat noodles. Both are boiled and served either drained or in a light broth.
But ramen, that's something else. Because the broth is rich and fatty and it cooks for hours.
So many restaurants do ramen noodles or soba and udon, but not both.
Tempura, that's quickly fried vegetables and shrimp. That's yet another thing. And it's completely separate from tonkatsu, which is a fried pork cutlet.
And that's different from kushi-age or kushi-katsu. Those are deep fried skewers of meat and seafood and vegetables.
Now at a kushi-katsu restaurant, you can probably get different cuts of chicken on skewers. But that's considered distinct from yakitori, which is chicken on skewers, but it's grilled, not fried.
And that's considered distinct from yakimiku, which is grilled meat, usually beef, but the customers grill it at their own table, whereas yakitori is grilled by the chef.
So for each of these dishes, you will find specialized restaurants, lots of them.
But in addition to being highly specialized, Japanese dining is also highly contextual. There are slightly different rituals that apply to different types of restaurant.
For example, with kushi-katsu, there's one bowl of dipping sauce for the table, so it's bad form to double dip.
But with tonkatsu, you have your own dish of sauce. And with yakitori, you generally don't add sauce. The chef should have properly basted it.
Now I don't want to make Japan overly exotic. All cultures have rules for how you eat.
But for centuries, the Japanese have reveled in discussing and reading about the right way to eat this or that.
What's the right season? What's the right restaurant? What are the right manners?
There's a brilliant and loving parody of these attitudes in the 1985 film, Tampopo.
So the story centers around a struggling ramen restaurant. And in one scene, it involves a ramen master, a man who has studied ramen for 40 years, and he is instructing a disciple on the correct way to eat ramen.
The master is dressed in a formal kimono. And he carefully explains that first one sits and quietly observes the gestalt of the ramen.
Then one caresses the surface of the ramen with chopsticks to express affection and appreciation.
And only then can one touch the pork slices with chopsticks. And that's only while saying words of thanks to the pork.
Now my description can't do justice to the scene. Please see the movie because it's funny largely because it's a parody of real Japanese behavior.
There are rituals around almost every category of Japanese cuisine.
You may notice a parallel here with the Japanese language, which incorporates formality and ritual even in everyday situations.
Now there's also a great sense of seasonality with food in Japan. Some foods are associated with certain festivals and holidays and times of year.
But even in ordinary daily eating in Japan, there's an awareness of what's in season and what's not.
It's something we once had in American culture, and foodies and locovores are reviving it, but in Japan it never disappeared.
For example, the fish samma. It's known in English by the ungainly terms mackerel pike and Pacific saury.
It's considered at its best in fall. If you eat it too early, it's not fatty enough. If you wait too long, it's gone or it's only available frozen.
And samma has become my restaurant test.
Whenever I encounter a 22-page laminated menu at a Japanese restaurant in the U.S., my test is to order in Japanese salt-grilled samma, shiyoyaki samma, when it's out of season.
And then I wait for the answer.
And the right response, the answer I am hoping for, is a long pause, a concerned face, and then a polite suggestion that I order something else.
Perhaps Hirame. That's considered delicious longer into the winter. Or if it's summer, maybe Suzuki.
But if the server just smiles and says, oh yes, shiyoyaki samma coming up, I change the order and I adjust my expectations for the food way down.
Okay, let's turn from the contemporary scene and talk about the backstory to Japanese food ways. And in particular, let's address this question.
How do Japanese food ways reflect the waves of Japanese globalization and isolation that we've discussed throughout this course?
Well, remember that wet rice agriculture itself came from China and the Korean Peninsula.
And although no one in Japan today would consider rice especially Chinese, many ancient Japanese food ways reflect that early wave of Chinese and continental influence.
For example, soy sauce brewing. It came from the continent. So did fermented bean paste. It's called miso. And so did noodles, which go back to the 700s in Japan.
But ancient Japanese cuisine was still distinctive in several ways. Some of our oldest records of Japanese food ways emphasize eating things raw.
Sashimi, for example, is very old. It dates to the Heian period. In the earliest records, fish was sliced thin and dipped in vinegar.
Soy sauce became popular once commercial brewing developed. And using vinegar for preservation is also very old.
Maki sushi, a cylindrical type of sushi, actually started as a means of preserving fish by wrapping it in vinegar coated rice.
And so the Japanese preference for fish or seafood over meat that goes back many centuries.
But everything in traditional Japanese cuisine, everything is secondary to rice. Long considered the staff of life in Japan.
And that's reflected in language. Meishi is a casual term for rice, but it can also mean a meal. And Gohan is the polite term for rice, and it can also mean a meal.
Now, there's an equivalent in English. Bread means food, as in give us this day our daily bread. But in colloquial English, that meaning of bread as food in general, it's almost disappeared.
In Japanese, however, rice continues to mean food, even though today Japan consumes almost as much wheat as rice.
Now, a simple Japanese meal, going back to the medieval era, was defined as rice and then a soup and a vegetable. That's known as Ichiju Isai.
Ichiju, one soup, and Isai, one side dish. A more substantial meal would be one soup and three sides, Ichiju Sansai.
Now, in Japanese restaurants abroad, servers will often bring the soup before the rest of the meal. That's European style. Soup as a separate course.
But that's completely wrong. Basic Japanese soups are designed to complement plain rice. You generally don't put anything on rice in Japan. Instead, you alternate sips of soup and mouthfuls of rice.
So, bringing the soup first is like serving rice and beans with the beans first, and then when you're done with the beans, here's some plain white rice.
Or maybe like serving bread and butter separately. Here, here's a nice thick pad of butter. Eat that, and then when you're done, here's some bread.
Now, a basic Japanese broth, going back centuries, is made from kombu, or sea kelp, and often with shavings of bonito. That's a large fish, similar to tuna.
This can be a clear broth, or one can add miso paste, or tofu, or different mushrooms, depending on the season and the level of extravagance.
Now, because rice was considered the main dish, anything served in addition to soup was called a side dish, okazu. That could be fish or vegetables.
But until modern times, animal protein was quite rare in the Japanese diet. That was in part for economic reasons, and partly because of a Buddhist aversion to animal slaughter.
And this was especially strict for livestock, like cows and pigs.
So until the 1800s, Japan had limited animal husbandry, not much cattle or pork, and virtually no dairy products.
Hull tree and eggs were more common, more common than beef or pork, but still quite rare.
Fish and shellfish, the most common animal products, were still unusual for the most part.
Most Japanese were de facto vegetarians until the modern period.
Now, when we talk about the Japanese diet, historically, we need to take account of class.
Because while most of the Japanese population worked as farmers until the 20th century, and they grew lots of rice, rice was still a luxury grain.
To eat highly polished white rice, that was a sign of great wealth.
Most commoners ate less polished rice, stretched with a less desirable grain, like millet.
Now the irony here is that brown rice, stretched with millet, is quite healthy as a staple grain, and highly polished white rice is not.
In the absence of animal products, such as pork, or vegetables like kale or cauliflower, or fruits like oranges,
in the absence of those a diet rich in white rice leads to a deficiency of vitamin B1, thiamine.
And that leads to a breakdown of the nervous system, with symptoms like mental confusion, difficulty walking, and cardiovascular problems.
Collectively, those are symptoms of the disease Berry Berry.
Now, until the late 1800s, Betty Betty was rare, and it was a sign of affluence.
Shoguns sometimes suffered from Betty Betty, but ordinary people almost never.
But it became tragically common as Japan got richer, and more people could eat white rice.
But this was when meat was not yet cheap enough to be a regular part of the diet.
And the Japanese military spent years trying to figure out why their young recruits who were devouring white rice,
and thinking they were eating better than ever, kept getting sick.
Okay, during Japan's second wave of globalization, the 1400s and the 1500s,
Japan's traditional diet didn't change dramatically.
But contact with the West did bring some innovations.
For example, the Japanese developed a type of sponge cake called castella,
which was an adaptation of the Portuguese dish Pao de Castella, or bread from Castile.
Tempura also seems to have come by way of Portugal.
It's a corruption of the Portuguese word temporas, meaning days or time.
And that refers to the four times a year when Portuguese Catholics avoided meat,
and therefore they ate fried vegetables and fish.
And it was also in the 1500s that Japanese warlords developed a taste for Western wines.
But ironically, the big transformation of the Japanese diet,
it didn't happen until the 1700s during a period of relative isolation.
And that's because the 1700s were a period of extended peace, relative prosperity, and urbanization.
All great things for food culture.
Remember, under the Tokugawa, Japan enjoyed domestic peace for over 250 years.
And the Shogun's capital of Edo was transformed from a sleepy fishing village
to a bustling city of over a million people.
And this new population was of two types.
First, dino and their retainers.
And second, the huge numbers of tradesmen and merchants who provided for them.
Now the dino were required to spend about half their time in Edo,
and they brought with them their high ranking samurai retainers.
So it was a wealthy and powerful elite in Edo.
And since there was no war, instead of competing on the battlefield, they competed in the dining room.
Dino began hosting lavish dinners to entertain themselves and to show off,
and this led to an explosion in the demand for things like kaiseki, highly formal Japanese dining.
Kaiseki drew from the formality of the tea ceremony with an exacting concern for presentation,
but it included lots of courses, often 14.
Sakizuke, an appetizer.
Hassan, a seasonal specialty.
Mukouzuke, a seasonal sashimi.
Takiyawase, a dish with several things steamed together, and so forth.
As for the samurai who attended their lords in Edo, they're developed unwritten rules for banquets.
If you got a promotion, then you were expected to invite your colleagues to a banquet
of a certain size and a certain caliber of restaurant.
Now this elite was supported by hundreds of thousands of tradesmen and merchants,
carpenters, masons, roofers, shopkeepers,
and their appetites spawned the growth of thousands of places for quick eats and thousands of food carts.
So tempura, which technically was adapted from Portuguese food in the 1500s,
became very popular during the Edo boom.
It's then that we see lots of food carts and stalls and restaurants,
serving tempura to busy workers and tradesmen.
The Edo period also saw the spread of another foreign food, the sweet potato.
It was probably introduced via the Philippines and China.
And the sweet potato was promoted by the 8th shogun, Tokugawa Yoshimune.
Because it was a way to use dry fields, those were fields unsuited to rice cultivation.
And today sweet potatoes appear everywhere in Japan, roasted at street carts, fried in tempura,
or turned into Imochochu, a fiercely strong clear liquor popular in the Southwest.
Now, in the late 1800s, Japan experienced another huge wave of globalization,
with Japanese traveling to Europe, the New World, and China, and foreigners coming to Japan.
And the Western impact on the Japanese diet was enormous,
a flood of new foods entered Japan.
You see, Japanese observers were not quite sure why Westerners were bigger,
or why they were more powerful militarily.
But they assumed that it was at least partly due to the Western diet.
So the government aggressively promoted cattle ranching and dairy production,
instead of discouraging animal husbandry as in the past.
Now the government promoted it.
And this led to the invention of new dishes.
Dishes specifically created to use new ingredients.
The first new dish was probably skiaki, skiaki with beef.
The first beef skiaki restaurant opened in 1862.
Skiaki involves a huge pot at the center of a table,
with a broth consisting of soy sauce, sugar, and sake.
And the diners put in their choice of onions, cabbage, tofu, mushrooms, noodles,
and most important beef, thin slices of beef.
So modern skiaki is actually based on older dishes that did not use beef.
But after the 1860s, skiaki was changed forever.
It's now a beef dish.
In this period, food writers responded to this new fascination with foreign foods.
They wrote the first cookbooks explaining how to use Western ingredients.
These cookbooks date from the 1870s.
And tomkatsu, fried pork cutlets, that seems to date from the 1890s.
Now another key development during the 19th century
was the stronger influence of continental Asian cuisine.
In the Edo period, Nagasaki had the only Chinatown in all of Japan.
So while at least one daimyo chose to cater a Chinese banquet, Chinese food was rare.
But in the late 1800s, thousands of Chinese workers came to Yokohama and Kobe,
and Chinese food became increasingly available as standard foreign food.
And this led to hybrid foods.
Japanese people associated Chinese food with noodles.
So they created Chinese style noodle dishes unknown in China.
One is Hayashi Chuka.
It's a summer dish.
Cold ramen noodles topped with things like sliced pork,
thin slices of Japanese omelet, ginger, and cucumber.
And because of Chinese and Korean influence,
Japan began to use more garlic.
Garlic was rare in older dishes,
but today you'll find garlicky dishes like kimchi throughout Japan.
But before I get too hungry, let's conclude by returning to an opening point.
The social aspect of food.
In Japan, eating out with friends is an important alternative to inviting them over to dinner.
And so Japan has lots of restaurants.
And this love of eating out has only intensified in recent decades.
In 2007, the famous Michelin guide began issuing an edition for Japan.
And they awarded 191 stars to 150 restaurants in Tokyo.
That's compared to 97 stars for Paris and 54 for New York.
So that's pretty impressive.
But as for three star restaurants,
Michelin found only eight in Tokyo compared to ten in Paris.
And that left Japanese foodies thoroughly irate.
Japanese critics insisted that Michelin really didn't understand Japanese food.
Some Japanese chefs claim that they had not been rated
because they'd just ignored approaches from Michelin.
And this was seen as a challenge.
And by 2013, Tokyo had pushed to 15 three star establishments,
completely eclipsing 10 for Paris and 7 for New York.
Now, I don't want to suggest that Michelin is a truly scientific benchmark,
but it's certainly remarkable that even after years of slow economic growth,
the Japanese are supporting so many three star restaurants
and taking world class cuisine as a point of pride.
And while those Michelin stars may be new,
as a historian, I know that the joy of eating out
is part of a long standing Japanese tradition.
