You
You
Your lecture is Dr. Mark J. Ravina. Dr. Ravina is professor of history at Emmer
University. He received his A.B. from Columbia University and his M.A. and
Ph.D. from Stanford University. Dr. Ravina has published extensively in
early modern Japanese history with a particular focus on the transnational
and international aspects of political change. His books include The Last
Samurai, The Life and Battles of Saigo Takamori, and Land and Lordship in
Early Modern Japan. As a public intellectual Dr. Ravina has also appeared
on CNN, CNN International, NPR and the History Channel.
The year was 1871. In Japan a new government had been in place for three
years and it was eager to modernize a country that had been under samurai rule
for seven centuries. Toward that end the government dispatched officials around
the world, both to study foreign ways and to convince Western audiences that
Japan was a progressive and civilized country. One of the officials was Ito
Hiromumi. He was then just a member of the finance ministry but he would later
become the Prime Minister of Japan. Among the highlights of Ito's trip was a Gala
dinner held on April 28th in Washington D.C. The guest list for the dinner was
impressive. It included such individuals as President Grant and Secretary of State
Hamilton Fish. Ito spoke to this group of prominent Americans in English and his
speech was something of a mini-course on Japanese history. Ito explained that Japan
was an old country, more than 2,500 years old, but that during this time quote
its intercourse with foreign nations has been exceedingly limited. Ito went on to
note that during this long isolation Japan had fallen behind the rest of the
world. It had become despotic and backwards, but now a new government of
which Ito was a member was eager for Japan to join the brotherhood of nations.
And then Ito thanked the guests for their support in what he described as quote
putting in motion such reforms and improvements as shall place us upon a
footing equal to the best of nations. Now as a scholar who specializes in Japanese
history and culture I find Ito's speech fascinating for many reasons and one of
those reasons will probably surprise you because when I read Ito's account what I
find most striking is that well it's just wrong and I'm thinking especially
about his idea that Japan had been isolated for most of its history and
while that idea may be familiar to many Westerners the trouble is it's not true.
Now to be fair Ito was offering a reasonably accurate description of his own
experiences. In fact in Ito's childhood Japan was isolated. His was the first
generation in centuries to travel freely around the world learning about foreign
cultures mastering foreign technologies. In Ito's youth it was illegal under
penalty of death to leave Japan but in Ito's account that level of isolation
stretched back to the ancient past and that's not historically accurate. Here's
another distortion as representative of Japan seeking support for a new
government Ito had an obvious interest in flattering his American audience and
accordingly he emphasized Japan's relations with the West. In other words
when Ito spoke of Japanese isolation he was specifically referring to Japan's
isolation from the US and Europe but that's a problem because by arguing that
Japan's quote intercourse with foreign nations has been exceedingly limited
Ito was clearly ignoring a few important places like China and Korea and in
general the rest of Asia. I think that's a big omission. Now Ito's speech is just
one example of this strangely pervasive view of Japan as somehow isolated
sitting at the edge of the world disconnected from everything until in
1853 the US arrived in the form of Commodore Perry and his four black ships
and Perry like Prince Charming he awakens sleeping beauty and he introduced
Japan to the modern era. Now that image is quite flattering to the US and it was
certainly politically savvy for Ito talking to an American audience in 1871
to conjure up that image but it's wrong. So as we launch our exploration of
Japan's history and culture right out of the gate we need to ask ourselves what's
a better view of Japan. Well in this course we're going to take a more nuanced
view than the one that Ito offered his Western audience. Rather than a single
clear break between isolation and globalization we will treat Japanese
history in cycles. Yes there have been periods when Japan has been fairly
isolated but there have also been eras of extreme international and cosmopolitan
engagement. Ito was describing his own experience living through the transition
from a period of relative isolation to an era of global engagement. It was an
era that began in the 1850s and continues to this day. Today Japanese
people actively and freely travel around the world. Foreigners actively and
freely travel to Japan. Japan is deeply connected to the world economy and deeply
enmeshed in international relations. But this ongoing cosmopolitanism it isn't
Japan's first globalization in fact it's Japan's third globalization. So to set up
our tour of Japan's cultural history let's ask a big question. What were these
cycles of great globalization and then isolation? Okay to answer that let's take
a few minutes to move backwards through two millennia of Japanese history. Now
we've started with the modern era which we can call globalization phase 3. Working
backwards we come next to a period of relative isolation which began in the
1630s and came to an end during Ito Hiromumi's lifetime in the mid 1800s. It
was during this 200 year epoch that the Shoguns implemented a series of policies
drastically curtailing Japan's contacts with the rest of the world. Japanese
subjects were banned from traveling overseas. The Portuguese and the Spanish
were banned from Japan. The Dutch and Chinese traders who came to Japan were
restricted to Nagasaki. Information about the outside world was tightly
controlled. Books discussing Christianity were banned. But before that from the
1300s to the early 1600s Japan had been intensely engaged in world trade and
politics. In the 1400s for example Japan was actually a haven for pirates who
terrorized the coasts of Korea and China and then in the 1500s Japanese traders
spread across Asia. There were large and thriving merchant communities in what is
today Thailand, Vietnam, the Philippines and of course Korea and China. In the
1500s and 1600s Japanese warlords employed foreign advisors. The most famous
example is the English sailor William Adams who inspired the James Clavel
novel Shogun. And at the same time Japanese samurai were serving foreign
kings. The king of Thailand relied on Japanese expatriates as advisors and as
mercenaries. And with all these interactions you can't stop the
inevitable from happening. Men and women from different places met and they made
babies. In fact one of the greatest Chinese warriors of the 1600s,
Zhang Chonggong, the most stalwart defender of the Ming dynasty. He was the
son of a Chinese pirate and his Japanese wife in Nagasaki. And here's
another sign of those global times. In the 1590s there were probably more
Christians in Japan as a percentage of the population than there were in the
1950s. Think of that. So important were Catholic missions in the 16th century
that powerful Japanese warlords known as Daimyo sent ambassadors to the Vatican.
And just by the way the greatest Japanese warlord of that era, Toyotomi Hideyoshi,
he decided in 1592 that he was going to take over the world. He declared war on
China. He launched an invasion of Korea and for six years Hideyoshi's troops
fought Korean and Chinese troops on the Korean Peninsula. So with apologies to
Itohiro Bumi this was not an era of isolation. Okay we've just discussed
globalization phase two which ran roughly from the 1300s to the early 1600s. So now
let's go back. Let's go back one more cycle to a period of relative isolation.
One that ran from about 900 to about 1300. Now Japan was not completely isolated
during this period. In fact a few intrepid Buddhist monks went to China and
brought back what became Zen Buddhism. But overall this was not a period of great
international engagement. In fact most Japanese fighting during this period was
defensive. In the 1200s the Japanese fought desperately to stop the Mongol
Empire from conquering their country. As you may know the Mongols who briefly had
the world's largest empire, they conquered China, Korea, Vietnam, North
India, Russia and parts of the Middle East and Eastern Europe. They were
terrifying as mounted warriors. But they were much less effective when crossing
water and their amphibious attacks on Japan failed. This is a huge point of
Japanese pride. But my key point here is that in the 1200s the Japanese state was
not reaching out to the rest of the world. Instead it was primarily trying to
keep dangerous people away from Japan. So we can say that by intention Japan was
relatively isolated for the 400 years between 900 and 1300. But let's move one
more cycle backwards to the period from the 500s to around 900. And I would call
this globalization phase one. That ancient era of international involvement did
not include Europe. But it did include vast parts of Asia. For example in the
740s the Japanese emperor commissioned one of the biggest Buddhist statues in
the world. It's been rebuilt countless times but it still sits in the city of
Nara inside Todaiji temple. Anyway at the consecration ceremony for this statue
in 752 the eye of the Buddha was symbolically opened by a monk from
India. And there were thousands of guests in attendance from across Asia. Here
again we see an internationally connected not isolated Japan. In fact during
this first phase of globalization treasures from as far away as Persia
reached Japan. For example the imperial treasure house at Nara has some
strikingly modern looking Persian glass. Moreover Japan and the Korean peninsula
were deeply connected during globalization phase one. The official
records of the imperial house show extensive intermarriage between Japanese
and Korean noble families. Okay so we've tracked back in time from the present
to around 500. And we've seen that contrary to Ito Hirobumi's description
Japan has not always been isolated from the rest of the world. Rather Japanese
history has moved through three cycles of international engagement punctuated by
two cycles of relative isolation. Now I want you to keep these cycles in mind
for the duration of this course. As together we deepen and enrich our
understanding of Japan. And I'm calling our journey a cultural history because
we'll be tracing the deep interconnections between historical events
and the distinctive culture that developed in Japan over the course of two
millennia. And the tension I've just discussed the tension between isolation
and global involvement that creative tension has had a shaping influence upon
Japanese culture. We'll find it at work in the visual arts in woodblock prints for
example and we'll see how it plays out in Japanese theater, literature,
architecture, even film. So whether we're analyzing key characteristics of the
Japanese language or describing the rich history of Japanese food ways you
should always be on a lookout for the ways that Japanese culture is uniquely a
product of global engagement and isolationist impulses. All right keeping
that crucial point in mind let's go back even deeper into Japan's past back to
the earliest human habitation of Japan and the origins of Japan's rich culture.
So how did people first get to the islands of Japan?
Well primarily they migrated down from Siberia along land bridges during the
Ice Age. Although a few scholars would argue that there was also a
migration up from Southeast Asia. As for when these first migrations happened
the exact dates are a subject of intense debate. Some argue for dates as early
as 200,000 BCE. But there's a rough consensus that around 40,000 BCE during
the Ice Age Japan was connected to the Asian mainland by land bridges and that
humans came over by about 35,000 BCE. By about 12,000 BCE these early Japanese
peoples had not only stone tools but also simple pottery. And Japanese pottery
is some of the oldest in the world. It's older than the pottery from the
Fertile Crescent. And what's intriguing is that almost everywhere else in the
world pottery developed along with agriculture. But Japan developed a
vibrant pottery tradition thousands of years before agriculture. In fact this
pre-agricultural period in Japanese history gets its name from the pottery.
It's called the Joumon period because Joumon means rope pattern and the pots
were often decorated by pressing a rope into the wet clay. The Joumon era is
commonly defined as 12,000 BCE to about 300 BCE. And Joumon pottery and tools
give us some idea of what life and culture were like. Joumon people lived in
small communities, in pit dwellings with tent roofs, and they hunted and they
fished and they foraged. In short they were semi-sedentary hunter-gatherers.
Now rather than thinking of this Joumon population as a single Japanese
people, it's better to think of prehistoric Japan as a web of tribes,
tribes that alternately feuded and cooperated. Now Joumon period pottery is
quite beautiful and it includes not only practical and ceremonial dishes but
also fanciful depictions of people and animals. But the hunter-gatherers of the
Joumon period did not have metal tools. This was an advanced stone age people.
Now around 300 or 400 BCE life on the islands began to change with the
introduction of two striking new technologies, wet rice agriculture and
basic metallurgy. These were probably introduced by migrants from the Korean
Peninsula. But wait a second. In the fourth and fifth centuries BCE there were no
Ice Age land bridges. So how did continental people get to Japan? Well
let's take a moment to consider a map of Japan. Both to think about passages to
Japan and to reflect on the broader question I've been addressing today,
the question of isolation and connection. Now Japan is actually four large islands,
the main island of Honshu, Kyushu in the southwest, the small island of Shikoku,
and Hokkaido in the northeast. It also includes many small islands such as the
Ryukyu archipelago in the southwest. And many Japanese love to explain Japanese
distinctiveness by noting that their nation is a Shimaguni, an island country.
And that term island country reflects a sense of isolation. When we say no man is
an island we mean no man stands alone. And in Japanese island carries that
connotation as well. And many maps are actually designed so as to cut off Japan
from the rest of the world. It looks like a cluster of islands in the middle of
the Pacific. One common technique is to take the long Ryukyu archipelago and
place it as an inset map somewhere off the west coast of Japan. Now inset maps
are fine but that technique has the effect of making Japan look completely
isolated. The inset map blots out the Korean Peninsula and makes Japan look
like it's surrounded by endless expanses of open ocean. And that technique
actually makes it hard to answer our immediate question. How did prehistoric
peoples get to Japan? Because it seems like they must have crossed vast
expanses of open ocean. So let's fix the map. If you simply center a map on the
Sea of Japan, zoom out a little and rotate it. Putting the east at the top
Japan suddenly looks closely connected to the rest of Asia. Japan is still an
island country but it's surrounded by other islands. Off the coast of Nagasaki
the islands are so close that you can get from Japan to Korea without ever
losing sight of land. The maximum open stretch of water is about 40 miles. The
same is true in the far northeast. It's about 30 miles from the tip of Hokkaido
to Sakhalin Island and Sakhalin runs all the way up to the mouth of the Amur
River and the Amur River stretches thousands of miles across Asia. In the
far southwest the distances are a little longer. There's one big gap of about 130
miles but after that it's small hops all the way to Taiwan and from there you can
island hop to the Philippines. So from this perspective Japan doesn't seem
geographically isolated at all. Yes it's a cluster of islands but those islands
connect to other islands and island hopping or river cruising can get you to
Australia or to the Central Asian steppes. So while cultural and economic
isolation has always been possible in Japanese history it has never been
inevitable. Now in the fourth and fifth centuries BCE migrants from the Korean
Peninsula crossed the narrow stretch of sea by boat and brought with them the
technologies of rice farming and metal tool making. These people and
technologies arrived first in western Japan and then steadily spread across the
islands. Now the introduction of agriculture was once seen by historians
and anthropologists as an unparalleled human achievement. Agriculture is
basically the start of real civilization. But more recently researchers have
noted that agriculture doesn't automatically improve human lives because
even though it produces more food it also produces new and more diseases. But
that debate aside one thing is certain. Agriculture means that some people can
produce enough to feed others and this allows for more hierarchy for a bigger
and wealthier ruling elite. And also for specialization some people can devote
more time to skills like metallurgy and then they can trade for food. In Japan
with the rise of wet rice agriculture we see this exact phenomena. We see the
emergence of kingdoms with powerful elites farmers paying tribute or taxes
to support that elite. We found storehouses for grain, elaborate burial
mounds for rulers, the emergence of specialized craftsmen, metal workers. Now
the era in which this specialization and these new elites began to develop the
era that followed the Jomon period. It's known as the Yayoi period and it lasted
for about 600 years from around 300 BCE to around 300 CE. And Yayoi by the way is
the name of the neighborhood the Tokyo neighborhood where artifacts from the
era were first discovered. Now as Yayoi chieftains grew more powerful they were
buried in more and more elaborate fashion commonly in larger and more complex
tombs. And therefore historians and archaeologists refer to the period from
about 250 or 300 CE to about 587 CE as the tomb period. That's based on those
burial sites. We can also think of the tomb period as an era of ancient
chieftains. These chieftains were much more powerful than earlier Jomon leaders
but they were much less powerful than the coming generation of Japanese rulers.
Now it's unclear how ethnically distinct this new ruling elite was from earlier
Jomon people. Was the ruling elite largely new immigrants or did the newer
migrants intermarry and intermingle with earlier settlers? And did they then
create a new ruling elite in the process? How many people migrated and in how
many waves? These issues are subject to ongoing debate. But fortunately we do have
those elaborate burial sites and as elite burial became more lavish in the
third and the fourth and the fifth centuries nobles were buried with
terracotta replicas of the things they enjoyed in life. These statues are called
Hanewa and a remarkable range of Hanewa have survived. Dancers and shamans.
Wooden boats where we can still see the details of the fittings and the stays.
Horses with the details of the saddle and the bits and the ornaments still
visible. A falcon which we know is used for hunting because it's resting on
someone's arm. And then we have this Hanewa replica of a soldier. You can see
his sword and you can see was presumably a leather vest with metal rivets. And in
fact many of these Hanewa depict organic materials like wood and leather
that have long since decayed. But they survive symbolically in these terracotta
models. And that makes the Hanewa both beautiful and valuable for
understanding society in the late Yayoi period and the tomb period. Now Japan in
that era was still a pre-literate society. The earliest Japanese writing is
from the 400s but we do have continental records. Primarily Chinese records of
contacts between the Japanese islands and ancient continental kingdoms. These are
mostly scattered references in classical texts. But one fascinating account comes
from the late third century from something called the Wei Ji or the
records of Wei. That was the official government chronicle of the Chinese Wei
dynasty. The chronicle contains a detailed account of a Wei Chinese
ambassador's visit to the ancient Japanese kingdom of Yamatai. Now we're not
sure where Yamatai was. It was probably somewhere in northern Kyushu and we're
not even sure if the ancient name Yamatai is related to the modern word
Yamato which is another name for Japan. But according to this third century
Chinese chronicle the Japanese islands were undergoing consolidation. They had
been divided into hundreds of kingdoms but they had consolidated to about 30.
And one of these 30 kingdoms was Yamatai. Now according to the ambassador's report
in the Wei Ji Yamatai was ruled by a shaman queen named Pimiko. She had some
sort of special direct connection to the gods and the ambassador described this
as magic and sorcery. Pimiko was attended by a thousand female attendants but only
one man that was her brother and her brother helped her run the country.
So Yamatai was ruled by a queen but almost no one saw her and the queen's brother spoke for her.
Now given that the most revered Japanese deity is a goddess the sun goddess it's
fascinating to find a Chinese envoy describe a shamanistic matriarchy
indirectly controlled by the queen's brother. At any rate there's an archaeological site on
Kyushu in Yoshinogari that's actually pretty close to the ambassador's description of Yamatai.
But there's one problem when Pimiko died she was supposedly buried with thousands of attendants.
The description in the Wei Ji sounds like a huge live burial but no one has found anything
like that in Japan. Instead archaeologists have found lots of clay figurines those hanewa.
So maybe the ambassador thought the clay models were going to be replaced with living people
or maybe the way envoy simply made it up.
But the general attitude conveyed in the Wei Ji is significant. For the Wei Ji
envoy the kingdom of Yamatai was utterly inferior to China. Yamatai sent slaves to China as tribute
and in return the emperor of China sent back bronze mirrors and other products of advanced
civilization and what's more Yamatai was ruled by a witch. And that attitude that's a good starting
point for the rest of our course because that Chinese condescension that was part of the motivation
that drove later Japanese kings to build more powerful kingdoms. By the time we reached the
500s Japanese rulers had begun to figure out why continental kingdoms were more powerful.
Those continental kingdoms could write they could make powerful weapons from bronze and iron.
So what did Japanese rulers decide to do? Well of course they imported those ideas
and that massive importation of continental ideas that's something we can legitimately call
ancient globalization. And as we'll see the goal and the eventual outcome of that globalization
was a kingdom in Japan that could describe itself as China's equal instead of a barbarian kingdom
at the edge of the civilized world.
