Today, we're going to talk about one of the most misunderstood, yet famous aspects of
Japanese culture, the origins of Bushido. As you may know, Bushido means the way of the warrior.
The suffix DO means way. So, for example, Judo literally means the gentle way.
Now, the topic of Bushido is so rife with misinformation that one of my colleagues
wrote an article called Bushido or Bull. And while there is such a thing as Bushido,
let's start by clearing away some of the bull. For example, strictly speaking, the term Bushido
was obscure until the 1890s. And that's about 20 years after the samurai class had been dissolved.
In fact, the term Bushido was first used in a book written in English by a Japanese
Christian who was trying to explain Japan to Americans. So, strictly speaking, the samurai
estate never practiced Bushido because the term was obscure until after the dissolution of the
warrior class. Now, being slightly less strict on the exact wording, if we accept the terms
Bushi, which means warrior, and Budo, which means the way of combat, and Shido, which means
the way of the gentleman, then we can conclude that people who were talking about Budo and Shido
and Bushi, they were talking about Bushido even if they didn't use that exact word.
But even with that allowance, we are left with a paradox. Samurai began writing about
the way of the samurai, Bushido, primarily during peacetime.
The Tokugawa Shogunate had suppressed the insurrection at Shimabara in 1638.
And after that, there was no fighting for over 200 years. But there was writing about
samurai culture. So, almost all our descriptions of warrior conduct were written after warfare had
stopped. And that's one of the striking tensions in virtually all works on Bushido. They are
nostalgic. They are looking back to an age that is slipping away. Or they confront the paradox
of warriors at peace, and they try to find a new role for the samurai. So, here's an example.
Miyamoto Musashi's famous work, The Book of Five Rings. It's a guide to strategy,
and especially swordsmanship. And Musashi was indeed a seasoned warrior, a great swordsman and
tactician. But the book was written around 1645, when Miyamoto Musashi was about 60. He had fought
on the losing side in the wars between the Toyotomi and the Tokugawa clans. And thereafter,
he had wandered Japan as a ronin, a masterless samurai. However, after 60 duels, Musashi became
known as a master swordsman. And he was politically rehabilitated. He fought on the Tokugawa side
at Shimabara, and he became a swordsmanship instructor for Kumamoto Domain. By the 1640s,
he suffered from a variety of ailments. And according to some accounts, he retreated to
a mountain cave to practice Buddhist meditation and write The Book of Five Rings.
So, the text is a combination of memoir and manual. It's full of practical advice on how to
duel, such as, don't try to jump in a swamp. But these are mixed with somewhat mystical aphorisms,
such as, compose your body and mind in a straightforward way so that you can bend and warp
the bind of your opponent, thereby achieving victory by twisting and distorting his mind.
Now, what's intriguing about a text, like The Book of Five Rings, is that even the practical advice
on dueling is largely impractical, because neither the Shogunate nor the Daimyo were willing to
tolerate that sort of lawlessness, the lawlessness that comes with vendettas and feuding. In fact,
in the early modern period, both the Shogunate and the Domains relied on a principle called
kinka ryo seibai, which dictated that in case of a fight, both parties could be punished for
disturbing the peace. So, practically speaking, virtually no one applied Miyamoto's lessons
outside of a martial arts dojo, a training place, because by the time he wrote The Book of Five
Rings, there was no officially sanctioned violence. Another book that's sometimes described as a
handbook for samurai is Yamamoto Tsunetomo's work Hagakure, that's sometimes translated as
Hidden in the Leaves. If you would do a basic web search on Hagakure or even just read the blurbs
on the back of a modern paperback edition, you will find it described as the essential book
of the samurai. It's a manual for the samurai class. It's a cornerstone of samurai literature.
And the only problem with these descriptions is that they are completely wrong,
just completely wrong. Hagakure is not a manual, it's not a long revered guide to samurai practice,
and it's not an insight into how most samurai lived. So, what is it? Well, basically Hagakure is
sort of a grouchy and petulant memoir and a lot of it is deeply contradictory.
Let me give you an example. The most famous line in Hagakure is found in the opening chapter.
The Way of the Warrior is Found in Death. This is widely quoted as central to samurai thought.
It's a cornerstone of the samurai code and the problem with that interpretation is that
unlike Miyamoto Musashi, Yamamoto Tsunetomo had no practical combat experience of any kind.
First, he was born in 1659 after warfare had ended. He never saw anything remotely resembling
combat. Second, he was ascribed by profession. That is not a profession with a big risk of
sudden death. There weren't a lot of deadly calligraphic accidents, even in wartime.
And third, he was mostly unemployed. His work as a scribe was erratic. And although he did have
personal contact with his lord, his daimyo, he never held an important position for more than a
year or two. So Hagakure is the morose late life reflections of an armchair general.
In fact, what's most interesting about Hagakure is how Yamamoto is deeply nostalgic for a world
that had already ended before his birth. He's saying goodbye to an age of which he was never
really a part. For example, Yamamoto notes that men are getting too womanly. Samurai get together
and they talk about sex and clothes and money. Whereas in the good old days, samurai were frugal
and tidy. And every morning they would scrub and groom themselves. They'd make sure their
armor was polished so that if they died in battle, they would leave behind a nice smelling and good
looking corpse. None of this makes any sense in the early 1700s when Yamamoto is dictating the
reminiscences that would become Hagakure. In fact, Hagakure isn't even a reminiscence. It's
nostalgia for what Yamamoto imagined his father's world was like or maybe his grandfather's world
was like. Now this eccentric book was largely forgotten for two centuries. The first modern
edition of Hagakure was published in 1900. And the introduction notes that it is an extremely
rare book. It's very difficult to find a copy. And even after the publication of this edition,
in the first decade of the 20th century, a total of only three Japanese language books
mentioned Hagakure either in the table of contents or in the book title. But
in the 1940s, the number of books discussing Hagakure soared to 35 with 24 books in 1942 alone.
Do you see the pattern? Hagakure really only becomes the book of the samurai
during the Pacific War. In fact, interest peaks right after Pearl Harbor.
So it actually has very little to do with samurai tradition. If by samurai tradition,
we mean what samurai actually did and thought. Instead, it's a good example of what the Japanese
army thought Japanese soldiers should think samurai did. So all in all, I find Hagakure
a rather perverse work. But there is a sense in which Yamamoto's work is historically valuable.
And this is because his frustration is part of a larger cultural shift. He was struggling to
understand how a samurai should behave in the absence of war. And so the quixotic passages
of Yamamoto's work are actually quite revealing. The book contains many strange and even confusing
jumps from the need for courage and resolution to a passage about how to properly receive a letter
and then a detailed discussion of how not to yawn. And I think that confusion is the best thing
about the book because by the late 1600s and the early 1700s, samurai were genuinely wondering
what they were supposed to be doing. They faced a truly significant question. How do you maintain
a warrior class in the absence of war? Now, a much better answer to this question came from
a scholar named Yamaga Soko. Yamaga was an influential Tokugawa thinker. He wrote about
Bushi and Shido. But unlike Yamamoto Tsunetomo, he was taken seriously in his own lifetime.
Yamaga was born in 1622. And he studied with one of the leading Confucian scholars of his day.
And he turned to Confucianism to explain why the samurai, as a warrior elite,
should stay in power even in the absence of war. Now, in an ideal society, in an ideal Confucian
society, the Chinese vision was that the country is ruled by the emperor and administered by an
impartial landed gentry. And because they are landed, they have the time to study. And because
they study the Confucian classics, they are moral. And so they administer the realm and advise the
emperor with wisdom and impartiality. So, who might in Japan be the counterparts to this noble
gentry? Well, of course, it's the samurai. The samurai used to be warriors. And they once ruled
as a warrior class. But now, during peacetime, it seems like they have nothing to do. However,
according to Yamaga, it's a noble Confucian nothing to do.
Samurai reflect on great Confucian moral problems. Like, how can I be loyal to my Lord,
so loyal that my own servants follow my example and are loyal to me? Or how can I be such a devoted
son to my parents that my children are dutiful based on my example? And in Yamaga's view,
since samurai are thinking about this so often, they themselves become intensely moral. And therefore,
it's only natural that they should be the ruling class in Japan, because who else could be so
impartial in justice and in administration? Now, this is a clever intellectual move.
In Hagakura, Yamamoto's theory is that in peacetime, a scribe should always be ready for
death in combat, which is very strange. Whereas Yamaga says, use your leisure as an opportunity
for moral cultivation, and that way you can earn your elite status. And Yamaga thought was deeply
influential. Although, in practice, being a moral exemplar could be quite challenging for the samurai.
In fact, here's a stickler. Yamaga elevated the virtue of loyalty. But how do you show great
loyalty in peacetime? Well, this was a question that the samurai of the early modern period really
wrestled with. And nowhere was the thorniness of this question more apparent than in the famous
vendetta of the 47 Ronin. This was a shocking historical event. It engaged all the major scholars
of the day. And as soon as the censors would allow, it was turned into a kabuki play. And it's never
left popular culture. There have been at least 39 film versions, starting in 1908, and at least 34
TV versions of the story, and also an opera and a ballet. So what's the story? Well, let's start
with the historical event. In 1701, the Tokugawa Shogun in Edo was preparing to receive an envoy
from the emperor in Kyoto, bearing New Year's greetings. This event was entirely ceremonial.
But since it involved the emperor and the shogun, correct protocol was essential. A shoguno officer
named Kira Yoshinaka was in charge of protocol. And the daimyo, Asano Naganori, was in the receiving
party. Now, depending on your version of the events, either Lord Kira was corrupt and cruel,
and he expected to receive gifts, basically bribes from Lord Asano, or the alternative version was
that Asano was violent and uncouth. But in either case, the two men did not get along.
And towards the end of the multi-day reception of the imperial envoys at the Shogun's castle,
Asano flew into a rage, and he tried to kill Kira. He cut him across the face,
but he was restrained before he could kill him. Now, Lord Kira recovered, but Asano's conduct
was so outrageous that he was ordered to commit seppuku, ritual suicide, and his entire territory
was seized by the shogunate as punishment. His lineage lost their land, and all his samurai
now became Ronin. But here is where the story gets really interesting. Kira suspected that
Asano's samurai would try to avenge him. But Asano's men were patient. They waited
almost two years, and then in the last days of 1702, the soon-to-be-famous 47 Ronin attacked
Kira's compound in Edo. They killed him, they took his head, they went to their Lord's grave,
they presented the head to their Lord, and then they surrendered to the police.
Now, the vendetta posed a problem for Tokugawa Law, because the samurai were both heroes
and criminals. At criminals, they had committed murder, and what's worse, they had killed a
shogunate officer. But as heroes, they had upheld the highest principle of samurai morality.
They had remained loyal to their Lord even when there was no chance of worldly gain.
They were loyal for the sake of loyalty itself.
And the shogunate took two months to debate what to do with these Ronin,
even though the details of the case were not in question.
In the end, the shogun ruled that the Ronin should commit seppuku,
that was the most honorable form of execution. And the general consensus was that the 47 Ronin
had struck an exact balance between their duty to avenge their Lord and their obligation to respect
the laws of their Lord's Lord, the shogun. So the incident became a famous example of Tokugawa
samurai loyalty. There were, however, dissents on both sides.
Yamamoto Tsunetomo, the author of Hagakure, insisted that the Ronin had been too cautious.
What if Lord Kira had died while the Ronin were waiting? It would have been better,
he insisted, to attack immediately, even if there had been no chance of killing Lord Kira.
A futile attack would have been better than the Ronin's caution.
And that opinion is a great example of why Hagakure should be read as an eccentric work.
Another account critical of the Ronin accused them of ambition. Sure, their vendetta looked like
martyrdom, but they surrendered to the police instead of immediately committing seppuku once
their vendetta was accomplished. So clearly they were hoping for a pardon, and then maybe a great
job. So they were actually careerists. A completely opposite opinion was that the Ronin were exemplary
because of how they carefully separated their personal grievance from respect for public order.
They reportedly had men at the ready to put out fires, just in case Lord Kira's mansion was set
ablaze during the attack. So they were determined to uphold the spirit of shogunate law maintaining
public peace. And some even quietly grumbled that the entire incident was set in motion by the shogunate
itself. Because one of the key principles of Tokugawa law was Kinka Ryosei. Both parties to an
altercation are guilty of disturbing the peace. So what about Lord Kira? Remember, if he really
provoked Asano to fury with cruel words, then that made him a party to the dispute. True,
he didn't draw his own weapon, but shouldn't he have been punished in some way?
Now, as I mentioned, this incident went viral, so to speak, and playwrights tried to dramatize it
almost immediately. The first version that got past the censors is from 1748. It was originally
for Bunraku, puppet theater, but it was quickly adapted for Kabuki. And ever since then, the
incident has been a source of fascination and inspiration to Japanese artists and audiences alike.
So the story of the 47 Ronin set up iconic standards for samurai behavior.
Rave, stoic, self-sacrificing, even violent when needed, but only as violent as absolutely
required out of respect for the broader social order. But it's all for theoretical and dramatic
power. That vision of the samurai is not especially good policy, because by the 1700s, most daimyo
were not especially interested in spectacular shows of loyalty. On the contrary, after several
generations of peace, they were primarily interested in maintaining high levels of
conspicuous consumption. The former rivalries of the battlefield had become rivalries of wealth.
So daimyo wanted samurai who could arrange a steady or even increasing stream of income.
But without oppressive taxation, that might provoke peasants into revolt.
So samurai sought to serve their lords by introducing alternative crops, things beyond rice,
things that could be sold in Osaka, or Edo, cotton, sugar, wax fruit, anything that might bring in
more revenue. Now the paradox of Tokugawa life is that at some level everyone knew this. But in
order to distinguish samurai from merchants, it was somehow essential to elevate samurai service.
Now at the margins, some thinkers began saying that samurai were basically employees.
They worked for their daimyo, but few people wanted to say this out loud. So for the samurai,
the early modern period was a time of change and even social ambiguity. And to illustrate that,
I'd like to close with one of the most remarkable examples of the way the samurai class adapted to
new realities. So let's travel to the domain of Yonezawa in northern Japan, where for almost
three generations in the early 1600s, everything went wrong for the Uesugi House.
In the 1590s, the Uesugi were at the peak of their power, with holdings of over one million
koku. Daimyo measured their wealth in terms of the annual rice harvest, and one million koku
is the equivalent of about five million bushels of rice. The Uesugi were also members of the
council entrusted with advising Toyotomi Hideyoshi's heir. But because they opposed Tokugawa Ieyasu,
they were reduced from a million koku to 300,000 koku. Then in the 1660s, the Uesugi daimyo died
suddenly of appendicitis. And that was without having secured Tokugawa approval of his will.
So by Tokugawa law, he was in testing. And the Tokugawa almost seized all Uesugi land.
But in the end, they were reduced to about 150,000 koku, almost a 90% drop from their peak.
So for generations and by Tokugawa design, the Uesugi were financially strained. When they lost
their land, they lost their means of supporting their samurai. And while they did shrink the
number of vassals, they always had too many. Just too many samurai mouths to feed. And so they
struggled. Until the late 1700s, when the Uesugi decided to bring a dark secret into the open,
samurai were working on the side. Samurai men and women were doing handicrafts in their homes.
Now, as shocking as this revelation might have been, the Yonezawa government decided to formally
embrace this new reality. They set up an official system where samurai households could get looms.
And they told merchants to let samurai sell their cloths discreetly, entering through a
side entrance so they wouldn't be seen buying and selling like commoners. The government also
issued an edict declaring that it was not shameful for samurai families to have buy
employments. It was noble and essential. The only thing that was shameful was weaving badly.
In fact, the Yonezawa government explicitly invoked samurai honor in promoting weaving.
They said, your samurai ancestors, they served us in battle, and they did so with honor. And today,
you can serve us by weaving. And the quality of the cloth that you sell to the government office,
that is a measure of your honor. And so these reforms led to something remarkable in Yonezawa.
The domain became famous for a distinctive type of cloth, a blend of silk and linen.
It was sold with a special seal, genuine Yonezawa cloth, except no substitutes.
And samurai households in Yonezawa became known as their lord's weavers.
Now, the extent of this transformation in Yonezawa was unique, but it points to the great
flexibility of the notion of samurai. The term samurai originally meant warrior,
but that began to change in the 1600s with the Tokugawa peace. And as we've seen, warriors began
to define themselves in terms of loyalty and self-sacrifice rather than actual combat.
And the leaders of Yonezawa pushed this transformation to its limits.
Samurai were told that samurai honor no longer had anything to do with combat or military valor.
It could be any kind of service to your lord, even commerce. So long as it was noble.
Now, in the early 1800s, the notion that samurai could be weavers was radical.
And it was the result of economic hardship. But two generations later, those radical reforms
in Yonezawa looked prescient. Because in the 1870s, a new government eliminated the hereditary income
of all Japan's samurai and told them all to find a new way to serve.
Now, many were lost in that new world. And that's the subject of an upcoming lecture.
But the samurai of Yonezawa, they had a big head start.
