Japanese Buddhism is almost as old as Japanese civilization, or at least as old as written
civilization. And that's because some of the same people who brought writing to Japan,
early scribes, were also Buddhist monks. Chinese sources suggest that Buddhism was introduced
to Japan in the 460 CE, although the more widely accepted date is 552 CE. That's when the king of
Bekche sent a mission to Japan, a mission that included monks, nuns, and Buddhist texts.
In either case, whether it's the 460s or the 550s or somewhere in between,
Japanese Buddhism is about as old as the earliest written records in Japan.
So what was Buddhism, and why was it appealing in ancient Japan?
Well, by the time Buddhism got to Japan, it was already a millennium old.
Buddhism had emerged from Hinduism in North India in roughly the 5th century BCE.
The exact historical origins of Buddhism are much murkier than those of Christianity, or Islam,
or Confucianism. But Buddhism spread up into China, and then the Korean Peninsula,
and by the time it reached Japan, it was a mature religion that had already split into
multiple sects. And those sects disagreed on some key points of doctrine.
But across all those ancient sects, we can find a few core ideas that were held in common.
First, Buddhism assumes reincarnation. You will be reborn after you die,
which sounds great. But in Buddhism, this is actually a bad thing, because ordinary lives
are full of decay and loss. Here's a quick rundown of why reincarnation stinks.
Imagine every possible measure of success. Money, for example. Certainly money is nice,
but you can't take it with you. So you spend your life getting rich, and then you lose it all.
Okay, what about power? Well, power almost seems to have an air of immortality about it.
We remember powerful people after their deaths. Although that's not really true.
How many of you can name 10 Egyptian pharaohs, 10 Hittite kings, 10 secretaries of the treasury?
These were really powerful people to their contemporaries. And today, even for a highly
educated audience, they are forgotten. But what about love? Who could argue against
loving and being loved? Well, if you are a deeply loving person, you love your spouse,
your kids, your friends, and then you have the pleasure of watching them all get old,
get sick, and die. Unless you get sick and die first, which is possibly the better option.
So, Buddhism makes the remarkable observation that reincarnation is actually a trap.
Even if you are a deeply mortal person, you are stuck in an endless cycle of disappointment and
loss. So from a Buddhist perspective, you actually don't want to be reborn. You want to transcend
the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth. And that transcendence is called nirvana.
So the goal of Buddhism then is to attain nirvana, to stop being reborn, to reach an alternate plane
of being that is beyond the vicissitudes of human desire. And those who attain nirvana
are known as Buddhas, enlightened beings. In Buddhism, there is more than one Buddha.
There is the historical Buddha, known as Gautama Siddhartha, who was born in North India in the
fifth century BCE. But there were Buddhas before that, and there will be Buddhas in the future.
And they all exist in a plane, in a realm that's beyond our comprehension.
Now, if that sounds too ethereal, you are not alone. And in practice, many Buddhists throughout
history have been quite content with half steps. So while the ultimate goal might be achieving
nirvana, in practice, many people have been quite content with more modest goals, like maybe
a few hundred really good reincarnations, maybe richer and more handsome, more powerful each time.
And then I'll get around to attaining nirvana and become a Buddha.
Many of you probably know Saint Augustine's famous prayer, grant me chastity and continence,
but not yet. Well, many Buddhists think the same about nirvana.
And as we'll see, Buddhism has room for those more modest expectations.
So what do you do as a Buddhist to move along spiritually, first towards a better rebirth,
and then ultimately towards nirvana? Well, for a better rebirth, the rules are unremarkable.
Don't lie, don't steal, don't cheat, don't murder, don't be mean to other people or other
living things, give money to Buddhist temples. No big surprise is there.
What's more intriguing is how Buddhism treats the higher stages of wisdom,
the path from being a good ordinary person to a truly enlightened being.
One of the central tenets of Buddhism is that desire leads us astray and makes us crazy.
We all want money and power and love, and we all secretly dread losing those things.
And we all secretly know we are going to lose them when we die. So at some level,
we all know that we are rushing around doing pointless things.
And in Buddhism, inner peace comes from accepting the transience of everything,
accepting that we will lose everything and therefore not trying to hold on.
But Buddhism goes further. If everything is transient and desire leads you to ignore that,
then desire blinds you to reality. It's not just that desire makes you do stupid things,
it stops you from perceiving reality. What our senses tell us about the world,
what we think is real, well that's actually just a mix of our hopes and fears. The real world is
actually something completely different. Some of this thinking appears second hand
in the Star Wars movies. George Lucas, the creator of Star Wars, calls himself a Buddhist Methodist,
and he made the Jedi Knights a bit like Buddhist monks. So remember when Luke has
crashed his X-wing in a swamp, and Yoda teaches Luke that with a clear mind you can lift a spaceship
out of the swamp, and Luke doesn't believe his eyes. And Yoda says, that's your problem.
Believing your eyes. Instead you need to use the force. Well that last part, use the force,
is just a Star Wars version of what Buddhists would call the power of a clear mind.
But both for Buddhist monks and Jedi Knights, our senses are a bad guide to reality. We need
Buddhist insight to know what's really real, and many things that seem logical at first
are just symptoms of an unenlightened, distracted mind. Which brings us to an important question.
How do you get that wonderfully clear mind? How do you attain enlightenment and become a Buddha?
Well, in ancient Japan, that path to Buddhist wisdom was overwhelmingly associated with monastic
life, monasteries, and abbeys. Monks and nuns separated themselves from worldly desire.
They ate a Spartan diet. They avoided animal products in order to avoid killing other sentient
beings. They abstained from sex, alcohol, and most worldly temptations. They also meditated,
and studied sutras, transcriptions of lectures by wise monks, and by Gautama Siddhartha.
Now, as I've noted, Buddhism arrived in Japan sometime around the 6th century.
And for the next three centuries, it was actively promoted by Japanese rulers.
But why did rulers find this essentially monastic tradition so appealing? Why did they promote it?
Well, first, promoting Buddhism was just part of what civilized kings did in East Asia.
They did it in the Tang dynasty, they did it in Tang China, and in Korea,
and Japanese monarchs followed suit. So as part of the Ritziryo state, the imperial court ordered
the construction of monasteries and abbeys, and the printing of Buddhist texts. But in addition to
just looking civilized, ancient Japanese monarchs hoped that the promotion of Buddhism would win
them divine protection. Remember, what seems obvious to the unenlightened mind is actually an
illusion. And what seems impossible to the unenlightened mind is actually easy for someone
approaching Buddhahood. And at the risk of invoking Star Wars again, things that seem like magic to
the pedestrian mind, well, that's just what Jedi do. They make things fly around with their minds.
So for ancient Japanese rulers, promoting Buddhism, supporting Buddhist clergy,
could seem like almost magical protection.
This idea is explicit in texts like the Sutra of the Golden Light.
According to that text, the Buddha was delivering an explanation of the path to enlightenment.
And when he finished four great kings who were listening took a vow. They pledged that if any
future king propagated and studied this Buddhist teaching, they would give him assistance by freeing
his land from pestilence, by giving him and his subjects longevity, by making his soldiers strong,
and by bringing harmony to his lands. And then the Buddha responded by saying,
wonderful. And in addition to your vows of protection, studying this sutra and disseminating it will
also help the king by making his ministers work together in harmony, making his officials
generous rather than covetous, and winning respect for his government.
So this sutra guarantees good things in two ways. The first is quasi-magical.
Heavenly kings will protect you. The second is a result of sutra study. It makes the government
ministers moral, honest, and compassionate, and that leads to better government.
Now, as a Japanese king in the 600s and 700s, you'd probably take one or the other or both,
but those rulers seem to have been more impressed by the former, divine protection.
For example, one of the oldest temples in Japan, Yaku Shiji, was founded in Nara around 680,
after Empress Jito had fallen ill. Emperor Temmu prayed for her recovery, and he took a Buddhist
vow, and he founded Yaku Shiji temple with 100 monks, and then of course Empress Jito recovered.
And in a similar spirit, Emperor Shomu, who commissioned the Great Temple of Toodaiji,
in the mid-700s, he ordered the construction of a temple in each provincial capital
in order to stop a series of crop failures and plagues. And according to the imperial
proclamation, Emperor Shomu ordered that, quote, every province should erect one golden image of
the Buddha 16 feet in height, and write out one copy of the sutra of perfect wisdom.
Well, what was the result of these imperial orders? Well, remarkably because Shomu promoted
Buddhism in this way, quote, the wind and rain were orderly, and the five crops grew abundantly.
In fact, since the Buddha statues worked so well, Shomu then ordered that each province erect a
seven-story pagoda and write out a copy of the sutra of golden light and the lotus sutra.
Certainly that would bring continued prosperity to Japan. So we can make three key observations
about the earliest forms of Buddhism in Japan. First, it was essentially a monastic rather than
a popular religious movement. Second, its spread was catalyzed by direct support from Japanese
rulers. And third, it was attractive to these rulers largely because of its
presumed power to protect and sustain the state. Now, this ancient state-supported
Buddhism was important in legitimizing the ancient state, and it was certainly crucial
for spreading Buddhism across Japan. But it had its weaknesses. For example, because they were
overwhelmingly dependent on state support, many of the temples supported by the imperialists
in Nara simply disappeared when the court moved to Kyoto. And even more important,
early Buddhism in Japan offered remarkably little for the laity to do, except provide for the monks
and be protected by their prayers. So it's not surprising that two new forms of Buddhism began
to emerge in the 9th and 10th centuries. Shingon Buddhism, an esoteric form of Buddhism,
and then a more popular form known as Pure Land Buddhism. Now, these two schools are very different
from each other, but they are even more different from earlier state-sponsored Buddhism because
they were both concerned with engaging the laity, both focused on having people do things to help
themselves. Instead of focusing on royalty who could protect Japan by building temples,
these new forms focused on what ordinary people could do to have a more auspicious rebirth.
And unlike the earliest forms of state-sponsored Buddhism, both Shingon and Pure Land Buddhism
are very much alive in Japan today. So let's consider Shingon first.
Shingon was founded by the monk Kukai, who's often considered Japan's first important Buddhist
writer. Kukai traveled to China in the early 800s as part of a government-sponsored mission. He
studied there and was deeply impressed by esoteric Buddhism. The esoteric sects emphasize that
advanced teachings needed to be kept secret from everyone except advanced students. Certainly,
there were ceremonies and services that anyone could observe, but many deeper truths required
extensive prior training and initiations. You can't just skip ahead to lesson 14.
In that way, Kukai's Shingon school is similar to Tibetan Buddhism.
And at the core of Shingon thought is the idea that Buddhist truth is difficult to apprehend.
Kukai argued that words alone simply cannot capture Buddhist insight.
So he took what I would call a multimedia approach.
Shingon Buddhism relies on three tools — mudras, mantras, and mandalas.
Mudras, called inge in Japanese, are symbolic hand gestures. These are often depicted in Buddhist
art, and these gestures are associated with various virtues. For example, a basic mudra
is the gesture of hands resting in each other with thumbs touching. This symbolizes a correct
attitude and a deep state of meditation. By contrast, the gesture of the right palm up and
the left palm down symbolizes an absence of fear. There is a legend that the Buddha stopped a rampaging
elephant with this gesture. So mudras are almost a Buddhist sign language.
If you look at a Buddhist statue, the position of the hands is actually a link to the Buddhist
liturgy. But for Shingon, in addition, it's useful to think of mudras as a physical way of
expressing ideas. Remember that some Buddhist truths are said to be so sublime, so powerful,
that they're effectively beyond words. So we can only apprehend them through physical sensation,
or through the physical representation of the mudras.
After mudras, the second tool in Shingon Buddhism is the use of mantras. In fact,
the Japanese word for mantra is Shingon, which in English means true word. It's the name of the sect.
Amantra is a word or phrase that has a metaphysical connection to Buddhist truth. So while conscious
language, with grammar rules and dictionaries, is of only limited use in attaining enlightenment,
Kukai taught that one could use the secret true language, the ultimate language of the cosmos,
to move towards truth. So it doesn't matter if you understand Amantra in Shingon Buddhism.
If you chant it, or hear it chanted, part of your understanding, your enlightenment,
will be just the non-interpretive experience of the words. Then you might have it explained,
and then chant it. And again, this is an esoteric tradition. The truth unfolds in stages.
The third tool Kukai introduced was the use of mandaras. Mandaras are extremely detailed
paintings, or sometimes groups of sculptures, showing the relationship of hundreds of Buddha's
and sages. And in Shingon meditative practice, the goal is to hold this totality in one's mind.
For example, one of the most revered mandaras in the Shingon tradition is the so-called
womb mandala. And it's incredibly rich and detailed, with literally dozens of different
manifestations of the Buddha and Buddhist sages. Just the center of the mandala has
nine different aspects of the Buddha. In the middle is Dainichi, the most ethereal and intangible of
all the Buddhas. Dainichi is the Buddha of all places and all times, the Buddha of the past,
the present, and the future. Dainichi actually means great sun, and he was therefore associated
with amitarasu, the sun goddess. That's one great example of how Buddhism and Shintoism coexisted
for centuries. Now, in the mandala, just below Dainichi is Amida, the Buddha of the past. As we'll
see in a moment, there emerged an entire sect of Buddhism devoted to Amida. Now, below Dainichi's
right knee is Kanon. Kanon almost became a Buddha, but he heard the suffering of less
enlightened humans, and so he stopped just short of full Buddhahood. And so he's in a special space.
He's almost a Buddha, but he's also attuned to human suffering because he didn't fully achieve
nirvana and therefore didn't fully leave our human level of existence. Now, if all of this sounds
impossibly complex and abstract, well, guess what? That's kind of the point. Shingon Buddhism
revels in that complexity. If it were easy to explain, it wouldn't be Shingon Buddhism.
But imagine that your meditation practice involves trying to keep an image this complex
and rich in your mind, not just all of these Buddhas, but all the details of the robes of
each Buddha, the mudras of each Buddha. So clearly, Shingon Buddhism is strikingly different from Zen.
And then the goal is to clear your mind to think about nothing. In Shingon, you push out the
distractions of the secular world by putting in complex images of the celestial world.
Now, because Shingon Buddhism was so abstract, so demanding, it's still assumed that only monks
could fully master these abstract insights and move to higher levels of enlightenment.
But this vision of deep and profound truths was compelling enough
that Shingon was able to survive without state support. Wealthy patrons agreed to support Shingon,
and in return they could watch Shingon ceremonies. And if you ever get the chance to observe a Shingon
Goma fire ritual, do so. The chanting and the huge flames have a transinducing power.
It's compelling even if you don't understand a word of the chanting, which again is part of the
point of Shingon. We need to add mystical experiences to our basic sense of reason.
And Shingon patrons could also be buried in Shingon cemeteries, and that ensured a more
auspicious rebirth. And as a result, the Shingon spiritual center at Mount Koya, Koya-san,
is a truly remarkable place. First, it's beautiful. It's a forested mountain temple complex
with huge ancient trees. But it's also a microcosm of Japanese history, because the Shingon graveyard
is a sort of who's who of Japanese history. Starting in the 800s and continuing to the present
day, there are gravesites for some of the most powerful and storied families in Japanese history,
including imperial courtiers and great warlords, and then modern institutional gravesites,
like the corporate memorial sites for the Nissan Motor Corporation and the Japan Professional
Photographers Society. That one is easy to spot. There are photos etched in the granite.
So while the ideas of Shingon Buddhism are indeed incredibly abstract,
powerful patrons have wanted to be a part of that tradition for over a thousand years.
But now I want to draw a striking contrast with Shingon, the most ethereal of Japanese
Buddhist traditions, because the Heian period also saw the birth of one of the most accessible
forms of Buddhism, Pure Land. Pure Land Buddhism was popularized in Japan in the late 900s
by a monk named Genshin, and Genshin's message was simple. The wicked go to hell,
and there they are brutally tortured in ways that relate to their iniquities on earth.
For example, if you killed someone in your human life, then in hell you would be ripped apart by
swords. If you killed something and cooked it and ate it, then you would be boiled in a vat for eternity.
Genshin's account of these horrific torments was extremely popular in the Heian period,
and there were illustrated versions called hell scrolls that graphically illustrated the
torments he described. So like the great Italian poet Dante, Genshin created
visions of hell that would inspire art for centuries. But Genshin's vision of hell was
balanced by his understanding of salvation. According to Genshin, Amida, that Buddha just
below Daimichi in the Mandala, that Buddha was ready to save you from hell. According to Genshin,
Amida had once taken a vow back in the ancient past when he was only a monk,
and he vowed that as part of his own path to Buddhist enlightenment, he would ease the suffering
of any human to call out to him for help. He promised to take those people to a special
paradise, the Pure Land. And then he did indeed achieve enlightenment, and so of course he kept
his vow. So you can avoid going to hell by calling out to Amida. And that emphasis on salvation made
Amida Buddhism, or Pure Land Buddhism, a great compliment for other forms of Buddhism, like Shingon.
If you're on your deathbed regretting a life of sin and dissipation, Shingon is probably cold
comfort. You could commission some prayers, but it's a little bit late to start meditating on a
complex mandala. But Pure Land Buddhism was almost custom made for deathbed regrets. There are even
special paintings showing Amida descending from the clouds to rescue a repentant sinner.
Some of these paintings even had strings, and you could hold the string and look at Amida in the
painting. It was as though the string would guide Amida to you. And some great Heian nobles are
said to have died holding strings attached to pictures of Amida. Now we will come back to Pure
Land Buddhism because it became a powerful force in Japanese history. In fact today the Pure Land
sects are the most popular form of Buddhism in Japan. But I want to leave you today with a sense
of the tremendous diversity of Buddhist teachings. First were the state-sponsored forms of early
Buddhism in Japan. They were critical in building the ancient imperial state, although today they
have virtually no popular following. And by contrast both Shingon and Pure Land continue to address
the spiritual needs of Japanese Buddhists to the present day. And this is true despite the fact
that they offer remarkably different perspectives on Buddhist teaching. Each of them has a distinctive
influence on Japanese culture, and together they have coexisted for over a thousand years
without insisting on an exclusive claim to Buddhist truth.
