Let's switch gears here, I'm going to try and do some mental division, starting with
dividing by my favorite number, 9.
Give us a 5-digit number, and I will try and divide it by 9 in my head.
15,362 divided by 9 should be, I get 1,706.888, okay, great.
Give us a 4-digit number, please, 4321 divided by a 2-digit number, to make it a little easier,
make it end in 9, 49.
I'm getting 88 with a remainder of 9, that is 88 and 9 49ths, a little bit like 88, a
little bit more than .18.
Yeah, great, thank you.
In lecture 6, we learned how to do math problems very quickly when they were presented on paper.
We saw examples of addition, subtraction, and multiplication problems, but when it came
to division, we restricted our attention to dividing numbers by 9, using the super-fast
Vedic division method.
In this lecture, my goal is to explore more strategies for doing division problems on
paper that may be faster than anything you've seen before.
What I'm especially excited to talk to you about comes from Vedic mathematics.
Vedic mathematics is a collection of arithmetic and algebraic shortcut techniques, especially
suitable for paper, that were popularized by a Sanskrit scholar and mathematician, Bharati
Krishnathirtaji, in the first half of the 20th century.
Some of the Vedic math techniques he wrote about, we've experienced already, like multiplying
numbers by 11, casting out 9s, squaring numbers at end in 5, multiplying numbers near 100,
and the crisscross method.
In fact, most of these methods have been around for centuries, long before what is now referred
to as Vedic mathematics, but the part that intrigued me the most, that I hadn't seen
before, had to do with division.
And as I played with it, I found that it generated answers faster than any method that I had
seen before.
When I've shown these techniques, teachers as well as students get very excited, and
I look forward to sharing them with you in this lecture.
Now the method may seem a little strange at first.
As you generate your answer, the digits of the answer actually play a role in generating
more of the digits of the answer.
This is kind of strange, but with just a little practice, you'll find that it's extremely
efficient and rather fun to do.
I should mention that I've made some modifications to the techniques and terminology.
I did this to make them easier to understand and to more closely resemble modern notation.
Vedic mathematics is an exciting topic, but if you get a little confused, don't panic.
The process that we use here will look very different from everything else that we do
in the course, and you won't need it for the other lectures, so don't worry if you
don't catch everything the first time.
Our focus will be on doing two-digit division problems, but let's start by doing one-digit
division.
In lecture 4, we split a jackpot four ways by doing the division problem 777 divided
by 4.
Now when we did the problem mentally, our process went like this.
Let's see, 4 goes into 700 100 times, 777 minus 400 is 377.
Now 4 goes into 377 90 times, 377 minus 360 is 17.
Now 4 goes into 17 four times with a remainder 1, and there's our answer, 194 with a remainder
of 1.
But when you have paper at your disposal, you can do the problem a little more quickly
using the traditional method of long division.
In long division, the calculation looks like this.
Long division is a little quicker than mental division because there is less demand on your
memory.
But when you work this problem on paper, I recommend using the process of short division,
which I'll show you now.
Now many schools don't teach short division.
Mine didn't, but I wish it had.
We learned long division, but I never realized there was such a thing as short division.
I just thought they called it long division because it took so long.
With short division, you go through the same steps as long division, but there's less to
write down.
You do more of the math in your head, and that allows you to go faster.
Let's do the last problem using short division.
Okay, so what are we going to do?
Four into seven, four goes into seven once with a remainder of three.
So the one is going to go up, and the three is going to go down.
Okay, next we'd have to divide four into 37.
Now four times nine is 36, so four goes into 37 nine times with a remainder of one.
So the nine goes up, and the one goes down.
Now we have to divide four into 17.
Four goes into 17 four times with a remainder of one, that's the last digit of our problem.
So the answer is 194, the four went up, and the remainder is one.
So there's your answer, 194 with a remainder of one.
If you compare this with long division, you see that it's much more efficient.
With practice, short division is a lot faster than long division because you write down
just enough to make it easier on your memory.
All you ever write down is the answer with remainders along the way.
Let's do one more example of short division.
Let's try the problem 13571 divided by four.
Okay, so we take four and we divide it into 13, the first number we can.
Four goes into 13 three times with a remainder of one.
So the three goes up, and the one goes down.
Next we divide four into what?
Fifteen.
Four goes into 15 three times with a remainder of three.
So the three goes up and the remainder three goes down.
Next we divide four into what?
37, four goes into 37 nine times with a remainder of one.
So the nine goes up and the one goes down.
Finally we do four into 11, four goes into 11 twice with a remainder of three.
And there's the answer 3392 with a remainder of three.
Notice how little we wrote down, whereas the long division solution would have looked a
lot longer like this.
The short division calculation is shorter and ultimately faster.
You now know everything you need to divide by one digit numbers on paper quickly and
accurately.
For one digit division, nothing beats short division, except maybe when you're dividing
by nine, in which case I recommend the Vedic method that we saw earlier.
For the rest of this lecture, I want to focus on dividing by two digit numbers.
Now if you're dividing by a number between 10 and 20, then I would still recommend using
short division.
But if your number's 21 or larger, then I recommend using the Vedic division technique.
With Vedic division, some two digit numbers are easier to divide than others.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the best two digit numbers for Vedic division are those that
end in nine.
Now why is that?
You may recall in lecture three that we did some two by one multiplications using the subtraction
method.
These problems were best suited when the two digit number ended in a high digit, especially
the number nine.
So for example, we could do the multiplication problem 79 times 3 by doing 3 times 80 to
get 240, then subtracting 3 to get 237.
As we'll see, Vedic division is sort of like the subtraction method for division problems.
Now we'll start with Vedic division problems that end in nine.
Our first problem will be 13571 divided by 39.
Now the long division solution would look like this.
If you try to do this problem by short division, you have to be very good at your multiples
of 39.
And you'll have quite a few three digit subtraction problems to do in your head.
That's why I would more likely do that problem by long division instead of short division.
The Vedic approach makes use of the fact that it's much easier to divide by 40 instead
of 39.
And dividing by 40 is essentially as easy as dividing by four, right?
For example, if when using short division, when we divided 13571 by four, we came up
with the four digit answer 3392.75.
I call this a four digit answer since it has four digits before the decimal point.
Okay, notice that if we divided 13571 by 40, what do we do?
We simply shift the decimal point to get a three digit answer, namely 339.275.
The Vedic strategy is to turn a hard two digit division problem into something that's almost
as easy as a one digit short division problem.
For example, we'll see that dividing by 39 can be made almost as easy as dividing by
four.
When dividing by 39, here's what we do.
We go up one to the nearest easy number 40.
Next we do short division dividing by four, but there's one shift and there's one twist.
I'll explain what I mean.
The shift is since we're dividing this number by four, that would produce a four digit number.
But since we're really sort of dividing by 40, we want to produce a three digit number.
So to get a three digit number, we simply move the remainder to the left by one spot.
So instead of the remainder going here, it will go here instead.
I refer to the number four as our divisor.
We start off as before.
Four goes into 13 three times with a remainder of one.
So we start off just like short division.
The three goes up and the one goes down.
But now comes the twist.
Instead of dividing four into 15, like we would do with short division, we divide into
15 plus three, the three, that little quotient digit on the top, right?
Now 15 plus three is 18 and four goes into 18 how many times?
Four times with a remainder of two.
So the four goes up and the two goes down.
Now instead of dividing four into 27, like you would with short division, we divide it
into 27 plus four, that little quotient digit on the top, 27 plus four is 31.
How many times does four go into 31?
It goes into it seven times with a remainder of three.
So the seven goes up and the three goes down.
When we arrive at the last digit, it's time for the remainder.
And the remainder is simply 31 plus seven to get 38.
So there's our answer, 347 with the remainder of 38.
And this agrees with our earlier long division calculation.
I'll explain why this works shortly, but let's first get comfortable with how it works
by doing another example.
Let's do 79 into 246, 810, all right?
Now as before, we add one to get to the nearest easy number, that's 80, okay?
So our divisor is going to be eight, ignore the zero there, our divisor is eight.
Now we divide eight into the first number that we can, that's 24.
Eight goes into 24 three times with a remainder of zero.
So the three goes up and the zero goes down.
Next we divide eight into what number?
Not the number 06, but the number 6 plus 3, 9.
Eight goes into nine once with a remainder of one.
So the one goes up and the one goes down, okay?
Next what do we divide eight into?
Not 18, but 18 plus one, 19, right?
Eight goes into 19 twice with a remainder of three.
So the two goes up and the three goes down.
Next we divide eight into 31 plus two, that's 33, how many times does eight go into 33?
Four times with a remainder of one, so the four goes up, the one goes down, finally when
we reach the last digit, we get the remainder and the remainder would be 10 plus four, which
is 14.
So there's the answer, three, one, two, four, with a remainder of 14.
I assure you that with just a little bit of practice, this method is much quicker than
doing the problem using short or long division.
So why does this work?
Essentially when you divide by 79, you're dividing by 80 minus one.
So if the process subtracts off three multiples of 80, it needs to add back three to compensate,
just like in the subtraction method for multiplication.
If we do that last example in slow motion using long division, what you're seeing is
this, 79 goes into 246, well you'd have to do 79 times three to get 237.
You'd subtract 237 from 246 to get nine, then you'd bring down the eight.
The idea behind the Vedic method is that instead of dividing by 79, it's easier to divide by
80, which is essentially the same as dividing by eight.
80 goes into 246 three times, so we subtract 240, that's an easy calculation, but we've
subtracted too much.
We were supposed to subtract three times 79, not three times 80, so we have to add back
three before taking the next step.
And once we do this, six plus three is nine, bring down the eight, we're at the same place
we would be using long division.
Here, let's do the pi problem, 3141 divided by 59, okay?
So 59, we round that up one to 60, so the divisor is going to be what?
The divisor is going to be six.
We do six into 31, six goes into 31 five times with a remainder of one, so the five goes up
and the one goes down.
Next, we do six into, not 14, but 14 plus five, 19, right?
Six goes into 19 three times with a remainder of one, so the three goes up, the one goes
down, we're at the last digit, that's our remainder.
Our remainder is 11 plus three, which is 14.
So there's your answer, 53 with a remainder of 14.
This is definitely shorter than long or short division.
There were no multiples of 59 ever used in this problem.
There's just one more situation to cover.
Sometimes when you do your division step, you get a divisor that's 10 or bigger.
If that happens, no problem.
You just carry the tens digit into the previous column and keep going.
Let me show you what I mean.
Let's do 1475 divided by 29, okay?
With 29, the divisor is what?
We go up one to 30, so the divisor is three.
Three goes into 14 four times with a remainder of two, so the four goes up and the two goes
down as usual.
And now we do three into what?
Not 27, but 27 plus four, which is 31.
Now three goes into 31 10 times with a remainder of one.
What do you do with that 10?
No problem, you write down the 10, but make sure that one goes in the previous column
for your 10.
Okay, so the 10 goes up and the one goes down, okay, and now we keep going.
Okay, we're at the remainder step, but there is a little twist here.
What's the remainder?
It's not 15 plus zero, the digit in the previous column.
It's 15 plus the entire 10 that you used at the last step, okay?
So 15 plus 10 is 25, and that's your remainder.
And now you can read off your answer, including that little carry digit, 50 with a remainder
of 25.
Let's do one more example, 29 into 8876, okay?
So 29, we'll use a divisor of three.
Three goes into eight twice with a remainder of two.
So the two goes up and the remainder two goes down.
Next we do three into 28 plus two, which is 30.
Three goes into 30 10 times with a remainder of zero.
So the 10 goes up and the zero goes down.
You see where the 10 went.
Now we do three into what?
Not into seven, not into seven plus zero, but into seven plus 10, 17.
Three goes into 17, how many times?
Five times with a remainder of two.
So the five goes up and the two goes down.
Now we're at the last step, we're at the remainder.
The remainder is not 26, but 26 plus five, which is 31.
So you could read off your answer as 305 with a remainder of 31.
But notice 31 is bigger than the original divisor 29, right?
So we can squeeze in an extra 29 into here.
So our answer becomes 306 with a remainder of two.
The two was because we do 31 minus 29 to get the two.
What if the divisor does not end in nine?
If the divisor ends in eight, seven, six, or even five, then the procedure is practically
the same.
Consider the problem one, two, three, four, five, six divided by 78, all right?
We start the problem the same as before.
What's our divisor?
Our divisor is eight, right?
Because we went up two to get to 80, all right?
Now we divide eight into 12, eight goes into 12 once with a remainder of four.
So the one goes up and the four goes down, so far nothing new.
But here's the twist.
If we were dividing by 79, our next step would be to divide eight into 43 plus one.
But since we're dividing by 78, since we have to travel up two to reach 80, we're going
to double the one before adding it.
So instead of doing 43 plus one, I do 43 plus two to get 45.
That two is the number that I call the multiplier, and it'll be used in every step of this problem.
Okay, so how many times does eight go into 45?
Five times with a remainder of five.
So as usual, the five goes up, the remainder five goes down.
Okay, next step, we do eight into not fifth.
If we were doing short division, we would do eight into 54.
If we were dividing by 79, we'd do eight into 54 plus five.
But since we're dividing by 78, we do eight into 54 plus twice five, 54 plus 10, which
is 64.
How many times does eight go into 64?
Eight times with a remainder of zero.
So the eight goes up, and the zero goes down.
Next we do eight into what?
Into five plus 16, twice eight, right.
Five plus 16 is 21.
When I divide 21 by eight, I get two with a remainder of five.
So the two goes up, and the five goes down.
Finally, we're at the last digit for the remainder.
And what will the remainder be?
Not 56 plus two, but 56 plus twice two, 56 plus four to get 60.
And there's the answer, 1582 with a remainder of 60.
If the divisor ends in seven, you'd add three times the previous quotient digit.
If it ends in six, you'd add four times the previous quotient digit.
If it ends in five, you'd add five times the previous quotient digit.
Let's do one more example that involves a carry.
Let's try the problem 77 into 31674.
So for this problem, tell me what's going to be the divisor.
We're rounding 77 up three to 80.
So the divisor is going to be eight, and the multiplier is going to be three.
So eight goes into 31 three times with a remainder of seven.
So the three goes up, and the seven goes down.
Now you divide eight into what?
Not 76, not 76 plus three, but 76 plus three tripled because of that plus three multiplier.
76 plus nine is 85.
You divide 85 by eight, no problem.
That's 10 with a remainder of five.
So we put down the 10, and the 10 goes up, and the five goes down.
Now we divide eight into what?
Not 57, not 57 plus zero, but not even 57 plus 10, but 57 plus triple 10, 57 plus 30,
which is 87.
So that means another 10 goes up, and then a seven goes down.
Similarly we're at the remainder step, the remainder is 74 plus triple 10, 104.
So there's the answer, you can read it off, 410 with a remainder of 104.
But since we can squeeze in an extra 77, that becomes 411 with a remainder of 27.
If the divisor ends in one, say it was 61, then you divide by six, but then you subtract
the previous quotient because you went down one to 60.
If the divisor is 62, you're still going to divide by six, but then you subtract twice
the previous quotient, and so on.
Let me show you what I mean.
Let's do 61 into two, three, five, eight, 13.
So this time we go down one to 60, so our divisor is six, and our multiplier is negative
one.
All right, so we begin the same as before.
Six goes into 23 three times with a remainder of five.
And since our multiplier is negative one at the next step, instead of doing six into 55,
we don't go into 55 plus three, we're going to do six into 55 minus three, that three
and negative one multiply, and 55 minus three is 52.
Okay, how many times does six go into 52?
Eight times with a remainder of four.
Okay, so now our next step, so the eight goes up and the four goes down.
Now we do six into what, 48 minus eight.
Six goes into 46 times with a remainder of four.
So the six goes up and the four goes down.
Next we do six into what, not 41, but 41 minus six, 35.
So that six goes into 35 how many times?
Five times with a remainder of five, so the five goes up and the remainder five goes down.
Finally, we're at the last digit, six goes into, well, the last, the remainder is going
to be 53 minus five, which is 48, and there's your answer, 3865 with a remainder of 48.
That may have taken a while, but it's shorter, it's faster than short or long division.
If we divide by 62 instead of 61, our divisor is still six, but now our multiplier is negative two.
That's because we had to go down two to reach 60.
Okay, six goes into 23, three times with a remainder of five, so the three goes up and the five goes down.
They always start the same way, but now the twist, six, we divide six, not into 55,
not into 55 minus three, but 55 minus six to get 49, right?
You see where that six comes from, three times negative two.
Okay, six goes into 49, eight times with a remainder of one, so the eight goes up and the one goes down.
Next, we do six into what?
Not 18, not 18 minus eight, 18 minus 16, which is two, all right?
And six goes into two, zero times with a remainder of two, so the zero goes up, the two goes down.
Finally, we divide, well, not finally, but we divide six into 21, minus zero, six goes into 21,
three times with a remainder of three, now we're at the remainder step, six goes in,
and the remainder is going to be what?
Not 33 minus three, but 33 minus six to get 27, and there's the answer,
three, eight, zero, three, with a remainder of 27.
Now in the subtraction step, you sometimes obtain negative numbers.
When that happens, we have a simple adjustment.
I'll illustrate this with the problem 235813 divided by 64.
Here, the divisor is six, and the multiplier is negative four.
So we divide six into 23, that's three with a remainder of five, so the three goes up, the five goes down.
Now we do six into 55 minus 12, three times negative four.
55 minus 12 is 43, six goes into 43, seven times with a remainder of one, and now here comes the trouble.
Six goes into what?
Six, we're going to divide six into what?
Not into 18, but 18 minus 28, and that's negative, that's negative 10, that's too bad, right?
We can't do that, so what do we do here?
When this happens, I call this an oops step, we make two simple adjustments.
We reduce the previous quotient by one, and we increase the remainder by the one-digit divisor.
So in this situation, we're doing 18 minus 28 is negative 10, and that's an oops step,
so the seven is reduced to the number six, and the one is increased by the one-digit divisor.
The one-digit divisor is six, as in 60, a one plus six is seven, and that's our new step.
We have six as the previous quotient digit and 78 there at the bottom.
Now, the reason this works is logically, when I did 43 divided by six to get seven with a remainder of one, like we did initially,
we see that that runs into trouble, so instead we say, hmm, I'd rather make 43 divided by six equal to six with a remainder of seven.
So my quotient's a little smaller, but I've got a bigger remainder to play with, so I'm not going to have to deal with a negative number at this step.
Okay, so taking this next step, we have 78 minus 24, 78 minus 24 is 54.
Six goes into 54 nine times with a remainder of zero, but I can see already that that's going to lead into trouble, having a nine on top and a zero on the bottom.
So instead, let's say that 54 divided by six, instead of being nine, we're going to say it's eight with a remainder of six.
So the eight goes up and the six goes down.
Now I divide six into 61 minus 32, which is 29.
Six goes into 29 four times with a remainder of five.
So we're at the last four goes up, the five goes down.
Now we're at the remainder step, which is 53 minus 16, 37, and that's the remainder.
So the answer is 3684 with a remainder of 37.
Naturally, to get comfortable with Vedic division, you'll need to practice, but I can speak from my own experience that with just a few hours of practice, you'll probably be able to do it faster than short or long division for most two-digit division problems.
As I mentioned before, if the divisors between 10 and 20, I would probably stick with short division, since multiples of these numbers are easy to compute and the Vedic method tends to produce a lot of carries or negatives.
Also, if the number ends in five, which results in the largest possible multiplier, I would instead double both numbers to simplify the problem.
For example, the problem 132134 divided by 35, we can double both numbers to get 264268 divided by 70, which is much easier.
There's more to Vedic mathematics than division, although we have seen much of it in this course already.
Again, I would describe Vedic methods as a mixture of mental math and pencil and paper math.
You're presented the problem on paper and essentially just write down the answer, but there is a lot of work that you do in your head.
And as we've seen, when doing mental math, we sometimes run into serious memory limitations.
In our next lecture, we'll learn a fun way to improve your ability to memorize words, lists, and especially numbers.
I think you'll find it to be a memorable experience.
