Okay, now I'm going to try to memorize some numbers.
I'll ask you to help me.
You can write these numbers down as they're called out to me.
Just don't let me see them.
I'll ask you to call out for me 16 single-digit numbers.
Maybe the digits of your credit card, or it doesn't have to be that.
So any one-digit numbers.
And I'm going to try to remember them and call them back out
without seeing the numbers.
Five.
Five.
Seven.
Seven.
Three.
Three.
One.
One.
Eight.
Eight.
Five.
Five.
Nine.
Nine.
One.
One.
Five.
Five.
Three.
Three.
Two.
Two.
Seven.
Seven.
One.
One.
Six.
Six.
Six.
Six.
Three.
Five.
Seven.
Three.
One.
Eight.
Five.
Nine.
One.
Five.
Three.
Two.
Seven.
One.
Six.
Six.
Three.
Good.
Thank you.
In this lecture, my goal is to show you a fun and amazingly effective way to memorize
numbers.
effective way to memorize numbers.
This will help you perform very large calculations,
and it will also help you memorize other numbers that
are important in your life, such as credit card numbers,
social security numbers, driver's license numbers,
and so on.
It can even be used to help you memorize numbered lists of things
that aren't numbers at all, like who was the 14th president
of the United States, or what is the 79th chemical element.
For most of this lecture, we will take advantage
of a phonetic code known as the major system, which
has been in the English language for nearly 200 years.
It's a standard technique used by memory experts
throughout the world.
I first encountered this technique in high school
when I read a book called The Memory Book
by two authors whose names I forget.
Just kidding.
It was by Harry Lorraine and Jerry Lucas.
The idea behind the major system is
due to a German monk, Gregor von Feinagel, who
presented his methods to audiences throughout Europe
in the 1800s.
The system was improved by a French memory
expert, Amé Paris, around 1820, and that's
what we'll learn here.
Most people's short-term memory can
only hold on to about seven plus or minus two digits.
But with the use of mnemonics, like the phonetic code,
this can be increased dramatically.
In this lecture, I'll show you how
to remember long strings of numbers in a fun and sometimes
silly way and apply it to doing larger mental calculations
that were previously beyond our memory capacity.
OK, here is the major system that
we'll be using throughout the rest of this course.
Here it is.
For instance, one is the t or the d sound, the t or d sound.
Two is the n sound.
Three is the m sound, and so on.
Now, you may be wondering, well, how am I
supposed to memorize that?
There are even mnemonics for learning this list.
The following tips were given to me by my friend Tony
Marlashkevips.
Here it goes.
The number one is the t or the d sound.
Since when you draw a t, your hand goes down once.
So a typewritten t has one downstroke.
And if you can remember the t sound,
you should be able to remember the phonetically similar d
sound.
The two, for the number two, it's n.
And the n has two downstrokes.
The m has three downstrokes.
Or if you put an m on its side, it looks like a three.
Or if you know sign language, the signs for t, n, and m
are one finger, two fingers, and three fingers.
Whatever it takes.
The number four ends in the letter r
is how I remember that four is r.
Now five is an l.
Now if you put the five on your hand
and you look between your index finger and your thumb,
you will see an l.
It's cheap, but you'll remember it.
And that's all that matters.
The six is probably the hardest one to remember.
It's the chsh or j sound, the chsh or j sound,
one of the sneezing sounds.
You might remember that by thinking that a six, if you
put it backwards, kind of looks like a j.
The seven is the k or the g sound, the k or g sound.
Now that's a hard g like goat.
Not a soft g like giraffe.
The giraffe g has a j sound.
And we've already used that with the number six.
You can remember that the seven is a k sound
by realizing that a k can be drawn
as a combination of two sevens.
Kind of a special k, if you know what I mean.
The eight is the f or the v sound, the f or the v sound.
A cursive f kind of looks like an eight.
Or you might think of a skater that does a figure eight.
Nine, that's easy to see, right?
That's the p or the b sound, the p or b sound.
You could turn your nine backwards or upside down
either way.
How about zero?
How would you remember that that's the s or z sound?
The number zero begins with z.
It's one of the hissing sounds, the s or z sound.
Another way to possibly memorize this list
is just to remember the name of my friend, Tony
Marloshkovitz, right?
If you take the consonant sounds from his name,
you get Tony Marloshkovitz is one, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, eight, nine, zero.
I'll bet if I quizzed you right now
and asked you for the sound of each number,
you'd probably get at least eight out of the 10 correct,
just by hearing these mnemonics once.
With less than 10 minutes of study,
you can learn this list backwards and forwards inside
and out.
In fact, do me a favor.
Right now, just take two minutes
to study the phonetic code along with the memory tips.
I'll put it here on the screen, or you
can study your course guidebook.
I promise that it'll be worth your while.
After that, I'll give you a short quiz.
But OK, I want you to pause right now
and study this list just for two minutes.
OK, we're back, and it's time for a quiz.
Are you ready?
Tell me what sound does three make?
With the phonetic code, three is the m sound, three downstrokes.
What does two make?
Two downstrokes, that's the m.
What number gets p or b, the p or b sound?
That's the number nine.
OK, what number gets s or z?
It's the zero, very good.
OK, what sound is five?
The number five has what consonant sound?
It's the l, the l sound.
What number gets ch, sh, or j, the ch, ch, or j?
That's probably the hardest one.
That's the number six, backwards.
OK, what sound does seven make?
It's the c or g sound.
Remember that special k that we drew with two sevens.
What sound goes with one?
One is the t or d sound, one downstroke, t or d.
And what sound does four make?
That's the letter r.
And what number goes with f or v?
That would be eight.
OK, here's a trick question.
What number goes with h, w, or y?
I'm getting silence.
That's good, because there is none.
There are no numeric codes for h, w, or y.
There are no digits associated with h, w, or y.
OK, and for extra credit, what's my friend's name?
Tony Marlachkevips.
How many of those did you get?
Once you know your code backwards and forwards, inside
and out, you're ready to take the next step.
Now that you've memorized your phonetic code, you have an
invaluable tool for turning numbers, even meaningless random
numbers into words.
We do this by inserting vowel sounds anywhere we'd like
among our consonants.
For example, suppose you needed to remember the number
491, perhaps in the middle of a big calculation, or maybe
it's your hotel room number.
How would you use the phonetic code?
I would probably turn 491 into a rabbit.
How do you do that?
Well, 491, what are its consonant sounds?
Four is r.
Nine is p or b.
One is t or d.
Now by sticking vowel sounds wherever you'd like among
those consonants, you can create words like robot or
rabbit.
Notice that even though rabbit is spelled with two b's, the
b sound is only pronounced once.
The number for rabbit is 491.
It's not 4991.
What else could you create?
You could create words like repeat or erupt or orbit or
ripped or rebate or make two words out of it, like rip it.
Now in the phonetic code, as I said before, there are not
digits used for the consonants h and y.
So you can use those consonants whenever you want.
So if you wanted to, for 491, you could stick a w at the
beginning and create a word like warped.
Notice that even though a number might have several
words that represent it, each word can only be turned into
one number.
And that's important.
Rabbit can only be represented by 491.
OK, here are some more words.
In fact, let's do the opposite problem.
Here are some words that are not created by 491.
OK, like party.
Party would be 941.
It's the p, the r, the t sound, and order definitely
matters, so you couldn't make the same mistake.
So you couldn't make party out of 491.
Or ramped.
The ramped has an m sound, so we'd have 4391 in between.
Or report, report.
What are the consonant sounds?
r, p, r, and t.
That would be 4941.
Or take a word like repeated.
That would be 4911 because the t, d sound is literally
repeated.
OK, time for another quiz.
Give me at least two words that you can make from the
number 36.
You can pause to think about it.
If it helps, what are the consonants for 3 and 6?
3 is m.
6 is ch, sh, or j.
So what words could you create out of 36?
Words like mash, or mesh, or mush, or mushy, or match, or
magi, or image, or if you like proper nouns, niche,
match, midge, any of those are fine.
OK, now do the reverse problem.
I'll give you a word, and you give me its number.
Feel free to pause after each question.
Fast would be what number?
The consonants are fst, so that would be 801.
Mental would be what?
m, n, t, l, 3, 2, 1, 5.
Memory would be 334 for m, m, r.
How about check-off?
Check-off would be ch, k, and v.
That would be 6, 7, 8.
How about a word like carry?
Carry would be 74, not 744.
Remember, when you use the phonetic code, spelling
doesn't matter.
All that matters is pronunciation.
So the number 744 could be a word like career or courier
where the r sound occurs twice.
You can use the phonetic code to memorize dates.
For instance, to memorize the Columbus-discovered
America in 1492, let's see, 1492 is t, r, b, n.
You might picture, you might turn 1492 into the word
turbine, and picture Columbus wearing a turbine
as he crossed the ocean, perhaps with a turbine engine.
Here's a hard one.
Pseudonumerology, give up?
Pseudonumerology is 0123456, and give up is 789.
To remember that Andrew Jackson was elected president
of the United States, in 1828, we could turn 1828
into T-F-N-F. You might picture Jackson
as a tough guy with a knife.
Or to remember that the Gettysburg Address
was written in 1863, that's T-F-J-M.
You might think that Lincoln wrote it
to get out of a tough jam.
You can use it for phone numbers.
Suppose your friend Fibonacci had the phone number 235813,
and then two.
You might picture using NML for the first three digits.
You might picture Fibonacci riding an animal.
And who was on that animal?
8132 is F-T-M-N.
He might be there with a really fat man,
or maybe while chewing on a vitamin.
By the way, there are plenty of free websites out there
that have converted entire dictionaries into phonetic code.
Just search on the words like major system and memory.
That's how I found the word vitamin in my last example.
I use the phonetic code to memorize my passport number,
most of my credit card numbers, and the social security
numbers of my family.
Suppose you wanted to memorize Elvis Presley's social security
number.
Here it is, 409-52-2002.
Now, looking at the phonetic code,
if you wanted to break that number into three parts,
409 is RSP.
You might get a word like raspy.
5-2 is L-N. You might get a word like lion.
2002, I don't know any single words that would hold that.
But you could get a word like two words, like in season.
So raspy lion in season is Elvis's social security number.
If you're given a really long number,
like a 16-digit credit card number,
then it pays to look inside the number
for particularly long words.
Since the fewer words you use, the easier it is to remember.
For example, here are the first 24 digits
of pi, the mathematical constant that we know and love.
Now, looking at pi, I see inside of it a 1415.
That's a TRTL.
And I see a 6264.
That's a JNJR.
I see some really juicy four-digit words,
like turtle and ginger, that we can make from those.
Putting it all together, we can construct a sentence
like, my turtle poncho will my love pick up
my new mover ginger.
My turtle poncho will my love pick up my new mover ginger.
Say this sentence about five times,
and you'll probably haven't memorized.
And if you have the phonetic code mastered,
then you now know the first 24 digits of pi.
Now, I admit there are times when I don't use the phonetic code
to memorize numbers.
Let me show you some of these situations.
Suppose you have the following credit card number.
You might call it an E card, since it's the first 16
digits of the mathematical constant E, 2.718281828459045.
I still remember that number using the method
that my calculus teacher taught me long ago.
He said, 2.7 Andrew Jackson, Andrew Jackson,
isosceles right triangle.
What does that have to do with E?
We have 2.7, then Andrew Jackson was elected in what year?
He was that tough guy with a knife, 1828.
So I have 2.718281828, and the angles
of an isosceles right triangle are 45, 90, and 45.
We use the phonetic code to learn
the first 24 digits of pi with my turtle poncho,
but I prefer to memorize it by reciting the first 14 digits
with music instead.
You might even recognize the tune.
It goes like this.
Pi, pi, mathematical pi, 3.141592653589.
A good ol' fraction you may hope to define,
but the decimal expansion won't die.
Sorry about that.
The phonetic code can also be used
to memorize any numbered list of objects.
For example, let's learn a method that would allow you
to remember each president's number.
Like Lincoln was president number 16,
and the seventh president was Jackson.
This method is called the PEG system,
and it converts each number on your list
into a tangible, easily visualized word called the PEG word.
Think of putting a PEG on a wall
and being able to hang your word on that PEG.
Here are my PEG words for the numbers 1 through 10.
Here they are.
T, knee, moo, ear, oil, shoe, key, foe, pi, and dice.
Notice that each of these words is represented
by their corresponding number.
One is T. Two, with the N sound, creates the word knee.
Three, with the M sound, creates the word moo, and so on.
So the first word on my list might be drinking T,
or the second item could be on my knee, and so on.
So to remember that the first president is George Washington,
you might picture yourself drinking T with George Washington,
or maybe washing a ton of clothes in a giant T bag.
The second president is Adams.
And I might picture my knee being blown up by an atom bomb,
or picture my knee smothered with little atoms,
or maybe I should say tiny atoms.
The third president is Jefferson,
and the word for three is what's the PEG word for three?
M is moo.
I might picture my friend Jeff with his son dressed
in a cow costume saying moo.
It's perfectly fine to create associations
that only make sense to you.
It's fine if some of them are silly or bizarre.
In fact, that might make it even easier to remember.
If your list has more than 10 objects,
like, say, the presidents of the United States,
then you need more PEG words.
Every two-digit number can be turned into at least one word.
So 11 is taut, 12 is tin, 13 is tomb, 14 is tire.
I could give you all of them, but I
encourage you to come up with your own PEG words
since the first word you think of now
is likely to be the first word you think of later.
If you can't create a word for a given number,
then go to one of the online major system dictionaries,
and they'll give you plenty of options.
How would you remember that Franklin Pierce
was the 14th president?
My PEG word for 14 is tire, right?
1-4-T-R is tire.
And so I might imagine the tire is being pierced,
perhaps by Benjamin Franklin.
Hence, the 14th president is Franklin Pierce.
Which president was James Monroe?
I might think of a giant wad of money rowing through oil.
And since oil is the PEG word for five,
I can remember that Monroe is president number five.
Who was the 40th president?
My PEG word for 40 is rose.
And you might think of a red rose,
and that RR might be enough to remind you of Ronald Reagan.
Or for something even sillier, you
might picture a giant rose pointing a dangerous ray gun
at you.
I can tell you from experience that if you use a list a lot,
like say the presidents, or a particular credit card number,
then eventually the phonetic code fades away,
and the numbers are converted to long-term memory.
Or you remember the numbers using other contextual
information.
For example, if it's already hardwired into your brain
that Abraham Lincoln was the 16th president,
and you know he was followed by Andrew Johnson,
then you automatically know that Johnson was the 17th
president.
You won't have to picture John and his son quacking like a duck.
My PEG word for 17 is duck.
Although if you know about Andrew Johnson,
you might think of him as a lame duck president.
Now, I've applied the PEG system for learning
where various elements appear on the periodic table.
For example, gold is the 79th element.
And from 79, you can make words like cup or keep.
So you might picture a gold cup, or you might think that gold
is something you want to keep, perhaps in a cup.
You can use the phonetic code to provide more security
to your computer password by adding extra digits.
For instance, if you have one password
that you like to use, like bunny rabbit,
but you want to make slight alterations
for each of your accounts, you can do something
like take your standard bunny rabbit password.
And when logging into the website for, say, your Visa card,
you might include the digits 80741,
which is the phonetic code for Visa card.
Or for your PayPal account, you might include the digits
995.
OK, do yourself a favor.
After this lecture, I want you to pull out
your most frequently used credit card or ID number
that you don't yet have memorized.
And I want you to memorize it using the phonetic code.
In the long run, this will eventually
save you tons of time.
The phonetic code is especially handy for numbers
that you need to memorize for tests
or for newly acquired phone numbers,
addresses, parking spots, hotel rooms,
and other numbers that you're just
going to need for a short while.
I find the phonetic code to be very useful when
doing large mental calculations.
And I'd like to illustrate that here.
For example, let's try to square the four digit number 4,203.
Our big picture strategy looks like this.
We take 4,203, the nearest easy number is 4,000.
So I'm going to go down 203 to 4,000.
I now have to go up the same distance to 4,406.
So the first part of my calculation
is I do 4,000 times 4,406.
How do we do that?
I do 4 times 4,406.
Now that's a 4 by 1, but we can do that.
4 times 4,404 is 176.
And 4 times 0,6 is 24.
When I attach those together, I have 17624.
That is to say 4,000 times 4,406 would be 17,624,000.
OK, now you want to take a mental break here.
You've got 17,624,000.
Now you can actually say 17 million at this point.
You can actually say it and get it out of your memory.
I'll tell you why you can do that in lecture 11.
But before we do our next calculation,
I need a way of holding on to 624.
So how am I going to do that?
Well, I mean, I don't have enough fingers
to hold on to a 6 and 2 and 4.
So it's the phonetic code to the rescue.
624, we can turn that into a word.
6 is the J sound.
2 is the N sound.
4 is the R sound.
So 624 can be turned into a word like junior, or January,
or shiner, or joiner, whatever it takes.
I'll think of junior.
That was the first word that came to my mind.
Junior, I'll say it a couple of times.
OK, next I have to do a new math problem.
I have to now add the square of 203.
And that's going to take all my attention.
But luckily, I'm holding on to junior,
so I don't have to remember 624.
It's a lot easier to remember junior than it is 624,
especially while I have a lot of other numbers flying around.
Junior is not going to turn into senior.
It's going to stand out like a sore thumb.
OK, so my next calculation I have to do is 203 squared.
How do we do that?
To do 203 squared, we go down 3 to 200, up 3 to 206.
2 times 206 is 412, so 200 times 206 is 41,200.
Almost done, we add to that the square of 3,
which is 9, to get 41,209.
41,209.
I'm going to take that 41,000 and add it to what?
Junior, of course.
But before we do that, I need to find a way to hold on to 209,
because I'm not ready to say those numbers yet.
So I'm going to hold on to 209 by turning it into a word.
Now the sounds for 209 are n, s, and p, or b.
So you can make words like no soap, or no sub,
or nose up, or news boy.
OK, so let's go with no soap.
So 209 becomes no soap.
So I've got 41,000, no soap.
And I'm adding that to what?
Junior, OK, Junior.
OK, 41,000, add that to Junior.
Junior is what number?
Using the phonetic code, Junior is 624.
Add 624 plus 41 from left to right, we get 665,000.
Go ahead and say it.
Get it out of your memory.
And now finish up your answer with no soap.
And no soap is the number 209.
We can say that.
And whew, we've just said our answer.
17,665,209.
We'll see more calculation examples
that use mnemonics near the end of the course.
But before we do that, let's end with a simpler and more
important application, remembering birthdays.
Do you remember the date of Abraham Lincoln's birthday?
I'll give you a hint.
Some restaurants observe Lincoln's birthday
by serving no tuna.
Now no tuna converts to the numbers 2 and 12.
And Lincoln's birthday was February the 12th.
Now if you want to remember the year of his birth, 1809,
those have the consonants T-F-S-P.
You might believe that these restaurants
suggest that since they sell no tuna,
you might try their tofu soup instead.
And tofu soup is 1809.
By the way, February 12, 1809 was not only Lincoln's birthday,
it was also the birthday of Charles Darwin.
Speaking of birthdays, once you know someone's birthday,
it's very handy to be able to figure out
its upcoming day of the week.
I'll teach you how to do that in your head
in our next lecture.
In fact, with just a few easy calculations,
you can determine the day of the week
of practically any date in history.
And I'll see you then.
