On the one hand, I see that James is afraid
of the weaponization of Christianity
in his attack on Christian nationalism.
But on the other hand, I see him doing the exact same thing
in trying to get the Christians on board with him
so that he can create his democratic secular enlightenment
utopia, which doesn't exist, which is not possible.
And so that's why I do believe that the only solution
to our predicament is a true return to Christianity,
like not a pretend one, not a unit.
And that's why most of my interactions
are not political at all.
Jonathan Pajot, you have risen in prominence
over the last couple of years.
In part, I think, because of your work with JBP,
what is the sort of the message that you're sharing
with people that is getting through,
that's cutting through, that's connecting?
Briefly, what are you saying that's getting through?
Well, I think that we're in a situation
where people are finding that the promises of the enlightenment
or the promises of the scientific revolution
are, although they have brought some great success
in terms of material wealth and in terms of comfort,
all of this is actually quite wonderful
that there seems to be something missing,
which is a connection to meaning, to purpose.
And we also struggle to understand
how and why it is that we exist together.
And so it seems like it's an interesting time
to be able to speak into this
and to help people re-understand our religious stories,
the mythologies, the images, the icons,
the structures of meaning that informed our ancestors
for thousands of years and how they can actually help us,
first of all, understand why it is we need that,
why it is we need purpose and meaning and cohesion,
and how it is that these stories,
and also especially the participation that comes from them,
can help us reconnect and find meaning again.
Brilliant, there's a huge amount in there.
Now, just for our viewers and listeners,
your background is as an icon maker.
What's the verb?
How do you describe yourself?
Yeah, I mean, I guess you could say,
I mean, icon carver, icon maker,
but it's really important to understand the icon making
as an application of a worldview
that I embraced a very long time ago.
And so it, I mean, I'm happy to take that title,
but it isn't somewhere as reductive
because the, like I said,
in some ways it was discovering a cohesive worldview
and embracing it and participating in it
that led me to want to apply that in my life
at different levels.
And one of them ended up being professionally
as making images for churches.
As I understood the images
and as I kind of understood this web of meaning
that is there in the Christian tradition,
it was a way to apply it practically,
and not just it'd be like a mental game that I engage with.
Right, but you were an artist before that, right?
Yes, I studied art in school,
but then I kind of abandoned art
and then went on a long arc of studying of reading
and ultimately coming back to traditional art.
Okay, gotcha.
Now, Jonathan, about a month ago,
we had James Lindsay on the podcast.
We had a fantastic discussion.
And you had a bit of a disagreement,
which I think is really cuts to some of the core issues
in the public debate at the moment.
So let's get into that.
On Twitter, you wrote,
the future is religious,
and no one can stop that anymore.
The question remaining is what that religiosity
will be turned toward?
Do you want to just unpack that for us
and give a sense of the way in which Lindsay
disagreed with you?
Yeah, I don't even remember exactly
how the argument started.
I mean, he came after me for something I wrote,
but I think he identified me first of all
with something that he had in his mind,
which is Christian nationalism
and kind of identified me with that
and therefore framed the things I was saying
in that perspective.
But it's related to what I said at the outset,
which is that we're noticing the religious crash
back into our story and whether you see it,
whether it's through woke ideology,
whether it is through worship of the environment,
whether it is its worship of the state,
and whether it's going to be worship of AI.
It doesn't really matter.
There seems to be different ways
in which this is coming back,
or whether it is like your uneducated aunt
that goes to the new age shop and has crystals
and has all this kind of stuff in their house.
The idea is that people are looking for ways
to make sense of their world, which is beyond reason.
It is beyond reason because it also has to encompass
the manner in which there's coherence,
the manner in which we come together,
the manner in which we align ourselves with our purposes
and the purposes of others in the world,
and that ends up looking like religious participation
or religious affiliation
because it has to do with celebration.
Like we actually follow that which we celebrate.
We live in that which we celebrate
and that ends up looking like religion.
It's like, what do you worship basically?
What do you put as the highest?
And what do you celebrate?
And so without traditional religions,
we end up with weird things like Earth Day
and LGBT Month and just this constant desire
to have insert holidays and celebrations
that are re-injecting religiosity into the world.
So my contention is that this is happening to us.
You know, the Enlightenment model,
the Enlightenment idea that we could all just be
rationalistic individuals like that live next to each other
is not working.
That gives the suburbs.
It gives the urban sprawl.
It gives the breakdown of the family.
It gives the breakdown of communities
and it turns us into these little consumers
that live next to each other but don't know each other
and don't interact with each other.
And everybody's feeling like that is not sufficient
because people are depressed, people are miserable
and they're looking for something more.
Now the question is, what is that going to be?
There's no, like I said,
I don't think there's a way around it.
Is it going to be Islam?
Is it going to be all these weird new kind of religiosities
that we see in globalism?
You know, I do believe that Christianity is our best bet
as Westerners and as let's say people who want to be able
to preserve the best of what the Enlightenment has given us
because the Enlightenment has provided powerful things
but it's insufficient.
It's not enough to hold people together.
It tends towards the problems we're seeing now.
Okay, so how are we understanding the word the Enlightenment?
We're talking about the sort of 17th, 18th century
movement in Europe.
We have in mind figures like Kant, David Hume, Newton.
Do you want to expand on what you have in mind there?
Yeah, and so, I mean, the Enlightenment
is properly understood as a continuation of a movement
that started, let's say, in the Renaissance
with the Scientific Revolution.
In some ways, it is the winning of reason,
like the notion that human beings are reasonable
and that reason is the way by which we're going to exist
and then applying that thinking, that reason,
and also the methods of scientific exploration
and analysis to the world.
And so we have a method in order to be able
to predict phenomena, to be able to understand phenomena.
We have a method by which we can analyze things
and that method is very powerful
and it yields power.
Like it's the best way to understand it.
It yields more capacity to control
and to manage reality, manage physical reality,
make spaceships, make all the things that we enjoy,
which are quite wonderful.
But there's also a blind spot in that.
There's a blind spot in this Enlightenment,
especially as it moves towards secularism
and especially as it moves towards atheism.
Because there's a sense in which we start to believe
that this reason and this capacity for reason is ultimate
and that it's sufficient.
And then we apply it, we apply it, we apply it,
but the problem actually happens
when we start to then turn it on ourselves.
When we come to the point where we now have to understand
ourselves as agents, as conscious beings,
then reason starts to become loopy.
It starts to not completely be enough,
especially when understanding how identities function.
Reason does not provide identity.
Reason provides analysis for identities
that are already given.
But the identity is seen to be a given
or to come, to use religious language.
They come from heaven.
Like you knew the identity before
you can apply the methods of science.
And so because of that, it leaves humans
with something missing in their experience
that they know is real, that they experience all the time,
but that cannot be contained by this process.
Yeah.
So one descriptor that's used
for the Enlightenment is the Age of Reason.
Now I really just like this
because I love the medieval figures.
And of course the medieval figures like Aquinas,
Scotus, Occam, early medieval like Anselm,
I mean, these guys use the reason.
So in what sense is reason really triumphant enlightenment?
Some people say that it's reason
plus the throwing off of authority.
Religious authority, Alistair McIntyre thinks
it's reason plus throwing off the fixed sense
of human nature.
Yeah.
Well, it's religion and pride.
It's the pride, sorry, it's the pride of reason.
It's the best way to understand it.
And so the manner in which the medieval's understood reason
was that it was derivative and manifested
by something transcendent.
Like a mystery which is beyond understanding
which reveals itself in reason.
And so there's always an aspect of the real
which it cannot be probed.
And you'll find that in all the medieval,
you know, whether west or east or west,
there's something beyond reason that cannot be probed
and it gives to reason and reason flows out of it.
And what it does is that it means
that reason is not sufficient.
Reason does not contain all things.
And what it also, how can I say this?
It also eliminates the problem of the pride of reason.
And so in the Enlightenment, the idea is like,
we can do this, we are the ones, we have it.
We try to contain reality within reason.
And sometimes it's the beginning of a revolutionary trope.
It's the beginning of the revolutionary structure
where the human tries to take from God, right?
The top of the hierarchy tries to say, no, we are the top.
We are the ones who can, with our reason
and our mind can analyze the world.
But as soon as that happens, then things start to devolve.
And you find yourself, at the end of that process,
you find yourself in a situation
that is not reasonable at all,
that is actually completely unreasonable,
but not unreasonable in the sense
that God is beyond reason, unreasonable in the sense
that our passions and our desires and our whims
end up ruling in the end.
And so this, in my conflict with Lindsay,
I quoted Goya's famous statement,
here's a print by Goya,
which says, the sleep of reason produces monsters.
Or the dream of reason produces monsters, right?
And that is the situation that we find ourselves in,
is that having insisted so much on reason
and having pushed to the margin
the things which are not reasonable,
they at some point, that unreason just crashes back in.
And like you said, in the medieval world,
that unreason or that which exceeds reason
would in some ways have been pushed up
towards the glory of God, right?
Would have been something like the excess of a church
in a village, like the golden,
all of this kind of unreasonable excess
that we experience in reality,
we give it up as glory to God.
But if you don't do that,
then it turns into the hybrid demons
that come in poke you at night,
like all these freaks and intermediary beings
that start to appear in the world
and will try to destroy reason that way.
Interesting, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, it certainly doesn't seem to me
that this sort of standards of racial inquiry
got much better with the Enlightenment.
It doesn't strike me that Hume is any smarter
than Occam or Aquinas,
but certainly I like your way of describing it
as this elevating reason, the pride of reason.
And I guess I put this actually to Pete Boghossian as well.
Last week, this idea that we need both reason and mystery,
because that's roughly kind of what you're getting at.
And is your criticism, or not even your criticism,
your understanding of Lindsay,
and to some extent, Pete,
is they just want to have reason, is that right?
Well, that's what you see.
And you see that in the Stephen Hicks,
Pete Pinker, Lindsay, all of that crew,
they have this, in my impression, a twisted image,
first of all, of what humans are,
and second of all, of how reality works.
And it can look very convincing at the outset,
because what they're saying is, if we were reasonable,
if we were just reasonable,
then we would have a perfect society, wouldn't we?
And so it's one of those like,
communism has never been tried problems,
which is that humans are not only reasonable.
Reality cannot be limited to that, which is reasonable.
And it just cannot, even epistemologically,
we cannot access all of reality through reason.
And we're starting to know that even scientifically,
this point, is that we cannot quantify all things.
We cannot analyze all of reality.
There always has to be some miracle,
whether the miracle is the big bang or whatever,
or something at the outset that is not part of the system,
that is just an inevitable aspect
of how being lays itself out.
And so it becomes difficult because they'll say,
if we were only reasonable and reasonable individuals,
then all things would work, but we are not that.
Human beings are not just that,
they are that to some extent.
And so then again, it has this problem.
It's like, if you have a blind spot,
you have this blind spot, which is the aspect,
unreasonable aspect, whether you understand it
as that which is beyond reason
or that which is below reason,
there's an aspect of reality,
which cannot be reduced to reason.
If you just keep it on the side as a blind spot,
at some point it comes crashing back in.
And so then you can complain as much as you want
about like crazy leftists
or kind of our intercategories
that are smashing into our world and hybridization
and all of this weird stuff that we're seeing happening,
but that is what's going to happen.
Yeah, and this is what's happened to Dawkins as well.
Of course, he was, I mean,
at this sort of rational scientific utopia,
but then what was it, back in 2014,
he lost his Humanist of the Year award
because of something he'd said about men
not being able to become women or something.
Yeah, because he didn't want to play that.
So that's a great example.
Like the great example of what happens
if you don't have the proper mystery at the outset,
at the beginning of your reasonable process,
then you'll have other mysteries that will be inserted,
other dogmas and other aporias and contradictions.
And so someone will say exactly that,
like a man can be a woman straight faced and look at you.
And what they're yearning for,
like what they're desiring for,
it's something like the Trinity, for example.
It's something like there is a mystery
about how unity and multiplicity coexist
and how they infinitely coexist
because we can't completely account
for the man in which one and many function
in our experience of the world.
And so we perceive, we have insight
about an infinite, transcendent way
in which those two are joined together.
And so that's the kind of mystery
that the medieval, for example,
could see as the outlet of reality.
But if you don't have that,
then you'll end up with a man as a woman.
Yeah, so I get unity and multiplicity
when it comes to the Trinity.
How's the man as a woman,
how's the desire for unity and multiplicity
being expressed there?
It's the desire for something to be itself and not itself.
It's the desire for something to be,
how can they say this, to be trans categorical?
Right?
And you can see it, by the way,
you probably know about the trans is sacred
like aspect that has happened over the last few years.
And there was the,
and even when they put on a version of,
what was it?
They put on a play with,
why is it my brain sometimes breaks down?
What's the name of the woman who was a knight
in the 14th century?
Joan of Arc.
They put on a play of Joan of Arc where Joan of Arc is trans.
And in the beginning of the play,
he, she says, I am one in many.
I am beyond category.
I am sacred.
I am like God.
I am.
And she literally says I am
because she's using the categories
of trans-rational infinite,
but applying it to what is intercategorical.
And so that's the problem that happens.
That's why postmodernism was like
an inevitable side effect of the enlightenment.
And this is obviously something that people
like Pinker and Lindsay and all these guys won't like,
but that he himself said that his project
was the enlightenment.
He believed that his project was the continuation
of the enlightenment because there's this reaching
into the intercategorical.
Do you understand how the intercategorical is like
is a trick to make you confuse that which transcends reason?
Because that's what intercategorical things do
is that the elude reason.
Okay.
So let's just get this clear.
Because so categories, what I'm hearing is that
in the transgender move, it's this desire to throw off
these, finish the sentence,
these rational categories that have been put on us,
this sort of search for transcendence.
Is that what you're getting at?
It's a desire to use the intercategorical
to destroy the categories.
That's what, first of all, if you want to one simple,
not to destroy, but to undermine the categories.
If you want to understand postmodernism,
like you could, that's maybe one definition
of what postmodernism is.
It's the perception that the intercategorical,
the indefinite, you could use the word indefinite,
the indeterminate, you could use that word too,
that all of these categories,
they undermine the hierarchy of reasonable categories.
And so the image, all the images that you see now,
for example, like even the image of the stranger,
or the idea of the migrant as an intercategorical figure,
as a figure that it doesn't have his own identity
based on the place where he is.
He's a kind of exception to the rule.
He's, the migrant is someone that doesn't fit,
that isn't a citizen, that cannot be,
cannot be accounted for by the system.
Like all of these, all of these types,
all of these types of categories that are used
by postmodern thinkers are there to do that,
are there to undermine reason.
Okay, so just to clarify,
because of course, when we're talking about categorizing,
we're going back all the way to Aristotle.
So in what way, because my sense,
I don't know your thought very well,
but my sense is you're going to have more time
for the ancient Greeks.
So Aristotle was engaged in that practice of categorizing.
So how did the enlightenment go wrong in that sense?
Was it that Aristotle held categorizing
alongside the transcendent?
Is that why it went, it was acceptable?
No, it's, the problem with the enlightenment
is that it, at least on the face of it,
it wanted to, let's say, systematize,
turn the world into an encyclopedia, right?
You know, like, that's one of the reasons
why the encyclopedia was such a great part
of the enlightenment project.
It's like, we're going to define everything.
We're going to measure everything.
We're going to quantify everything.
And we'll have, we'll basically understand reality.
But it's ignoring an aspect,
which is that there are aspects of reality
which cannot be categorized for different reasons.
And one of that is the intercategorical, the monster.
The monster cannot be categorized.
That is one.
And then the other one is rather the transcategorical,
like, or the supracategorical,
that which gives, that which gives way for categories,
the infinite, you know, being itself,
or the different aspects that are beyond
simple analytical categories.
But what I'm saying is that in removing the religious part,
removing the transcendent aspect, what happened now,
and this is why postmodernism in some ways
is inevitable to the enlightenment,
is that need for that which is beyond reason
is not going away in people.
It's just part of how humans are,
but they can find it in the monster.
Like they can find that titillation of the transgressive,
the titillation of that which is beyond categories
in the intercategorical, you know?
And so that's what you find in the, sorry.
So I get that.
I just still, I hear you saying that the enlightenment
we're trying to put everything away in their boxes,
but I'm not an Aristotle expert,
but I mean, he was engaged in that sort of activity
way back then, granted he had more openness to the transcendent,
but...
If there's nothing, no, but there's nothing wrong
with trying to categorize reality.
So as soon as you're getting rid of, yeah.
It's just as you tried, but ultimately.
Now, the problem, again, the issue with enlightenment
is not just that, is that the enlightenment already,
even at the outset, was not completely that project.
There's a dark side to the enlightenment,
which people call the counter-enlightenment.
And like you said, Kant is part of the enlightenment.
It's hilarious because ask Steven Hicks
if Kant is part of the enlightenment.
He'll tell you, no, Kant is the counter-enlightenment.
And so it's like this weird idea that the enlightenment thinkers,
there are aspects to them
that a lot of the modern enlightenment defenders don't like.
And they put them in what they call the counter-enlightenment,
which is in some ways aspects of what reason and magic
and hermeticism and all of this stuff,
which is like a weird parasite on the enlightenment
that you can't completely get rid of.
It continues on through characters like Swedenborg
or Jacob Berm or all of these esotericists
in the Western canon that are not opposite to the enlightenment.
They're the same people.
It's like Dick Duff spent a lot of his life
trying to contact the order of the Rosicross.
And it's like, so these are the same people.
They're not different types.
So there's this weird parasite in the enlightenment
of magic and esotericism and Freemasonry, all this stuff.
Freemasonry, yeah, interesting.
Now, there's loads we could get into,
but you brought up Pinkham,
and I was just reading his Enlightenment now.
And you were at the ARC conference.
I was at it back in October, and it does seem like...
I think people are tired of nihilism.
So there's not many that are good.
There's not many that are going for full-on nihilism these days.
You mentioned Islam and woke,
but it seems at least within the ARC crowd,
the main worldviews that are emerging are Christianity
and Enlightenment humanism.
And that's why I think your discussion with Lindsay
was so revealing, because, well, it revealed this crack,
and it'll be very interesting to see
where that goes over the next couple of years.
Now, that's a speculative question,
but do you have any thoughts on that?
Well, I want to say, first of all,
that I really admire James Lindsay.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, I want to...
I want it to be careful that, you know,
I mean, he went after me quite aggressively,
but I don't feel the same about him.
I think that the work that he's doing is really useful,
and that all the effort he's putting into helping people
see the kind of communistic stuff is amazing.
So I think that's important to really understand
because I actually don't have a problem with James Lindsay at all.
But what I do have a problem with, let's say,
I agree with him in terms of his attack on communism
and all the stuff, but I do not believe
that we can have a fully secular society
that I don't think that that's possible.
And I really do believe that the kind of secular humanism
that the Enlightenment proposed
ran aground.
It is not sufficient to hold societies together.
It's not sufficient to hold us together as people.
Now, the danger is we also cannot weaponize religion.
You can try.
But if you weaponize religion,
then you turn it into that which it is not.
That is, if you try to make religion
into something that will help you keep your society together,
then it will become an opportunity
and so the worship of God, you could say,
or the acknowledging of the absolutely transcendent
and our submission to it and our participation in it
is a good in itself.
And downstream from that,
you do have all the gifts of civilization that come with it.
And so on the one hand, how can I say this?
On the one hand, I see that James is afraid
of the weaponization of Christianity
in his attack on Christian nationalism.
But on the other hand,
I see him doing the exact same thing
in trying to get the Christians on board with him
so that he can create his democratic
so secular Enlightenment utopia,
which doesn't exist, which is not possible.
And so that's why I do believe
that the only solution to our predicament
is a true return to Christianity,
like not a pretend one, not a...
And that's why most of my interactions
are not political at all.
Then nothing to do with politics.
It's mostly trying to help people reconnect
with the deepest aspects of our tradition
to give them the right orientation
for the rest of their other participations.
By the way, if you want to know
if you're sure the culture war isn't over,
we're going to see a lot more of the conflict.
But in the end, the truth is that
the secularist voice is going to grow weaker and weaker
as things come.
And I don't say that.
I'm not saying that in a celebratory tone.
I just don't see any other way for the future.
And the question, again, is going to be
which one is which.
New religious perspective is going to be dominant.
And there are several possibilities.
One is a weird new globalist religion
that worships AI and the earth
and all this kind of stuff that we're seeing.
The other is Islam.
That is definitely a real possibility.
And the third is, I believe,
the possibility of some kind of Christian reawakening
to the roots of who we are
and all our ethics and all that we believe in
are writing on this ontology based on love
that Christianity presents,
like this idea that the world is held together by love,
that that is the mode of existence of reality.
Those are the possibilities.
I don't see, maybe there are others,
but those are the possibilities I see.
Yeah.
So let's get clear on what the concern is.
The concern from people like Lindsay
isn't that Christians are going to say vote pro-life
or something like that.
So try and influence politics in that way.
The concern must be that the Christians
are going to try and get in charge
and inflict their views on the rest of society.
Is that how you understand this
or push back against Christian nationalism?
That's possible.
I don't know if that's his complete,
like what the reason for his such a strong reaction.
Now, this is a difficult situation
that we find ourselves in,
because if we realize that that which affords
the type of freedom that you love is based in a way of being
that is Christian and it's based on a message
and a way of seeing the world that is basically Christian,
but you also don't want Christians to back off,
then you're ultimately going to lose the freedom that you love.
And so I understand that it's a difficult situation
because you also understand what somebody would not want
Christians to completely impose their worldview on others.
And so to be honest,
I don't completely know what the solution is,
but in the end, that's going to happen no matter what.
I don't know what to say.
If you think that whatever happened to COVID isn't coming back,
I mean, you have to be so naive.
What happened to COVID is going to happen again, folks.
What's that going to be?
I know it's going to be,
but what I mean is that the capacity to impose the world on us
and to impose the way we live and the way we,
and a kind of social credit system or some kind of something
is coming towards us at full speed.
Now, the question is, what do we have to mitigate that?
And I do believe that when I look at all the solutions in front of me,
I do believe that the foundation of Christian love is the best solution,
but I don't know how it's going to play out.
I also don't have that much hope that it's going to...
This is also maybe the reason why I don't totally understand Lindsay's thing
is that I don't really believe that even Christianity,
if it returns, at least in the short term,
at least for 150 years, 100 years,
is going to have the power to take over society.
It's mostly a way for people to be able to live
approximately in their families, in their communities,
in their parishes, in their more local settings
in order to be able to live the best life possible
and to make the most of things.
That's the way that I see it.
And in some ways, maybe plant a seed for the future,
but the idea of some kind of Christian fascism in the United States
I don't know, it's like I just don't see it.
Maybe I'm wrong, maybe I'm naive.
I just do not see that as a...
So it's a real drarer sort of thing.
Yeah, it's more like it definitely is going to do wrong.
Yeah, yeah.
It's just a rather...
I totally agree on this idea,
like that in some ways that his Benedict option,
you know, not that if we're treating home society,
but rather being deliberate about your community,
about your choices, about what it is that you want to be,
is the way to go.
But I don't see it...
I don't think we're going to save the world.
Yeah, it's funny.
We had Oliver at Donovan on a few weeks ago.
He's arguably the top Christian political thinker
of the last 100 years.
And we put this to him partly,
but he was just like,
look, you have to deal with what's realistic.
And a return to Christendom is just not on the cards.
Now, I know plenty of people who are pushing for it.
I sort of knew Christendom, but certainly in his view,
it's not realistic.
But do you know many people that are pushing for it legitimately
or as an aesthetic?
I know there's a meme aspect to it,
which is the idea of pushing the idea of a Christian world
as a driving, as something that drives you, right?
As something that kind of gives you hope
and gives you a vision to move towards.
Maybe it's because I'm not in the same circle to you,
but I don't think I've ever met anyone who really thinks
that we're going to have a Christian emperor.
I don't know what exactly they can imagine.
Well, there's integralism from the Roman Catholic perspective.
I'm not Roman Catholic.
I don't know well.
No, in the strongest versions of it, as I understand it,
people like me, Protestants, we can survive,
but we're not allowed to share our views in public.
Again, that's in the strongest version.
Is that happening in the United States of America
or in Europe, in England?
Look, this isn't my view at all.
Exactly, I'm just naive.
Maybe there's a Christian emperor over the hill.
Who knows?
I just really do not see that as a possibility at all.
Yeah, I make a habit of speaking to people
with wildly different views from me.
This is one of the views that comes up,
but basically, what they'll say is that the problems
are that large, that that sort of solution.
I'm just going to get very dark before that solution is available.
I'm not defending it.
I'm just saying some people say it.
Sorry, do you want to say something?
No, if they say it's going to get very dark
in the sense that things are going to get so completely out of control
that people are going to desire a Christian,
that the nation will yearn for a kind of Christian culture,
then maybe, but that's not anytime soon.
And if that happens, then that'll happen.
I mean, it's like, if it happens that people see how dark
our kind of nihilistic freedoms can become
and that they turn their heart to the Lord,
like Nineveh, all of people turning towards a better morality,
let's say, then I don't see why that would be a problem.
That would just be what happens.
But the idea of some Christian king that comes
and just imposes it on everybody, that's ridiculous.
I don't see that's the most ridiculous.
But they don't, it's not a king.
It's sort of a, it's a new elite they have in mind.
Again, it's not my view.
So McGillchrist, just brief few final questions.
McGillchrist, we had Ian on a month or two ago.
I'm reading, I'm in the middle of the matter of things.
So I read Master and the Mystery years ago.
I'm in the matter of things now.
I'm going to go as far as say I'm almost a disciple of him,
because I'm so obsessed with his thought.
And I think he's on point.
And he just seems to be saying something similar to you,
that we need reason and intuition, reason and mystery.
No, I totally agree.
I definitely agree with McGillchrist.
I also interviewed him once on my own channel.
I think that we are very similar in terms of our perspective.
And, you know, a lot of the cognitive psychologist types,
John Revekey as well and in our Bernardo Castro,
and there are several right now that are just showing
the inevitability of this question.
Like that we cannot, that the idea that analytic processes
and this kind of, that is not sufficient to human experience,
that there is an entire other aspect,
which is the grasping, which is the intuition,
which is the seeming of the shining meaning
that is beyond the multiplicity.
This holistic, let's say, vision of the world.
This is, you know, not only is it accounted for in every single
religion and tradition from the beginning of time,
but now, like I said, it seems from the cognitive psychologist
that they're realizing this is inevitable.
You know, and I think I'm not, I don't have the courage
to get into the matter of things,
because even when I contemplate the brick, like I, like, who, who.
I know, I thought the same way, but it's amazing.
It's, I'm just obsessed.
I've put a copy that I'm giving it to everyone in my department.
We're going to read and discuss it.
It's really quite something.
I think, so I'm really on board with McGillchrist,
but I do think, though, that in terms of the analytic tradition,
as you know, there was something of a renaissance
of Christian philosophy of religion in the last 60 years.
Alvin Plankton, Richard Swinburne, Eleanor Stump,
William Lane Creeks, the big popularizer.
I do think, though, there is, there's a lot to be said
for the work they've done, and they can at least present
the Christian faith in a way that connects with
the sort of Lindsay Boghossian outlook.
No, I put it to Pete last week, and he was like,
yeah, I just don't think their arguments are good,
but I mean, their arguments are being taken seriously
by really top analytic philosophers,
ones who aren't even theists.
Well, maybe I'm not, I'm not, myself,
I'm not a big fan of that type of argumentation,
but it's also because I'm a, you know,
I really come from a more mystical tradition,
like orthodoxy, I think I have a beauty-first approach,
let's say, to the question, you know,
and I think that that's why I'm closer to the cognitive psychologist,
let's say, in terms of a phenomenological point of view,
you know, the idea that there are certain ways
in which reality, you know, lays itself out to us
that have this dance, right, that have this pattern in it,
and we can't completely, we can't ignore it
because it is the structure of our experience.
So I tend to go there more to kind of outlay
the structure of our experience and show how it is captured
in the, let's say, the liturgical life of the church
in the aiming towards mystery, right,
this idea of that there's something, you know,
there's something hidden behind the veil
that is making everything exist
and you can't completely capture it, right,
it eludes our capacity to analyze it.
Anyway, so that's been my approach,
but I mean, I'm happy that if that type of argumentation
can help some people, you know.
Yeah, yeah, I got that.
I think the final point is,
because we always have this problem
with false teachers and false prophets.
I mean, my own history is a complicated one.
As a teenager, I was mentored by a guy who claimed to be a prophet
and he turned out to be, I think, a sociopath.
He was exposed two years ago
when he stole a church worth $60 million
and blamed it on the Holy Spirit
and it was in the newspapers and everything.
So, I've seen these guys that appeal to mystery
and, of course, this guy appeals even now.
He's appealing to the Holy Spirit as to why he necked this church
and I think one thing that we can do with reason
and one of the reasons I've benefited from being trained
in the analytic tradition, even though I'm very aware of its weakness,
the sort of McGilchrist-like weaknesses,
is that you can spot the BS, basically.
You definitely need to spot the BS.
That's one of the reasons for tradition.
Tradition is there to help you also, let's say, spot the BS
because there's a manner in which the people that say they're prophets,
they can't just fly off the handle.
They can't just do whatever they want
because they have to be down in a certain way of being in a certain tradition.
So, tradition helps to prevent that kind of stuff.
There's a method of discernment, let's say.
I'm not Catholic, but in the Catholic Church, for example,
they actually have quite a method of discernment
to be able to know if someone's visions are legitimate.
I think it's a little even too, let's say, rigorous,
but it's pretty rigorous.
If you want to have some kind of recognition
as someone who has visions,
they'll send someone to study you for months
and they'll ask you all the questions
and they'll try to figure out what intentions you have
and what it is that's motivating you
and they can discern the spirits, let's say.
But you're right that, for sure,
the world of religion has always been a world of bullshit.
There's no way around that.
The question is, this is the problem again with the whole thing.
It's like the world of religion has always been available
to those who want to trick others and use bullshit.
So then what?
So now you just cast it aside, you just say
that because some people use mystery to trick people,
therefore there is no mystery,
or because some people are dishonest in their religious approach
to use people's desire to follow, for example,
to deceive them and use that to make money
or to get sexual favors or whatever,
you're not going to get rid of people's desire to follow.
And so either they follow the stupid idiotic guru
or they follow Taylor Swift
or they follow whatever nonsense on TikTok.
So what are they going to follow?
And that's again, that's one of the blind spots again,
is to say, well, if people could all just be reasonable,
reasonable like me,
then we would have no problems.
But that's just not how it is.
Yeah, it's throwing the baby out with the bath water.
Yes, you have holy oils coming from saints
that are recognized as being virtuous
and true to the transcendent,
and people take them and they sometimes use them in words
or maybe a little superstitious, that's possible.
You have that or you have like the new age shop
and people go and get crystals
and we don't know what it's related to.
It has no connection to the rest of our engagement with reality.
I know that that might sound like I'm being cynical,
but I'm not being cynical.
I'm actually seeing that people need these markers of participation.
They just need them.
Yeah, and I believe you're Orthodox,
so you have that sense of tradition.
I think the problem is in a lot of the non-dom Protestant churches,
they just don't have a sense of tradition.
They've got the Apostles Creed and whatever,
but after that it's just the Bible
and there is no sort of inherited wisdom.
Jonathan Paju, thank you so much.
That was a very rich and very discussion.
Thank you very much for joining us.
I hope it was useful.
Brilliant, man.
To our viewers and listeners,
do subscribe.
We'll be back in two weeks' time, but for now, take care.
