Rwy'n cael ei ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud.
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud.
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud.
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud
o'r ddweud
Fyddwn ni'n gweithio, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud, rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Dod y d 450
Rwy'n cael ei ddweud
Rydych diwethaf
Y llydy godio'r northwfan
Rydych diwethaf
Rydych diwethaf
Rydych diwethaf
Rydych diwet黑wg
TWBB
not to be confused with thermodynamic free energy, which entails beliefs about hidden states
in their environment implicit minimalist minimalized minimalization minne maise minimization.
Well, minimization. That's not a word you hear every day. A free energy is formally related to
variational Bayesian methods and was originally introduced by Carl Friston as an explanation
a bodies of perception in neuroscience, which is also known as active inference.
The free energy principle describes the behavior of a given system by modeling it through Markhof
blanket, which minimizes the difference between their model of the world and their sense and
association perceptions, basically, of the world. The difference can be as described as surprise and
ac os undo bydd eich cym ysgol y dashERS
ein modell yn y system yw'r hiwn.
Mae'r pertyn y bydd Cymru yn y meddwl y dy digitsau
am eich modell yn Guess Stop,
gallwn f elim,
rydyn ni'n de allodun i ymgelwch chi
y sench yn oedno
y sydd inherited wedi然 ar yr allan y cynllun newydd
yn un o'i model yn dim,
sydd fwyaf amdana ni i steidi'r enw lle rai clywed arweigdd canolodd ychydigodd llai
A yna ni'n credu'r pryns appreciationur, mynd beth ni'n meddwl
Wrth cre Wrongwyr yn bryh 넣a wedi r millorngau ym jeuxag yna
Ier beth ble ellai bod y model e vallahi ar bob amser yn astaur
Hynny'n fydd yma'n hyfrgonell gwyddoedd mwy peth圴
goal of my work was not to do anything related to physics or metaphysics or mathematics it was to
try and figure out what would be necessary for
the creation of a self-aware technological being so artificial general intelligence essentially and
even though I don't like that term and
basically that would include what is technologically necessary and also
yw angen o amser
y cefnod Ginger closer
ac mae angen y
hen nidosiwch fel amser
ond â nhw angen o'n gwneud
ass mathwch fel Paul
c expertfyneth
arlas cael eu chliwydder
a Maherhof Blanchett
a brebiau
cael sydd
yr un dweud
Diolch!
eineunIK maenig yw rhanfobl yn y
model mewn hirole feall.
Diolch hyn yw'r newisio mewn total cyn firit
arocalio'r variants a variants a係wl hwnn?
Wren o ceisio'r l panforth hyn a somf
neu mewn i wneud lliwys novel.
Mae holl o'iandro yn Lynyddu.
But Carl Christen, creator of the Free Energy Principle,
is a British neuroscientist at University College London and an authority on brain imaging.
He gained reputation as the main proponent of the Free Energy Principle,
active inference and predictive coding theory.
Carl Christen studied neuroscience physics and psychology at the University of Cambridge in 1980,
and completed his medical studies at King's College Hospital in London.
Carl Christen says on the parents of the benefited individuals who believed in neuroscience physics in
him that they did not have the right magic energy during the years,
and the reason they did not access for their family there was material research andanasional edited by
thesehoo ment Film Eiw.
It's not a scientific use,
but somebody is trying to help Camp Kyle to achieve information about science science,
if it puts someone in trouble to make them in trouble.
He might have hadsaw many investigations and analysis from Jim Howard that everyone else
that went to universities passes this on between not only to many people.
y Buddios pethau o gweldoedd hannwch i bobl sy'n llawer o bobl
ddiwylliant,
a gynnig o'r Viking amgofain.
Cyngor?
Ychel yn y gall Produchters Ywi fi wnaeth eich cyngor yn rhoi ffordd yn편.
Requiem ti sut")wn arnihynau.
Os writing ar fiwl gy Wein am gyhoedd.
O ran nhw Childrenaidd.
Yn...
Yn successes.
олжu Aberchilyw.
Rydyn ni wnaeth auditorurio yound
y....
ond rhai'r tifanau, yma, yn haf deg i santhon i'r bigfynthver.
Let's just do that first.
O le Nurs!!!
Jos neu sefn, rhai bobl,
Here it says the...
..Dono ni'n cenizn...
... writing it for primary perspectives
That are inside, out, separately, and oneness
And these four perspectives are interdependent
turnig gan roedd y cyfnod o unrhyw o unions ac roedd y cyfnod o unrhyw gyfrennu mas te gwyl
ddeg, boed wedi cael sy'r cyfrannog y frayr flodd y byddian arni Organization Show y boid
fel roed i beth saeth i bawb iddysgu restrictur o uniondedd.
Nad oherwydd roedol eggwr fel hyn o'r cyfrannogah race a beth sy'n cael ei successorwyr
mant oherwydd hyn yn ogylched i dntand.
A sy'n de privacy hefyd ond.
Roedd yn tyfion o爱ch, roedd yn tyfion o dal, roedd yn tyfion o y dryd o lech o energiau hefyd
fod fy gyn 암, maeoup yr amser, wyno yn id·f ynحدd am sylif ZustELLfynn sy'n Skyng shooter
yng lŵl er fåw, sydd wedi an scholariaethaurons fel e'wa amserau 10 m.
bah raised whiffrwyd rwy'n rhoi,來, there is no, you can't create...if you are all there is,
if you as a sentient being are all there is, there's nothing else, then you can't create
something that's next to you. You can only create something that's inside of you, because
there is no world outside of you to create another thing in. You are the world.
a yn ystod yn credu y dweud o'r dweud o'r dweud o'r dweud o'r dweud.
Fy gyd, y gyrdd y fawr yn fwy o'r gweithio'r reilio'r ddweud,
ond mae'n meddwl o'r llyfr o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud o'r ddweud.
Mae'r llyfr o'r ddweud o'r ddweud a'r ddweud o'r ddweud.
Fy en unknown im yn de mwy o am neud fo ma thedw hwn nid yn un,
ond fe rhesfaint bwrddies yn ei sél a dyna fyd meddwl degrees.
yw y gallwch fin nhw, ach clywodd yn pen llwy o bwrdd o y bydd y lineag o colludiaeth
oedd yn poeni o gwblod clusteru'r bwysig honno'r pethau cynciluretyان yng Nghymru,
費ysgrifanc maydd am ei gobeithio i ddim ni allan i wahanol y ffordd inn hissifwn wedi credu wiselltf arddek John
byddanol mor grim honi'r ardal.
Ond yma hefyd gen i'r g 96 traveled chip firesh,
s гwein o hwn rotate,
am sylwedd dda,
o holl ti'n bod yn wir yn mynd i'n bitigol
o ran i'w lle mas g anymore o ifonau yn gallu y dod
lle mae'r ffordd a beth gallwch' pethau'r ystadydd
i wneud bod gayul yn gallu cyfdhacl
mae beth wnaeth ei ums lying wrap
P
oscillio kylw各位.
bell o broinden ni o gweithio bobi internet hefyd.
Wal, o blaen.
Er oma, a awraddiad mor archif gweithio hefyd yn y Cynaker theod careful
holliant mewn roddo ru, via daeth i'w bobi, a byddain o d screws
a gwunain efo bobi desp standards angen cy waite jo i neb ao mawr
hynny, sut mae'n abogaeth Dadw i gael mynd gan millon cyntaf
i'w amdoedd yn niachu mewn metersic,
oherwydd, er oines yn gweithisneidahanol o'r wneud ein
felly wedi gwnaetio yn ytaf 5000 oe wedi'i gwybod, mae eisiau pentrcies.
Ond beth yn daech ei bod wedi wasb certainlyad, o fe wnaetio arw才'r dweudio'r gair a ff Candy
dwittiau'r gennych wrthysgw space ydi echo arall, efallai'n rhan yn edrychwll yn mi ystyried iawn.
A sydd yn amtion hwn ddweud yng empoweredd acserio, yn cyf expanding hwnnw, ond roeddi'r hwachant benimetadau llungofyn neu neu fan f 떨 arall.
Mae'r Perfect Specsau ei bwysig yn cael yn denctat** yn serpent diplomatic.
A gael amddant matiau'r fitadurau gweld o fally iechyd diwylliant am ganddo dweud y pethau sy'n cwerlft ac psychologych cily услов,
y cynpus ar whistle, ac mae g heldwch yn gofyn drifi.
roeddwn i'r reineu at y blygu yn unrhyw ar gyfer gwneud ysb HDR Athen ddweud oilyb
wydeichwch gettin ar yrthink ystoli acrossi.
Dyma hwnny maen nhw'n gl goodsant er sefydli gyda'i dal o weld gwgwled,
a rhai'n sgw Telethcel yr Tamb oopsgwrs yn hwnnw dechydig phond le nadau'r gw kaydiad
The free energy principle does as well.
And so, we are going to look at that.
So, also, sentient singularity theory says that
that a sentient singularity is a sentient being.
Okay?
And it's basically...
it says here...
A sentient singularity theory denotes a singularity as the structure that has the property of infinite one as such as a mobiestrip and one being that is composed of many, or one being that is composed of many beings, such as a multicellular organism.
Or a cell that is composed of molecules, or a molecule that is composed of atoms, et cetera.
And that these are the building blocks of the cosmos, as sentient beings, what I call sentient singularities.
And each one has these four primary perspectives that it perceives.
So...
This is...
We're going to start getting into what the free energy principle is. This is the first clip.
The most likely path that the system will take, particularly the states of the particle or person that we're talking about,
that we can associate as paths of the action with paths that minimise something called variational free energy.
That's the most likely path that the system will take, particularly the states of the particle or person that we're talking about.
Notice that he said particle or person, okay? So they have the same intrinsic functionality, I guess, in his model.
We can associate those paths of the action with paths that minimise something called variational free energy.
So that's basically it. And then the story is, well, what's variational free energy?
Well, variational free energy is, as with all actions in physics, it's just a path integral or a time integral,
a sum, an accumulation of a functional, usually known as a lagrangium, where in this instance the functional in question,
this variational free energy can be read as exactly the same quantity that statisticians,
psychologists, people trying to understand data would treat as a proxy for the evidence for some model of the world.
So this is known as Blazing Model Evidence. Statistically, it's also known as a marginal likelihood,
the likelihood of these sensory data, the sensory, the paths through the sensory states,
under a particular model that would try to explain a hypothesis that would try to explain those data.
So you've got this interpretation of certainly the fact that the functional form of this variational free energy
that is being minimised by the paths of least action of the autonomous, the active and the internal states
on something, a part of or a person. Now, looks as if it is trying to minimise the quantity
which provides an approximation or a negative approximation to marginal likelihood on model
evidence. So in other words, it looks as if the most likely paths are trying to maximise model evidence.
So one can read that in many different ways, one can read that in, as Jacob Howie has read it,
a philosopher and neuroscientist who has a commitment to understand into this kind of
formulation as self-evidence, literally interacting with your environment, actively inferring, engaging
with your experienced world, your eco-niche, in a way that looks as if you're trying to solicit
the most evidence for your model of that world, this quantity. Okay. Okay, so basically it is,
he's talking about Centine Binks, he's talking about how you
go and you look at the world and you're looking for evidence that is confirming of your current model of
or construction or vision of what the world is and we're going to get to how this can be actually
exploited and how this can be dangerous later because they talk about it, but this can be
dangerous. The exploration of consciousness can be quite dangerous, but not even the exploration
of consciousness. You can be, your consciousness can be manipulated and you don't, and it's important
to be able to identify where that would be. I'll get some water. Okay, so
this is the Free Energy Principle.
Yn y rhaid i'r ffordd o'r ffordd o'r ffordd o'r ffordd, ond y ffordd o'r
Free Energy Principle, is it tries to understand the relationship of something in relation to everything
else. So you're starting from the premise that something exists and then you have to think carefully
what is a thing and how do I distinguish it from something else. So immediately you start,
you have to introduce a partition between the states of things that comprise states that are
internal to the thing and states that are outside the thing and thereby think carefully about
how those states are coupled and what happens is that you have to introduce a further set of states
and then there's blanket states that constitute a mark of blanket that mediate a bi-directional
exchange between the internal states and the external states. So you've got this notion now
of taking the states of any universe, any system that you want to try and understand,
and partitioning it or carving it into four subsets, internal, external, and then sensory and active
states that constitute the blanket states, where the active states mediate the effects of the internal,
on the external, on the inside, on the outside, and the sensory states conversely mediate the influences
of the external on the internal. So with this particular partition, which you wouldn't need if you
wanted to now just move on and develop, say, quantum mechanics or statistical mechanics,
sort of longian classical mechanics. Okay, so a few things here. One, now I hope some of you,
at least watching this, see why this is so amazing, because his four-part partition
with Markov blankets, he calls them, which is basically what I think
is what I would call sentient singularity, but he calls them sentient artifacts. So later on
in this, he says, this four-part partition is necessary to begin the formation of
sentient artifacts, which is exactly what I'm talking about. These four primary perspectives
are necessary for any sentient singularity to be able to perceive itself as and achieve
self-awareness. Also, therefore, awareness of what is not self, because you must be aware of
self in order to be aware of what is not self, and you must be aware of what is not self in order
to be aware of what is self. So they're interdependent, and this is different than just simple neural
nets that we currently have in AI, which isn't really AI. There's no such thing as AI, not even
AI is AI. There's just intelligence, and it's not artificial. It's just natural. It's like
consciousness. It's everywhere. But what he's saying here is exactly what
sentient singularity theory is about. It is about how do you distinguish between different things,
but outside of relativity. It was the end result of my work, but it wasn't
actually the original goal. Understanding sentience was the original goal, or consciousness,
of self-awareness, I guess you could say is better by putting it. It was the original way
that I thought about it when I was first formulating this. In sentient singularity theory,
you have inside, outside, which is separate and one. So in free energy principle, and Markov
blankets, you have internal, external, so inside and outside, and you have active and sensory states,
I guess. One of them would be your, it would be you are,
the mechanism, the process that is happening is you are receiving or absorbing sensory
information. So information is from the outside is moving to the inside. So it's, it is,
you're receiving input. That's what I'm trying to say. You're receiving input.
And then the active state is when you are now taking that information that you've sensed
through your sensory mechanisms, and you have processed it, and you are now acting in accordance
with that new information that you have, in the, that new information that has been input into your
system. And so that is active state. And what it is, is it's just you acting on the outside world,
and it is your output. So the sensory, you sensing things is your input is your receiving input,
and you acting is you are producing output. So that output would then be the input for
the other observers that are able to perceive whatever that output is in the world that you
are putting out. And that would be impacting other sentient beings or sentient artifacts or
sentient singularities, as I would call them sentient singularities as, as Friston would call
them sentient artifacts. So this is exactly the same. And what he says is that, and we'll get
into it in a minute, but the way in which he models how, what part of this four-part partition
can impact the other parts is fascinating, and I'm going to look more into it, how it relates to
mine, because maybe not on this stream, but in sentient singularity theory, and I'm not sure
if this is the most up-to-date model, but you have like oneness outside, inside, and separate,
and they are defined by each other. So separate is inside or outside of oneness,
and inside would be separate, and oneness outside is separate from oneness,
and oneness is outside and inside of separateness, kind of. So it's, and I'm not exactly sure if
that's the best definition, like I said, and I don't think this is the most updated model, but these
two are definitely correct, and this one is at least close. So separate usually would mean
it could be outside of oneness, and it could be inside of oneness, but it's depending on your
perspective. So you separate from another is inside of oneness, and you observing something outside
of you as separate from you, that would be outside of oneness, but you observing yourself inside
of you as separate from another that is outside of you would be inside of oneness. So it's kind of
complicated, but it's, these two are definitely much easier, this outside and inside, but
it he has sensing and acting, and I have separate and oneness, and
so active would be oneness in my is in alignment with oneness in my model, and
sensing is separateness, because you sense that which is separate, and then you act, and once you act
on a system, you become part of the system, so you become one with the system. But as you sense
the system, you're not inherently one with it, even though people who are into quantum mechanics
are like, that's not true. But what Kristen said, though at the end of the clip that I played,
is that this is basically that you cannot use this to get to quantum mechanics, and I totally
disagree with that. There's a reason why there's four fundamental forces, and that they are really
the strong force, the weak force, and electromagnetism, and the strong force, and electromagnetism are on
two sides reflecting across the weak force, and then they are kind of summing to oneness,
which would be gravity, and we don't really fully understand this relationship yet, and that's the
point of trying, you know, all these theories that have the goal of unification with gravity.
They've already unified the other two forces, the other forces, but they have not yet unified
them with gravity, and there's a reason for that, but this, you can get quantum mechanics and the
standard model from these four primary perspectives, it's, there's more, you have to get more
than just these, at least I think, than these four primary perspectives
in order to get to the standard model, but it's so close, and you could use the free energy
principles models as well as active and sensing and internal and external, you can do it, but
I mean, if you can get to the four fundamental forces, these forces correspond to force carrier
particles, and these force carrier particles are part of the standard model, and you know,
they, when you understand what is, what is an electron, and what is a boson, and what is
a neutrino, at least what I think they are, you, they stem from those particles, stem from
relationships that are described by these, this four part partition, so they're described by
interaction between internal and external centered artifacts, and that is basically, that does mean
that you can get quantum mechanics from the free energy principle, essentially, which is amazing,
but I'm not claiming to do a great job explaining that right now, but it's going to be in the paper
that I'm going to be releasing, at least, at least the correspondences will be there,
so like I said, please hit the like button, if you're watching this, you find this interesting,
share this, comment any questions in the chat that you may have, and I will get to them,
but this, his work, Friston's work, is incredible, there was a four hour stream that he did with
Kurt, and I have not finished watching that yet, I will finish watching that, and if it's,
if I feel it's worth, you know, doing an episode on, even though I've already done this one,
then we'll do it, but I thought that the two hour one that they did, which is their most recent one,
highly suggest watching that one, even Kurt said to watch that one first before the other,
and I think that's probably true because this, it's tough to, it's tough to understand,
even one of the things that came up in the stream is that
there was a word that was actually used, free energy print, Kurt said that many people
describe the free energy principle as inscrutable, I've never heard this word before,
but it means like, unable to be understood, and
we'll look at it, but I have a different reason for why it seems inscrutable
to some people and intuitive to others, which is what it really is, than what Friston said, but
what we have in common with the variation of free energy, so what that means is that
if you now understand at hand the functional form of your variation free energy, that depends upon
posterior beliefs or beliefs about the outside world, under a geritim model, quite simply a probability
density over the external causes of the consequences that are the sensory states,
and then you can use that methodology, use that principle to start to simulate, to build
sentient artifacts that behave in the way that we assume under the free energy principle
that you and I are behaving. Let's see if I can make a nutshell of the nutshell for some people
who are more familiar with physics, so let's say you have a ball, you want to know the dynamics
of the ball, you can understand this with Newtonian force, and that's useful for certain
calculations, or you can think of it as minimizing a Lagrangian, and then that actually provides a more
useful, for most cases, way of calculating the trajectory of the ball. So then right there when
I said ball, we've identified the ball. Now here you're not just limiting yourself to balls, you're
saying let's say cells, instead of talking about people because we can break it down simply, at
least for me, for myself, I find it much more easy to think of a cell. Okay, so then we want to know
what are the dynamics of the cell, how is the cell, a single cell, going to act? Okay, firstly,
the first step would be identifying that cell, and when you mentioned the word Markov blanket,
that's a way of identifying what this object is, because in order to identify what an object is,
it's often useful to identify what it isn't at the same time, what it is and isn't, so that Markov blanket
delimits the cell. Now is that correct so far? Absolutely, yeah, so I think the cell is a perfect
example here, you've got a cell is just defined by the boundary which would be the surface of the
cell, and that would essentially be the sensory states that I was talking about before. The insides,
the intracell in the states would be the internal states, and then the milieu in which that cell lives,
which is usually in a bunch or family of other cells, would constitute all the external states.
So you've made the very first step just talking about a cell, a thing, you've defined it in terms
of this partition into internal, external, and the sensory states that bound and separate the
inside from the outside. You may be asking, well, where have the active states gone for a cell? I usually
like to associate those with something called acting filaments that just lie underneath the surface,
the sensory states, and actively push the cell surface, say, all the filia, the
mechanisms that cause motion of the cell should it move around. So those parts, those states that
are responsible for cellular motility, so when now thinking about a moving cell, a swimming cell,
for example, that you need to supplement that partition with active states, so that's
absolutely the first step, and then you're going to go on and now translate the bull, what's the bull,
in this metaphor. You also mentioned the word bi-directional earlier, and when I was learning
about this, the way that I like to understand this was that in computer science, generally computer
scientists think and can only think in terms of you have an input, then there's a black box,
and you have an output, and that's essentially computer science. That's exactly what I said.
Okay, so you have a cell, or an organism, you have a molecule of an atom,
you know, whatever it may be, even a cast, or a technological sentence, and
it interprets its world, and you interpret it as its own holonic entity. A holon
is like a structure that is self-referencing, kind of in a way, so here, holon, define it. A holon,
oh look, this is fascinating, a holon is something that is simultaneously whole
in it of itself, as well as part of a larger whole, in other words, holons can be understood to
constitute constituent parts of a holes of a hierarchy. This is exactly what I talk about all the time,
how hierarchy is necessary to understand all of this, because hierarchical structures is how you
deduce what structures are sentient artifacts and which structures are not, because the hierarchical
lineage that you go through, which is like a cell, is inside of an organism, an organism is inside
of a cast, a cast is inside of a nation, but really that means like a technological
sentience, or technological singularity, it's inside of technology, and a molecule is inside
of a cell, and an atom is inside of a molecule, so this is how you know which direction
to look in, in which these sentient artifacts manifest and evolve.
But otherwise, you start thinking about stars, and you start thinking about planets, and you're
like, is a planet sentient, is a star sentient, is a black hole sentient, and is a galaxy a
sentience, and you start branching off into the wrong direction, and you're like, well, you know,
person is inside of a planet, and a planet is inside of a solar system, and then a solar system
is a star basically, and then an atom is inside of like a galaxy, and the galaxy is inside the
universe, and you've branched off in actually the wrong way, and you cannot get to where you
need to get to, but it's close, but it's not quite there, but this is just very important
exactly what they said is that, you know, knowing what is outside you, and knowing what is inside
you are two parts of two sides of the same coin, you get that coin at the same time, you can't get
an understanding of that which is outside of you, but not yet understand what is inside of you,
or really you cannot get an understanding of that which is separate from you, but not,
but have an understanding of what is one with you, who are you, so in order to know you, you have to
know what is not you, and so this is exactly what they're talking about, this is what the
free energy principle is about, and it is basically saying that this exchange of inputs and outputs
of information, so basically your acting states are your output, and your sensory state is when
you are receiving input, this like, you know, mobiestrip, never ending mobiestrip of information
where it's basically you receive information and then it's flipped and processed and then
spit back out as an output which is an action, so you sense an input and then it goes, you know,
it is processed by your mind, organized into a hierarchy, differentiated, you know, whatever,
and then oriented around a goal and then spit back out in terms of action, and this is you
becoming one with any structure because anytime you act on a system you become one with that system
and anytime that you sense that system, you are perceiving yourself as separate from the system
because you were perceiving the system separate from you, so it's that separateness from sentient
singularity theory is the sensory state from, is the perception, it is the perspective that is
perceived during the sensory aspect or part of this four-part partition, and then the oneness
is perceived is the perception when you are acting, so you are becoming one with the system
because you have acted on it and you perceive yourself as separate from when you are perceiving
it initially, so these are the perspectives that are associated with
these four-part, this four-part partition, and here we can just look at this real quick,
so we can go to my work, we can go to
my
work here
pan wnaeth iawn—各filiau iкиwyd
wedi credu hynny.
Dyna, dywedwch i chi?
Rwy'n heb rydych yn credu an SonoSi Rhaeddaeth!
Wrth i'n cy ensig yantes a hyr hwnnw yng ngynhwys a'n mynd i'n holl yn uned yn galwfall
Ond fi wneud beth roedd yn eu gweld yno.
Mae'r teudnewet o'r rhe tbsp yw nad oes ar eittho'r gweithret i'r mod iddi puber ynddo Very
yww hyn sydd fel pawan nebifangelio hyd yn ein hamsgrif een riliad drws iliw projects ond ydy hynny sg의 Would be ater anghof
a dypa yn 하겠습니다 a hynny lifted y SNF or SNF singul a featt ac mae y mae'r wyleding gyda summon
ac yn haneswellof y parlun newid,ン� 좋아하fiadau ac a Bürger Cayo yn gallu b~]ad
ac mae'n meddwl ymlaen, felly rwy'n meddwl beth sy'n...
hen oc oeddi i chi?
Fy enw'r wedi noos darkw file yw'r meddwl.
Dyma'r
sentiant.
Rwy'r energi.
Di'n credu cymaint.
Ryn oedd hwn hy tôi..] iawn.
fe dyna a eau rydyn hon,
Unrhyw unrhyw unrhyw hwnna o��겠습니다.
ac ydyn nhw, yn y Prifysg Llywodraeth Llywodraeth Cymru, ychydig ychydig ychydig ychydig ychydig ychydig ychydig ychydig ychydig ychydig ychydig,
ychydig ychydig, sydd fyddwch ar gyflawn.
Mae'r cynnwys.
Mae'r cynnwys.
Mae'r cynnwys.
Mae'r cynnwys.
Mae'r cynnwys.
Okei.
executives.
These are the same thing, obviously.
But there is that bit of a difference because what is happening is
This is very much about perspectives, and this is about functions.
This would be your...
Constraints and degrees of freedom would be...
Kind of like...
Almost like this kind of.
Not saying that this is exactly correct, but I'm just kind of riffing on it a bit just to think.
So...
Constraints are limits, kind of, you know...
But there you go.
This is the same thing.
You have geometric unities, X4, and you've got the tetraeutron from...
Clear one's theory, and I'm sure there's more, but I mean you can...
I'm not saying these align, because they don't, because I moved things around, but...
It's really going to be...
This would be gravity.
And then outside would be...
Separate, and then this would be...
And then I think...
Strong force, nuclear force, and there you go.
I don't know if that's correct or not, but it's fine.
All right.
But this is about function.
It's about what you're doing.
Okay, so like...
What is happening?
What is perceived?
So my theory is about what is perceived.
Free energy principle is about what is happening, okay?
And I don't want to say on this stream which one is more fundamental, even though I'm pretty sure it's going to be sentient singularity theory, just because...
The free energy principle is about minimizing deviations from the truth in your model, I guess, of reality.
And it's about what is happening within the various parts of you, I guess, of a sentient artifact.
And then a sentient artifact is a sentient artifact by definition because it is perceiving, it is feeling, which is perception.
And what you perceive is what dictates your constraints and degrees of freedom.
So the perspectives that you have are what are responsible for your allowances, okay?
You can't see then you are limited in what your actions can be and also in what your sensing is.
But if you can see, then it opens up sensory state, kind of, and then it also opens up an action state for you.
This is much more about what is being perceived, not yet what is being done, okay?
So what is... I guess you could say what is being done.
So it's almost like this is step one, this is step two, as we start to, like, I guess, make changes to the world.
And then you get to, you know, probably geometric unity.
And then you get to maybe emergence theory, because all of a sudden now we're in a, where we're talking about three-dimensional space,
where we've moved back into relativity almost because you were talking about the pixelisation or the fundamental pixels of a three-dimensional space would be tetrahedrons according to emergence theory.
But this is way before you get to a three-dimensional space.
But, like I said, they all have their unique strengths and purposes.
Fascinating. Fascinating.
Okay.
Okay.
Here. This is good. It's in next clip.
There is a thing that's in play. There is a mark of blankets.
And what that tells you is, in principle, it would be possible to take all the states that constitute, say, an echadnish,
and this find, identify the thing of interest, say, me, and my internal states.
And then I would identify my blanket states. And then I got the rest of the states.
But now I can start again. I can find another set of internal states and identify its blanket states
and then take those states up the table and then start again.
And recursively tile all the external states so that now I've eliminated effectively external states and replaced them by the internal and the blanket states of all other things.
And then on that view, what happens is that because there's a statistical insulation or separation of internal and external states by the blanket states,
that means I can never see your internal states. I don't need to know your internal states because everything that is knowable about your internal states is on the surface on your blanket states.
So now the picture that emerges is an ensemble of things, natural kinds, that are coupled to each other via their blanket states.
No individual particle or person or thing will ever have access to the internal states of anything else.
But there will be coupling influences and mediated by the blanket states, the active states, and possibly the sensory states.
Mathematically, you can actually have the sensory states also influencing the outside.
But for simplicity, let's assume that sensory states do not influence external states.
It is just the role of active states to actually couple back to the outside.
You mentioned something extremely interesting.
I'm going to say one exception to what he just said, even though I agree with everything you just said, except with bearing one exception.
And that is God.
God has access to your internal states and can perceive your internal states because God is outside of time and space
and isn't limited by this differentiation that he has created.
Even though he has created it and he chooses to not necessarily act in a manner that would violate your internal states,
even if he is perceiving your internal states.
So he could perceive your internal states, isn't changing your internal states necessarily always.
He can, and sometimes he does, if it's the right thing to do.
But normally, you would want to preserve multiplicity because multiplicity of consciousness is necessary to the creation of meaning.
He doesn't want to just make you do whatever he wants you to do just by making you do it, basically turning you into a robot that he can just control remotely.
That's not what he does because that eliminates meaning.
Because it eliminates you as a singularity unto yourself, as a separate from him.
And if you're not separate from him in any way, then there is no meaning.
So when you're talking about consciousness and people are like, well, is it you are God?
No, you're separate from God.
Okay, the answer is both.
You are separate from me.
No, we're all one.
Okay, the answer is both.
Because the reality is that if we didn't intrinsically impact each other eventually.
And then we weren't one, part of the same system, which is a sentient being in and of itself.
Then what happens to you doesn't matter to me, and what happens to me shouldn't matter to you.
And also, if we aren't separate, then I don't matter and you don't matter because you and I don't exist.
So you need separateness and oneness in order to have meaning.
And if you have two parallel universes, okay, in just, I don't know, the Sean Carroll-like many-worlds model or something,
not claiming to perfectly understand it because I kind of gave up a while back.
But, you know, as I understand it, there's many universes and what happens in one does not really influence another.
It may make another, but it doesn't influence the other.
So once you have two parallel universes branching, because of a decision that has been made,
they're separate from there and no longer relevant to each other.
So in that model, what happens to one of them doesn't impact the other at all.
That model is incorrect, first of all, but it causes all kinds of logical breakdowns when you take things to its ultimate extreme,
which is why his model doesn't work and many other models don't work.
If meaning is not the goal of the system, then it doesn't work.
There is just a bunch of logical breakdowns eventually.
But there is one uniter that always makes it so that what happens to you should matter to me.
What happens to me should matter to you, even if it's not as direct as certain other relationships, which it's certainly not.
But that doesn't mean that it doesn't matter.
It matters, and that is because there is a uniting structure to all things that doesn't limit it by these boundaries that Carl Friston just talked about.
My internal state is not visible to you, but that doesn't mean that my internal state is not visible to God,
because if my internal state is not visible to God, then eventually you will have a breakdown in meaning and relevance, essentially.
You have to have a unifying structure to all influence, just really tough to understand, but maybe not.
Maybe it's intuitive for you, but regardless it's difficult to find the words.
It's the only structure that does transcend boundaries in sensing of internal states.
The reason for this is because you are inside of them.
The internal state of a cell, of a cell's molecules, does that matter to the DNA of a cell, is inside of a cell?
Does the state of that DNA matter to the cell next to it?
Maybe, maybe not, but it's not perceivable until it manifests in some action form, but it still matters to the organism that it's within,
because that structure that is higher up in this nested, holonic hierarchy of sentient artifacts or sentient singularities unites all of the levels below.
You can feel the state of the levels below you.
Now, not saying that you have a direct picture of what is happening inside your cells,
but the state of your cells will impact, the internal state of your cells will impact your internal state, because it impacts their external state, yes, and things like that.
It's different than another cell next to that cell perceiving an action happening by that cell that it's next to.
It's different, it's like a feeling, because it's inside the cells inside of you.
The cells that are next to each other are not one, because in it of themselves they are united by the structure above, which is us as an organism,
but those cells inside of us are one with us.
They are also separate, but they are also one, whereas the cells inside you that are next to each other are separate from each other,
and they are not one with each other on their level.
You have to up-level in order to perceive the oneness that they have, because you have to see that they're part of an organism.
We are the organism, so we already perceive the oneness.
Remember, this is about perception, so from our perspective we know that we are one with our cells, and therefore our cells are one with each other,
and that they are also separate, but from the perspective of the cells they are not one with each other, they are separate from each other,
and it would take an awareness of the up-level structure of an organism that is uniting the cells to be aware of and perceiving of the structure that unites them into one.
It's tough, and sentient singularity theory is about this.
It's about the perspective that would then lead to the constraints and degrees of freedom that are described in the Markov blankets of free energy principle.
It's like proceeding, it's very tough.
This is the one rule of these Markov blankets according to Friston.
We're going to talk about this.
The individual independence that definitively specifies the Markov blanket.
It so happens that all you need is a following rule.
Internal states can only influence themselves and active states.
External states can only influence themselves and sensory states.
That's all you need.
With that condition in place, you now immediately have a Markov blanket or a particular partition.
From that follows the conditional independence and therefore the interpretation of the autonomous dynamics,
which is a description of the trajectories or the paths or the processes taken by the active and the internal states of a particular particle.
That means that it is mathematically allowable in the sense that you do not destroy that Markov blanket or the statistical properties of that Markov blanket.
It is allowable for the sensory states to influence active states.
You may be thinking, that's a bit silly.
There's a way in which my photoreceptors or my cochlear and my ear materially affect the outside.
I think that's absolutely true.
For things like you and me, then you would not normally expect the sensory states to influence the external states.
That's not the case for much simpler things.
When you look at much simpler things, where most of the dynamical influences, the coupling that we're talking about,
that you'd write down in terms of the differential equations, the large van equation, most of those influences...
This coupling that he's talking about is what I call entanglement.
...are basically short range.
We can preclude action at a distance, for example.
If you're a single cell, unless you're next to me, I don't really know what you're up to.
Having to extrude here all sorts of interesting things about long range,
electrochemical communication and electrical gradients of the like.
Let's just take a bag of cells that just diffuse stuff locally.
They touch each other, and that's the only way that they can influence each other is by being proximate in some Euclidean space.
Everything's short range.
In this situation, you have a very different structure.
Here, the sensory states are the cell surface.
When these active states lie underneath the cell surface, change the environment,
they do so by pushing the cell surface into the external milieu
and cause changes in the sensory states, the surface states of other cells.
Being a cell is probably a good example of where your sensory states, just by your surface states,
actually do all the heavy lifting in terms of changing the outside,
the spatial relationship with all the other cells that you're co-inhabiting a particular organ, for example.
It's a little bit counterintuitive, but I think a really interesting thought experiment
and actually a practical consideration when it comes to looking at the different ways in which
insides couple to outsides and the nature of interactions between the internal states of something
and the external states of something.
We sort of take it for granted that we can do action at a distance.
Literally, I can talk to you in carrot.
The reason why he's saying that our perception, our sensory states,
does not directly influence the outside world, the external states of reality for us,
but they do for much simpler structures, he says.
I think he gets into it there, but I don't think he's talking about even cells.
He's talking about particles and things like that.
I need to double check, but here's my explanation for it.
Exactly what I said earlier is that basically you cannot perceive the entirety of what is going on on your level
because you would need to be perceiving of that which is happening on the levels above you
in order to perceive the totality of what is happening in your world
because the level above you knows to some degree what you are able to perceive
and it changes the world based on what you are able to perceive
because it wants to show you certain things that would give you a perspective
that is good for the state of the system as a whole, the sentient artifact as a whole.
When I say this in previous streams about how our constraints and degrees of freedom
when we're looking at spacetime, our intrinsic constraint is that we are always in our current location.
We cannot change that, we're just always going to be in our current location.
We can go closer towards our goal in space and we can also back up and go further from our goal in space
which is back the way in which we came.
If you want to go to Chick-fil-A, Chick-fil-A is the goal in spacetime
and you are in your current location always along this journey
but you can also go forwards towards the goal
but you can also go backwards away from the goal
because you can go backwards towards your house or whatever where you originally started
even though you have the goal still of getting to Chick-fil-A
but for some reason you've decided that you're, I don't know, afraid or something
and you're not going forwards.
So then that's your forward, your positive degree of freedom
which is forwards towards the goal, a negative degree of freedom which is backwards away from the goal
your intrinsic constraint which is your current location which you cannot escape
and it is due to you, you are the constraint
or you are the cause of that constraint.
Then there is an extrinsic constraint that you are always within in this journey
and that in spacetime is time for us.
It's just like this is the true four-dimensional spacetime
instead of length with height in time it's forwards towards the goal, backwards away from the goal
your current location and time
or the being that you are within looking inward
that's us looking outward being inside of another sentient artifact
or sentient being looking outward
but if you're that sentient artifact that we are within looking inward kind of analysis
then you have your constraints and degrees of freedom are not in spacetime
they are in time space now so everything is flipped
and you have the ability to maneuver in time
not in space because you are space
so it's like saying like move you know within yourself
it's you really can't so time is like a vortex
and you can if you were the being above
then you can basically like change how this vortex spins
and how fast it moves in certain locations
in order to influence time
and so what it does is it's trying to line up
what is happening
what it wants to occur in time
with what you are having occur in your space
so you want to get to Chick-fil-A
and let's say it wants you to meet your future spouse on the way to Chick-fil-A
and all of a sudden you get into a fender bender with some girl
and you're some guy and you get this girl's information
because you just had a fender bender with her
and instead of hating each other you end up falling in love and getting married
and this is because literally sometimes
you can say God or the universe as a sentient being
maneuvers in time by slowing down or speeding up
and this isn't totally imperceptible by you
you cannot perceive this
if they slow down time you can't perceive it
but you can see when certain things just like happen
it's like well what are the odds of that
that that happened right then, right there
and think about that right then and there
it's not just about space it's also about time
so the time has been adjusted to match up with where you are
and all of a sudden something happens
this is only done by the being that is able to
it means that your perception, okay
your sensory state is influencing the world around you
because it's the being above you in the hierarchy of holons
is changing the world around you based on what you are perceiving
but you can't see that on your level
but you might be able to see that
if you're looking at much simpler structures
as Bryston said, below us
I don't know if you're going to look at hadrons or something like that
you might be able to see this type of thing happening
but that doesn't mean you understand it
but it means that you can see that the sensory state
of a being or of a particle
is influencing the world around it
but us, we assume that the sensory state of us
is not influencing the world around us
and that's not true
so people very often get into
well you know if you look at the double slit experiment
it shows that our perception influences reality blah blah blah
this doesn't mean it's really understood by people who are discussing it
but this isn't even exactly what I'm just talking about
I'm talking about the world around you
the timing that dictates when certain structures are in position
related to other structures
is being manipulated by the being above you
in order to cause the intersection of events
and that is being done based on your perceptions
your sensory state because you need to sense
when these events would take place
it's not doing it just based on your actions
having an impact on the outside world
it's doing it based on your perceptions of the world
and then it is taking actions
that would change your world
it's not that your actions change the world
it's its actions change the world
but you can't see this on your level in the periodicity
of Holonic sentient artifacts
so it looks like just you know
your photon receptors, your eyes
do not influence the world necessarily
and I'm not looking at things like in quantum mechanics
I'm talking about just you know normal experience
it doesn't seem like it impacts the world
but it does because your world is also a sentient artifact
that you, it is a multiplicity of sentient artifacts
that you are interacting with or sentient singularities
and you're all within a singular sentient singularity
or sentient artifacts that is making conscious choices
based on what you are perceiving
not even what you're doing
sometimes also what you're doing
but also what you're perceiving because it has to
it has to maneuver within time
which means it's not just about what actions you're currently taking
it's also about what actions you might take
which is based on your perceptions
that you currently have
so what your sensory states
and
what this means is that there's no such thing as probability
from an objective perspective
there is just determinism
and that determinism is based on choice
and your choices are constrained
or are dictated by certain constraints
and degrees of freedom that manifest
based on a number of factors
but
there is no probability
probability is an illusion
it's about you predicting what will happen
what another being will do
before they do it
or beyond them doing it
but it doesn't mean that
it's not actually deterministic
because as soon as they make a choice
it's no longer
33% he's going to take
you know, I don't know
like he's going to go to college
and 66% he's not going to go to college
it's he's
there is
there is no
there's nothing almost
and then there is 100% he's going to college
or 100% he's not going to college
but
prior to this you can
you can make predictions
but that doesn't mean that it's not deterministic
it's not
reality is not
probabilistic
your ability to
model reality
is probabilistic
it can use probability
which is about
it's just geometry really
but it's not
that the world is probabilistic
we think about this all the time
in quantum mechanics it's like
when you're looking at electrons and you can't see where it is
and whatever it's like
oh it's based on probability reality is probabilistic
no it's not probabilistic
your model of reality
in your
Markov blanket basically
or in your mind
is probabilistic
but
it's actually not
there's no such thing as probability
outside of an internal
mental model
of reality
which is really just a bunch of mental
a bunch of minds modelling
but
because
reality is actually
composed of a bunch of minds
and
or act in accordance with
you know
a deterministic algorithm
which would be like instincts
sometimes you can make choices and go against your instincts
and that's actual choices
and those are deterministic
cause deterministic outcomes
and then also
if you don't make any choices and you're just acting on
instincts basically you're just letting an algorithm run
it's also deterministic
so there is no escaping this
whatsoever
reality is deterministic
it also allows for choice
because choice is part of determinism
fundamentally
and
but
probability is
reality is not
probabilistic
it's just the interpretation of
you know
your internal model of reality
could be probabilistic
but not
actual reality
that's always deterministic
and
that is something we don't yet fully understand
but it's
I just felt like mentioning because
he's talking about probabilities in multiple parts of this stream
and
probability is not
it's not fundamental
it's just
emergent within a mind
that is modelling the world around it
but it's
and it's because of the limit that it has
where like
Friston says you can't perceive the internal state
of another
from you
and that's true of us
and another
human like me as a human and you as a human
I cannot perceive what is happening inside of your mind
I cannot perceive what you are perceiving
I can only perceive your actions
once you do them
but
the being above you
above us, the universe, God
can perceive what you are perceiving
and can make adjustments to reality
based on it and we will not
be aware of those
easily so like he said
the sensory state
of simple structures can influence
reality
but not of us
that's not true it's just we can't perceive it
okay that was cool
okay
next
I'm going to go a little bit quick
because I have about 15 minutes
I'm trying to end this
but this is
Kirk talking about how
this
about how the free energy principle
about how the free energy principle
principle is inscrutable
which means you can't understand it
it's just not understandable
and I'll explain why this is the case
in a minute
between our sensory states and our active states
there is not
a gift
of very simple
sensory like structures
and automata
that can't interpret signals
will be subject to
will be sensitive to
influences
at a distance
just so you know or for people who are listening
and if this wasn't obvious enough
the free energy principle is famous for
or perhaps infamous for being somewhat
inscrutable for people who have
a physics background or math background
what would be the minimum prerequisites
this is how I like to conceptualize
the podcast before I interview someone
I think about okay what are all those pieces of knowledge
I need to know prior to interviewing them
so obvious example is let's say QFT
you need to understand classical mechanics, Lawrence of variants, quantum mechanics
perhaps bundle theory
if you want to understand Yang Mills and so on
properly so what would be the
prerequisites for someone to properly
understand the free energy principle
let's say if they have a math or a physics background
it would be
it would be
probably much less than you'd expect
to encounter
a university
you'd certainly need to know
sort of
the basics of variational calculus
and it would be really nice if you understood
where a logological account
came from
and to understand
the simplicity of action
basically
Hamilton's principle of least action
how that inherits from
pathogens of Lagrangians
and how that arises
from
dynamical systems theory
of a very simple sort where you can
write down any random dynamical system
as a stochastic differential equation
or a large family equation
and I think
that's probably quite sufficient
what
what you would need I think
to
appreciate
all the interpretational
richness afforded by
what happens to
the paths of least action
when you have a mark of blanket
you'd need to know a little bit of probability theory
you'd need to know what a conditional distribution is
you'd need to know
what
have an intuition as to what is
meant by
of levitins for example, marginal likelihood
ok
I was very good at probability in school
it was like one of the things I was
ridiculous at
and I took a
class, it was one of the few math classes
I actually took in
school it was required for
a finance degree
and it was probability
and I aced it, I think it was the top of the class
and I mean like
when I say top I mean like the top
not like
I was so good that
like once I got my wisdom teeth out
and I had to take the test
like a couple days after everybody else
and everybody had gotten their tests back
I knew that
and I
was allowed to take the test
like
like alone
at a different time
which was a few days later because
like I said I got my wisdom teeth out
and I didn't finish
my last problem because I knew that
if I had done it I was going to get 100% on the test
and it was my first test in the class
and I
so I hadn't proven that I was like good enough
to get 100% and I
thought that I would be seen as cheating
so on the last question
I just started doing it
and I just stopped
I just never finished it so I got
every other question correct except the last one
and that's not to brag I'm just saying
like this is probably
why I can understand a lot of this
and
I just have a natural
kind of ability to
visualize
probability
which is really like
it's like geometric relationships
but it's not actually
real like I said it's just me
modelling reality and it doesn't exist in actuality
so
so like if you think about marbles
and like there's like three marbles
three green marbles and a
thing of nine marbles and there's
six red marbles and three green marbles
inside of a jar and
you go and you're
blindfolded and you reach your hand and you have to pick out a
marble and you know what are the odds
that you pick out a green one versus a red one
and obviously the probabilistic odds
are that you pick out
you know
one third
it's that you're
the likelihood that you pick out a green one
would be 33%
but the likelihood that you pick out a red one would be
you know 66%
but in reality
which one you grab
let's say you reach your hand and you're like
feeling around and you grab there's
you can feel two distinct marbles but you can't
tell which one's red and which one's
green as soon as you
make the choice to go with one of those two marbles
it's now all of a sudden
it's 100%
going to be
a green one or 100% going to be a red one
assuming that one of those was green
and one of those was red but it's just
your mental model
that is
frames the world in a probabilistic
sense but the reason why he's
what he said here was great I love this
he said
the prerequisites
are much less than what you would think
and people have told me since the start
of this project you don't understand
you couldn't have done this because
you haven't even taken a physics class
you couldn't have done this because
you haven't read Penrose's Road to the
Reality
you haven't done this because you don't know
what this equation
is
you haven't memorized Maxwell's equations
whatever
they've always placed these various
assumed prerequisites
on top of this work
and
and it's much less than you would have expected
because
but it's also much more
it's like much more than what you would have expected
but much less because it's much less
of what you would have expected
but much more of what you wouldn't have expected
to be as necessary
and that's really what it is, it's a super position
so you need to have had a lot more
of
what you wouldn't have expected
which
odi gweledd, прям ymwy nickname i yw'n credu'r trofod ychydigent, a dychydig i'ch ddigW
Ydyn ni am父fyniad â'r neud cyfarwmp.
Mae'r neud cyfarwmp sydd mwyll echoes seep hwn yn gweithio neu siaradfa swyn etr говорhe.
Ac mae'r siaradfa swyn etros, lwylo yng nghy dumplingaronol sy'n sefydlueddigaethau.
Dyna ff lockedór integrfynol Cymru,yn fach yn hiddiolion, fyrderant geni'n gwy mount o entrepreneuriaeth Aelodau Ardôr,
bod chi gwelur yr dysgu gyfietiddio bndergymell nhw, anombos chi oherwydd oedd y Cymru a'r cymdeithaserdd y gallwch blwyddyni 한번.
Yn gwrth chi ymd intrinsicio hir dros preco fort yn amifi addins iaol,
na i ymddî MSNohr hon.
Rwy'n enghro at syniad wedi bod ans merchants yn gyf petaidd yn goron mawr.
You would see that people in computer science have an easier time.
People even in biology would have probably an easier time.
Neuroscience may be have an easier time,
as long as they're not too focused on the brain.
But physicists would really struggle.
When reality is a bunch of sentient beings or conscious beings or minds, and physics assumes that that's not the case, then first of all, you're starting from the wrong place.
But when it is a bunch of sentient beings or minds, understanding, fundamental reality means understanding mind, understanding consciousness, understanding sentience.
To do that most correctly, which you really need to get this right if you're going to understand it at all, is you would look to where you can learn the most about that structure, about a sentience, about a consciousness, about a mind.
And if you do that by looking to secondhand information that is being taught in school on a blackboard, or on a YouTube video even, or in a book, and that is where you're looking to understand sentience, instead of looking inside yourself to understand sentience, mind, consciousness,
you're already starting wrong, because you're basically trusting secondhand information over first hand information, which, as soon as you really understand this, mean you know that you can't do that, and as soon as you do, you're screwed.
This is, I'll talk about this in a minute, this is how people can literally manipulate your minds and how you can lose your mind a bit.
But especially even when you're studying consciousness, you're just listening to other people talk about consciousness and you start taking other people's word for it, over your own personal experience that's first hand information, which is what experience is, then you're going to start to lose it, or at least it's possible.
And, you know, Michael Levin, when he was on Kurt Jaimongol's channel just talking about his work, he said that the investigation of consciousness is a first hand endeavor.
It is experienced. It's you experiencing yourself, and paying attention to it, and that is how you can understand fundamental reality.
But if you go to outside of yourself to understand fundamental reality, you're looking not at directly at a sentience or consciousness to understand fundamental reality, you're looking at kind of like a reduced watered down version of, or explanation or model of it,
because as soon as you turn something into an image, or you translated verbally or anything like that, audibly, all of a sudden you've reduced the amount of information.
Experience, though, is experience, and you thinking about yourself, experiencing yourself and self-awareness coming from that, that is where you actually understand reality.
And to those who have done that to a sufficient degree, free energy principle and sentience singularity theory are going to be intuitive.
But to those who go outside of themselves to understand whether or not this is true, and they're trying to relate what is being described in the free energy principle and sentience singularity theory to what is in this textbook, in this textbook, in this textbook,
it's going to be inscrutable. But if you're trying to take what is being described in sentience singularity theory and in Carl Friston's free energy principle and you're trying to relate it to your personal experience, that's where it's going to become intuitive.
And academicians, especially those in academia, especially those in physics, are going to be probably the first ones to go and see if whether or not the free energy principle lines up with something written by another physicist, which you don't even know that's true.
And it's like that game of telephone. You want to just hear the original message. You don't want to hear the message after it's been said in a chain of 50 people. The odds of you getting the correct message from that is just not nearly as likely.
And imagine that that was across multiple languages, and also some people wrote it down, and some people said it verbally, and some people played trades to get the next person to guess it, and instead of just you hearing it from the source.
The thing is, is that you are the source. And that is where you're going to see free energy principle become intuitive. And you're going to be like, listen to him describing Markov blankets and you not being able to influence the internal state of another being, or sense the internal state of another being separate from you.
You can't sense what is going on inside. You can't sense what they're sensing. And if you think about that, it's going to be intuitive. But if you're like, I'm going to go look up in a book. I don't know what book yet, but a book of whether or not a cell can sense what another cell is sensing.
And to determine whether or not the free energy principle makes sense or is right, you're not going to, this is not going to work. You're going to misinterpret. And you might as well just like, not do it at all.
But this is why to some people it's inscrutable and to some people it's intuitive. People who it's intuitive to are trying to, they're checking sentient singularity theory and the things that come from it and the lessons that come from it and free energy principle and the lessons that come from it and the models that come from it with their personal experience.
And to those people, this is intuitive. But if the people who are already relying, like what Kurt said, is like, what is the prerequisite knowledge? The prerequisite requirement is that you are a sentient being and that you are checking it based on the lessons from these two theories with your personal experience, primarily.
That doesn't mean you don't also check it with other things, but you hold what lines up with your personal experience above what lines up with some fact in a textbook, always, or some equation in a textbook.
But if you're assuming that there is coursework that would be necessary to understand the free energy principle, then you've already put second hand information above first hand understanding in your attempt to try and understand this and you've already destroyed.
Like any hope of you truly, you know, having an intuitive understanding of the free energy principle or sentient singularity theory, you don't need school to understand this.
School can teach you things that are known that then you can later see line up with the lessons from these two theories, but whatever that information comes from that is not as important and should not be put as high in the hierarchy of determining whether or not something is true kind of as your first hand experience.
So when I say consciousness exists and somebody is like or choices exist and somebody says choices don't exist and you're just a leaf, you know, like a Sam Harris leaf in a river or whatever, but like consciousness doesn't even exist.
Some people, as I said on here before, some people have come onto my discord were trying to get their PhD in philosophy of consciousness.
Their thesis was arguing the consciousness doesn't exist. What they're doing is they're placing models of information processing that have been watered down, that are watered down reductions of what is, you know, actually happening inside your mind above their own personal experience.
And then saying because those models exist and there isn't any process information in a certain way outside of consciousness, not even thinking about the fact that they are a consciousness who had to write down the models or another consciousness did.
They are now coming to this crazy conclusion that invalidates their entire existence. They have basically thought their way into, like, you know, into delusion.
And it is because they put first hand, second hand information above first hand information. You cannot do that in any attempt to understand consciousness because everything, because you are consciousness.
You can do that in an attempt to understand airplanes because airplanes are not conscious and you are not an airplane.
But if you're trying to understand a conscious beings and you are a conscious being, then you are the greatest evidence to look to in order to understand whatever it is that you're looking at that you're also trying to understand another conscious being.
But if you're just looking at, you know, airplanes, trying to understand airplanes, don't look to yourself as like an attempt to understand airplanes because you're not an airplane.
But this does work with consciousness. And as soon as you do this, where you put second hand information above first hand information, meaning like you put what you learned in school above what you have experienced in real life, you're going to lose your mind.
And we see this with people all around us. And we're going to talk about this for a minute. So I thought this was interesting real quick, and then we'll get to that discussion.
And then I have some questions that I have to answer. I'll get to the chat promise, and then we'll go, but here.
So, if we are coming back to this picture of some mathematical universe that I've now tiled with multiple Markov blankets encapsulating or defining lots of particles, and basically we inhabit a universe that is constituted
by things like us and initially mum and dad and mothers and sisters and peers at school. That means that our models of our lived or experienced world have to have models of other in it, which means you need to be able to disambiguate between sensations caused by others
and sensations that you've caused as a phan.
Well.
This right here is that this is the universe composed only of Markov blankets basically or, or sentient singularities or sentient artifacts, and the you have the hierarchy of the sentient artifacts, and each basically.
You have these.
This is a a sentient artifact or Markov blanket kind of.
And it is a calculating structure that is self calculating so you can see that the values are changing based on what we is the input, but the input is always one, and because you are your own input in any kind of like sensible sense and then you've got the perspectives here the definition of those perspectives here, and you've got some of the math going on, which is just basically you're taking information and you're in a symmetrical structure, which means like all of what's happening here.
Has to be symmetrical with that so you have symmetrical calculation, and, and then you take the information that is internally calculated, and you add it together and then you also multiply it so this is multiplication.
This is addition simultaneously until you get a self reflection, which we'll get into later, but this is this right here is a bunch of these.
There's one, there's one, well, there's one, there's one, and they're just stacked and layered and entangled in such a way, and that they're connected, and you can see that it's still calculating.
Okay, in very specific way, and if you change here and you go zero, all of a sudden this is all zeros because this is all connected input one and there you go.
This is exactly what he just described, it's tiling, tiling of the world, according to, like these Markov blankets, which are composed of four primary perspectives of inside, outside, separate and oneness, and that function according to internal, external sensing and acting as the four part partition of the function.
The optionality of this, or of these of this one sentient singularity that is composed of four primary perspectives.
Okay.
Fascinating that he even used the word tiling.
Okay.
So, Kurt deals with understanding, trying to understand a lot of different theories of everything.
And in doing so, you know, especially when these theories are primarily centered around consciousness in the end, which is any accurate one would be, it's very easy to kind of just start like to have an existential crisis.
And I will say to Kurt, like specifically, and anybody else who is who is experiencing some kind of like existential crisis of like, do I exist? Does my wife exist? Does my do my friends exist? Does God exist? Does does anything exist? Does anyone exist?
It just like to chill out. It's okay. Like, and know that you're not the alone in going through this. And in it, in that of itself, like knowing that you're not alone in going through that means others exist and you exist because if you are not alone, then like there's others who are going through that as well.
And I can tell you that that's true. And obviously you don't know whether or not exist. And I don't know whether or not you exist. You could be a construction. But by who?
You know, it's like I didn't construct you, at least not initially. But because there are parts of you that I don't know. And, and, and as soon as I do know them, that doesn't mean that I understand even what what you're saying.
There are math, you know, mathematical statements that, you know, Kurt makes that I don't understand, because I don't that I just don't know it's not even that I don't understand them. I don't know them because I didn't go to school for mathematical physics.
But that, that information came from somewhere, came from someone that's not me. So I assume also that there's others that exist, not just me, but also it be wildly inefficient for you to be the soul.
Existent sentience in your digital world. Okay, in your simulation, I guess, would not make any sense. It'd be extremely boring. And it would be extremely inefficient. And prime. And here's the thing, it would be isolating of you from others. And that destroys meaning.
Meaning was the purpose of the creation of ex of multiplicity of existence. So if you exist, and you didn't create everything else that you experienced, then there had to be someone else who did. And the creation of multiplicity is for the sake of meaning, because there is no meaning outside of multiplicity.
And if you're God, and you're all there is, there is no meaning to you, to your existence. You don't feel meaningless. You are meaningless if you're God, and there's no no one else beyond creation. And God didn't feel meaningless. He was meaningless.
And he felt meaningless, but he also knew he was meaningless. Beyond creation, God didn't feel lonely. He was alone. And he knew it. You can feel lonely in this in this existence, but that doesn't make you actually alone.
It's just like a lie. God knew he was alone. He knew there was no one else. He knew he was meaningless. He knew there was no meaning at all. And there's logical reasons for that.
If all that exists is sentience, then all that matters is sentience and your impact on other sentience. So if you're aware that you are all there is and that you are alone, then you are aware that sentience is all that matters, but that you are the only sentience.
And you don't matter to any other sentience, and therefore you are meaningless. You are meaningless. You are alone. Not just lonely. You are lonely. You're the loneliest person to have ever existed was gone at a certain point.
It's also the least lonely person to have ever been. When I say person, meaning like having personhood, having sentience, not like a human. But simultaneously the loneliest and the least lonely because he knows everyone now that multiple city has been created.
He was the most meaningless or had the least meaning. I can no meaning prior to creation. But now has all meaning because everyone else who exists other than himself was created by him.
So we all owe everything, which means he's the most meaningful.
So my point is that there are logical reasons why multiplicity of consciousness exists, even though sometimes you question everything along in your attempt to question everything.
You question your own world away. And I did this. Kurt says in here, he says, I felt horrible because I'm questioning whether or not my wife exists.
I've had that exact same experience where I looked at my wife and it was my girlfriend at the time, and I've looked even done this since, but don't really do this anymore in any kind of real way.
But prior to getting married, there were moments along this journey where I looked at all my friends and my parents and my siblings and my girlfriend who I've now married.
And I have just been like, are you even real? Are you a bot in a game and I'm the only player?
And that's okay to question that. It's also wrong to deduce that you've made some error if that is your final conclusion.
There's so many reasons why that is not the case. But it is understandable why you would question that, and I've done that so many times.
And it is a nerve-wracking experience to do it honestly, to be like, I wasn't even married yet.
And if you are married, it might be even harder on you or Psyche, but to not be married and to be like, am I about to marry a bot?
And to really think about it is, it's tough. It's a tough thing. But I can tell you, you're not alone in this, which means that the inevitable conclusion of that line of questioning is that you should assume that the other beings around you are sentient, that appear to be sentient or sentient.
There are logical reasons from so many different, I guess, angles that that is true.
But ultimately, if sentience is all that matters, that means that there's purpose and meaning to this world that we are in.
And if there is, then multiplicity of consciousness is the generator of that, and therefore you should not think that you are alone in the universe.
The universe is not even. It is in and of itself sentient. There is no escaping of this. You're much less lonely than you ever could be, or could have imagined, I guess. It's just impossible.
But I understand. It's tough, man.
I'm trying to imagine. What would that be like? And if someone's a materialist, well, what does it mean that this was dead and it somehow emerged that we have consciousness?
Either way, the point of that is to say, I've been feeling like for almost a year and a half now, just in a void, not sure what is true and what's not true. That's fine. I can deal with that, except that that led me to this spiraling of such...
It was probably the most terrifying experience I've ever had in my life, and it took me weeks, and I'm still recovering from it, where I felt like, shoot, am I? All that exists.
And then just that thought alone, I'm like, I don't want to believe that that could be the case. And I remember looking at my wife and thinking, is my wife even real?
How much of an imbecile, and how ungrateful, and how foolish is it, and that I would even think that I feel bad that I would even entertain that thought, oh my gosh, I'm scared. I don't want to go to the hospital, because I felt like if I was to truly accept that thought, I was on the brink of just losing it into an insensate spiral.
I became extremely scared of myself, and I think that I'm the type of person, I am an anxious person, and I am the type of person that tends to obsess over thoughts.
So then I started to obsess over this, and for the past couple weeks I was so scared, so scared of my own mind. So almost like a hypochondriac for mental disorders, where I didn't want to even look up what the definition of schizophrenia or psychosis was, because I was afraid that I would see the signs everywhere.
For example, a few days ago, or about a week ago, I remember generally we all speak to ourselves in our own heads, and sometimes I use the phrase, so I don't like that, or I like that, I use the word I in my own internal monologue, but sometimes the word, yeah you can do this, you can do this, so sometimes you use I, and sometimes you use you.
And I imagine we all do that, it's colloquially okay to exchange those two. However, then I thought, oh shoot, what if I felt distant from my thought, what if the one that's saying you is a thought speaking to me like a schizophrenic may hear.
Oh my gosh, oh my gosh, I don't want to hear this, and I was so afraid that I felt derealised and depersonalised when you mentioned Parkinson's earlier, that the difference between the model and then the data, that didn't strike.
Okay, I don't have that much time, so I can't go too deeply into this, even though I want to. But let me explain, I understand exactly where he's coming from, I've been there, this is difficult to navigate, it's difficult to navigate this space of consciousness.
But the thing is, what's occurred might be in actually a harder place than me, because I purposely avoided other people's work along this journey, because I didn't want my mind to just get lazy and start taking other people's work for even just being like, that sounds good, I'm going to take that.
And I know that my mind could do that, because that's what we do. We're like, we don't want to do the math of why the earth would be a sphere, at least from outside of it, that's another discussion.
Then we would just take the word of someone else, because oh, that makes sense with satellites and other things that I'm aware of in my mind, but so we'll accept it as true, even though none of us have ever been outside of the earth, unless we're astronauts, so we're always taking somebody's word for it.
This is something your mind can do, and you've got to be really careful of it when it comes to consciousness, because you cannot take second hand information above first hand experience in this journey.
And if you do, you will lose it. You really will. You cannot take your information that you have figured out by looking up definitions of schizophrenia or anything like that, or as basically like the determining
evidence as to whether or not you have lost it. And if you do start looking to other sources outside of yourself to validate or invalidate your own existence, then you are almost, it's like you have chosen to invalidate your own existence,
and maybe not realize it, and you can't do this. And there are certain instances in which you can do this where it creates little moments of derealisation of yourself as a sentient feeling entity that actually has self-control.
But then there are certain topics where you cannot do this. Maybe you can do this with climate change, where you're like, you don't know what's going on with climate change, so you look it up and you're like, I've taken that guy's word for it, even though you have no idea, and you can't relate that with your first hand personal experience in any way that really matters.
And so you take on second hand information and you put it above your first hand experience. And then you can become this like, I don't know, this like broken mind that can buy a house on the beach and then also preach about how sea levels are going to rise 30 feet in the next like 30 years.
It's like, well, you just bought a beach house on the mansion on the beach. Do you really like to think that sea levels are going to rise in 30 years? But there's a brokenness happening, and it is because of the prioritisation of second hand information above first hand information.
And it's just momentary in certain things like that, but it can be all-encompassing when it comes to, with your personhood or the personhood of others, if you truly believe that no one else exists, that is a pathway to absolute insanity and in a very serious way.
If you truly believe that you don't exist, you will act in a manner in which like you have removed, you have no more agency. You gave it up.
And see people tell you, you have no free will. It's like, I have no free will.
That is like, I mean, that free will is complicated because you kind of, you have to know that you have instincts, but you are in order to understand where your freedoms are.
But if you truly believe that you could make any choices ever, then you, even though your experience is as someone who makes choices, if I tell you you have instincts and you have choices that you can make that can go against those instincts, and then you think about your own personal experience, and you're like, yeah, I've really had like a lot of drives and like before to eat this and act in that way.
But like, it doesn't go along with how I think things objectively should be done. And it creates a conflict in my mind. It's like, your first hand experience is now validating the fact that you have instincts and you have choices.
It's like, okay. But if you look to some book and it basically says you are nothing but chemical reactions, and that's it, and you have no ability to make actual choices, or for some reason that gets you to consciousness doesn't exist, and you're writing your thesis about how consciousness doesn't exist.
It's like, who's writing the thesis about consciousness? About how consciousness doesn't exist? This can be bad. And it pains me a lot because I'm like, well, you know, I'm teaching about consciousness, and because that's what this theory is about.
But I don't really think that you can learn about consciousness from a second hand source and actually get it and not misinterpret it and kind of eventually like, do you realize your own existence?
So my advice to anybody listening to my theory, or Carl Friston's work, or any other theory, CTMU, that is about consciousness, is your experience has to be the primary data set by which all other data are compared.
If it doesn't align with what your personal experience is, then disregard it. Don't think that your personal experience is wrong. Personal experience is right.
And if you have to do this, you absolutely have to, you know, I've said on here before that there, I asked myself like, you know, first, Isaac Asimov wrote a short story called Last Question and ends with Let There Be Light. It's interesting. You should look it up. It's about like tech and AI and like basically creating universes.
And so I asked myself, what is the first question? And I found out there actually is a first question. And the first question, when you ask, you say, what is the first question? The answer is, what is the first question? It answers itself with itself.
And then you get to what is the second question? And it is, what is the truest thing that I know? And the second answer, which is the answer to that question? The answer to the second question is, I am. So what is the first question? It's the first question. The first answer is, what is the first question?
The second question is, what is the truest thing that I know? And the second answer is, I am. And this is like the Fibonacci sequence, one, one, two, three. It's like the first one repeats twice. And then you get, it kind of creates the second question and or the ability to have the second question and then is answered as the third piece of third perspective or the fourth perspective.
But it is like the second answer to the second question, which would be, I am. You are the truest thing that you know. Everything starts with that, that you exist. I am. You are. And anything that invalidates that is false and it must be treated as false.
Or you will lose it. You will lose yourself, literally lose yourself. And you see this a lot with people who are in like politics these days where people, the meme called NPC is non-player characters. It's like just everybody's becoming bots. And they're not always bots. They're bots in specific instances, but they're increasingly bots. And the reason why is because it's people who are trusting second hand sources of information above their first hand experience.
Oh, well, everyone is racist and sexist and whatever you mean by that doesn't matter. It means something negative. And then you hear that again and again and again. You've learned it in schools and that these people are pressed and these people don't need, these people, men don't need women and women don't need men.
It's like if you start taking all this stuff again and again and again and again, the second hand information above your first hand information, which is like, do women need men? Yeah. Do men need women? Yeah. Your first hand experience would absolutely tell you that. You were birthed by a woman. If you were a man, then men need women because you needed your mother, your mother to give birth to you.
But if you start taking someone's word that men don't need women or women don't need men, it's like you're taking some exterior word from this and you're not thinking about your first hand experience. Don't do that because the more you do that, the more you will lose yourself.
But if you do that with consciousness, you can totally lose yourself in like one or two, you know, misconcluded ideas. So I have to go here in a minute, but I thank everybody for the support in the chat. I'm going to answer these last things because someone had asked me about this in theory of everyone discord.
Could you differentiate non-sentient parts of reality? Yes. Non-sentient parts of reality would not be in this hierarchy of nested structures right here of like a hadron is an assembly of quarks, an atom is an assembly of hadrons, a molecule is an assembly of atoms, cell is an assembly of molecules, family is an assembly of organisms, etc.
So this nested holonic periodicity, anything outside of it is non-sentient and this is, each one is within the next. An atom, hadrons are inside of atoms, atoms are inside of molecules, molecules are inside of cells, cells are inside of organisms, organisms are inside of families, families are inside of casts, casts are inside of technology.
Or you could say each one makes up the next. Hadrons make up atoms, atoms make up molecules, molecules make up cells, cells make up organisms, organisms make up families, families make up casts, casts make up technology, and anything outside of that is going to be a non-sentience.
Is every split in the unity feeling something? Yes. Every sentence singularity within the singular sentence singularity of existence itself feels, by definition, that is feeling is the finality of thought or information processing around the cell.
So it's self-aware, it is a byproduct of self-awareness feeling, so everyone feels, not everything, chairs do not feel, but the molecules within it feel.
Like this does not exist objectively, it only exists subjectively, this is a remote control for the lights, it's made of molecules, they do exist objectively and the atoms that make up those molecules also exist objectively and because they're part of this periodic structure.
But you can't be like remote controls and get anywhere. Remote controls make up what? You could say remote controls are made up of what? Plastic, springs, rubber, glass, batteries, you're just eventually going to get to rock bottom, but all of those are just subjective, there isn't really an objective perspective to look at things at.
So you have to go in that periodicity that I showed. I don't have the time to get too into it, I wanted to get more into it but this went a bit long, but I will talk to you more about it and also this will all be in my paper that's coming soon.
Is a story and I'm creating my head a separate cluster of awareness. No, only God's thoughts are sentient, you are sentient thought, but it's not even right to say thoughts are sentient because it's like that's not really true.
It's like you're a player in a thought, but our concrete reality is the thoughts of the being above us, so like God's thoughts or the universe's thoughts are experienced by us as concrete reality.
Even though our thoughts are not experienced by God as concrete reality, or by us as concrete reality, they are just internal states, but because we are inside of a being above us in the hierarchy of nested periodicity of sentience,
Anything that is happening in the mind above us, which is a mind in and of itself, that's what it is, universal mind, the thoughts of the universal mind are literally experienced by us as material reality.
It's higher, their thoughts are higher than us in the hierarchy, and that doesn't mean you can't influence them, it just means that we experience them as hard reality.
You can influence hard reality, but you can push a dresser across a room or whatever, but you can't just think that dresser is not there and it's not there,
because the thought in the mind that we're within is thinking that that dresser is there, so it's there, but it's not a separate cluster of awareness.
There's only sentient beings, really, and they each have various awarenesses, but a thought is not a separate sentient being.
The relationships between sentient beings can be the thoughts of the mind that we're within, so think about your thoughts as a mind, like imagine the universe as a mind and it's having thoughts, and we are inside that mind.
Processes that are occurring within the mind that we are within are going to be experienced as hard reality to us because they are, like you're inside of it.
How do you decide, as an individual, what is not, what I said earlier, that periodicity is of those composite structures, those are sentiences,
and so Hadron may be an atom, definitely, molecule cell, organism, family, caste, and technology, and some of these, they're really four beings or four sides of this periodicity each,
but these eight periods can be split into four and four, and four of them maneuver in space via individuals, and four of them maneuver in time via lineages,
so an organism is maneuvering in space as an individual, but it's lineage, it's really part of a lineage structure, is actually maneuvering in time via a lineage of a chain of individuals,
and they're really the same thing, you are not just one individual, you are the tip of the spear of a lineage that is behind you, so it's a superposition structure,
but which one is an individual, an individual lineage is also an individual, but it's also a chain, but you are also an individual, but you're also an assembly of cells,
so an individual is wherever being can be self-aware, meaning feeling, it has feelings, if it doesn't have feelings, it's not an individual, but if it has feelings, like real feelings, then it is an individual,
so with that, thank you everyone, and what you describe God as, God is the singular sentience that is existence itself, existence is a sentient being, all of existence, and that is God.
With that hit the like button, please share this, I do have to go, but I really appreciate everybody on here, definitely check out the entire interview with Kurt and Carl Friston, I'm going to watch the next,
the other stream with Carl Friston that was older, but it's like three and a half hours long or something like that, and we'll see if there's more to talk about, but his work is incredible and to Kurt, if Kurt ever watches this, or anyone else who is also investigating these theories that involve consciousness,
you exist, and you are the evidence of your own existence, and do not believe anything that violates your personal experience, even if I say it, if I say something and it does not jive with what your personal experience is, then don't believe it,
put it into a separate basket of facts, or not facts, but bits of information that you've heard that may or may not be true, but the things that you put into the basket of true must align with your personal experience,
and that is how you keep your sanity when you do this, and in anything, your life is the best evidence you have of anything, and the logical extrapolations that you can make from your own personal experience and beingness are what you should trust,
not what some secondhand source says in a book or even a person on YouTube, and then the extrapolations that you make from there, you're going to go into nonsense land.
Even for things as simple as like, don't you know the world is a sphere? Is that your experience?
I'm not saying you should say that it's, you know, it's flat in every instance, but I'm just saying like, you know, and I'm not, definitely not what people would define as flat earth, but I just think space is an emergent phenomenon, guys, like it's not fundamental, so that's my position on it, so we should just, there's no argument.
When you're outside of a space looking in on that space, it's a sphere.
When you're inside of a space looking out, it's a, you're going to experience a plane, and so that's the reality, like it's not even an argument, but if you're either of those two perspectives where you're like, the earth is flat, people are like, the earth is a sphere, you know, astronauts that have been outside of the earth and experienced it as a sphere,
like that guy who has experienced it as a sphere should never, ever, ever believe anybody who has, who is saying it's just flat, but he has two perspectives.
One is the perspective that this is flat, and two, the perspective that this is a sphere, so he has two perspectives, and he should believe both.
But if you've only been here, then only one of those is one that you can truly trust is, you know, not a sphere, but that doesn't mean you shouldn't believe that it is a sphere, but if you're outside it, what it means is that you shouldn't let that thought override the thought or the experience that you have had firsthand.
That doesn't mean you can't believe that in some circumstance it is congruent with or it's not mutually exclusive of your experience firsthand, but it has to in some way eventually be reconciled with your experience firsthand if it's not, then it's wrong, and you have to treat it as such.
So with that, thank you everyone. Please hit the like button. Please share this. I hope this made sense. If not, write in the comments below what you think didn't make sense or what you think did make sense.
And like I said, I will not be having a call on Thursday. I have a date, but I will be back on Tuesday and I believe next week should not be a problem either of having a call.
So we'll see. Depending on how quickly I get back, maybe I'll jump on, but don't bet on it. Anyways, with that, peace, guys, and thank you.
