Okay. You can probably see this right now, which isn't good. But awesome. So I am... Yeah,
that's okay. And I guess if you can see this, that's fine. I don't think I have anything
secret here. I don't have a second monitor currently, but I'm anticipating. This is the
first time, obviously, I've streamed on anything ever. So if there's sound issues,
let me know. I'll just see notifications pop up because right now I'm only working on one
screen. So based on the title of the stream, you're probably thinking I'm going to talk
about section 230, which I am. But first, I need to talk about Lord McAlpine and the Kiwi
Farms. And if you don't know what those are, that's totally okay. Lord McAlpine is a, was a,
maybe still is, I don't know, a British politician who in 2012, there was a documentary released
by the BBC that implied he was a predator of some kind. And he sued them, of course, he sued
the BBC and said, you know, that they didn't say his name, but they didn't imply he was a predator
of some kind. And so he was able to sue them and get some money out of them. Let me actually,
I'm going to adjust my microphone, sorry for the noise, if there is any. So anyway,
he sued them and won. Well, he settled outside a court. I mean, I consider that winning. He got
paid a lot of money. But he didn't technically win a judgment. He just settled outside a court.
Anyway, the damage had already been done. And 1000 people around about on Twitter,
tweeted the accusation that he was a predator. And about 9,000 people retweeted the accusation.
So what did Lord McAlpine do? He sued all of those people around all the ones he could find
anyway, around 10,000 people were sued by Lord McAlpine. You know, whoever he could find,
basically, he settled with or he won in court. I don't think he lost any of those cases. The most
famous one is this gentleman over here, who what's his name, Alan Davies, who paid him $15,000. So
you can imagine if he had sued all 10,000 people and they paid this much exactly how much he would
have gotten, it would have been insane. He had to delete the tweet. He apologized. He paid Lord
McAlpine 15,000 pounds, not dollars. And then he donated an additional amount of money. I don't
think they said how much to a local charity. And that was it. All because this guy tweeted and or
retweeted an accusation that wasn't true. Now, what's interesting about that story is that
Lord McAlpine sued the BBC and he won all that money. And then he had to sue 10,000 people on
Twitter to get recompense for the accusation that was seemingly not true. But he didn't sue
Twitter directly. You might wonder why like why would he sue the BBC, which is obviously much
easier than suing 10,000 individuals. But then on Twitter, sue 10,000 individuals. And there's
a reason for that. And the reason for that is a basically section 230 part C, part one, or I'm
sure there's some legal way to say this, I just don't know. But anyway, so that story aside,
I guess I should say I know I said my next video was going to be about WeChat. Obviously, I just
want to do this real quick. And I recorded this in my car, like you'll sometimes I post those
videos and be ranting in my car. And I was so tired of editing it and redoing it. I was just like
screw it, I'm just going to do it live. And then we'll, we'll, that'll be, that'll be it. We will
just see how it goes. So sorry, if you're listening to this later, and you hear me stuttering a lot,
stammering a lot, it's because I'm doing this live and I don't edit those things out, obviously live.
Anyway, so section 230 is actually quite long. In the title of the video, I mentioned it was 26
words. There's there's a lot more to it than just that. The important part that everyone cares about
is this here though, these are the 26 words I was referring to, which say no provider or user of an
interactive computer service, which means things like Twitter, Facebook, shall be treated as the
publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information content provider. Now,
if you're wondering what information content provider means, I brought that up as well. It means
information content provider, the term means any person or entity that is responsible in a whole
or in part for the creation or development of information provided through the internet, capital
I internet, or any other interactive computer service. So an information content provider is
someone posting something online. So if we go back to the Lord McAlpine example, Twitter cannot be
held liable based on these 26 words for information posted on their platform. You cannot sue Twitter
if someone on Twitter of their own volition accuses you of being a predator. You have to sue the
person individually. So why am I talking about Section 230? Because right now in America, as the
election is getting nearer, it's an issue that's coming up more and more and being spoken about
more and more, which is basically what should we do about it? Both presidential candidates,
Donald Trump and Joe Biden, have expressed interest in wanting to repeal it entirely,
this entire thing, just repeal it. The effect of that would mean that someone like Lord McAlpine
or anyone could sue Twitter for defamation or potential defamation posted on their website,
and the lawsuits wouldn't be thrown out immediately citing the Section 230 protection.
Some people like Trump view this as and Biden view this as a good thing, because
basically what their argument is that these big platforms that I'm going to keep using Twitter
as the example to keep it simple, but this works for any of them, Patreon, Facebook,
even MySpace or something, all the big names in tech, they enjoy this protection.
Also to make it more clear, because as I'm speaking, it's occurring to me, I don't think I made it
entirely clear. Section 230, if like the Washington Post posts an article that accuses Lord McAlpine
of being a predator, they can be sued. But if someone in the comment section of that article
calls him a predator, the Washington Post can't be sued, he has to sue that individual. And the
reason for that is colloquially, they call it platforms versus publishers. So in the article
sense of Washington Post, they publish and editorialize the articles they post, but they
don't publish and editorialize the comments. So that's the main difference is that they can't
be held liable for the things said in the comments. There are some exceptions to that,
but I won't go into that now, not at no point. So let me check over here real quick, sorry.
Oof. I'm definitely gonna have to get another monitor. That's going to be really annoying.
I can't just keep on checking back over there. I got a size issue, a resolution issue,
that I'm not able to troubleshoot because it's on the same screen I'm on. Anyway,
let me continue. So I'm talking about, I don't really have a point in this video. I just kind
of wanted to rant about this a little bit, because if you're a fan of Section 230, which I am, for
reasons I'll get to in a little bit, you're in a stressful situation, which is currently
the president and the opposing candidate, the person who's not the incumbent,
they both want to do away with Section 230 for different reasons, but to the same effect.
Really the same reason they just have different points of view, but it's the same reason why
they want to get rid of it, which is these companies have enjoyed so much protection from this law
and not given anything in return, and now it's clear that these sites are centralized locations
for severe issues in our country and around the world. Facebook being able to censor not,
well, I guess I should say first that I don't, I'm not really a fan of Trump or Biden, so
I'm not making these arguments because I'm pro or against either of them, but these are the
arguments they make. From the Facebook point of view, they're able to block and censor certain
information based on, well, really their own frivolous ideas, but they can do it based on where
you live, based on how they feel you should feel. There was an article that came out so many years
ago, whenever that Analytica stuff was coming out, where basically there was an insider who was
saying, if you're a Facebook user who uses it more than one hour per day, the odds that you've
been involved in a social experiment are between 99 and 100%, and those social experiments included
things like seeing if they could affect your mood by showing you depressing updates, you know,
because you'll notice on Facebook, the updates, they're not in order, they're not like in timeline
order, because that would make the most sense. They're like in keyword order that you don't know
because it's part of some experiment you're being used in, but you're not privy to.
Anyway, there's all that. I used to have rants about that online. I took down, they weren't on
YouTube, but, you know, I have a lot of feelings on how these companies utilize this, how they mess
with your brain in an attempt to see if it gets you to use their platform for longer periods.
Anyway, these companies have pretty much been able to work under the table, do all this stuff
behind the scenes, and they've been able to have people, whether they provoke the responses or not,
post whatever they want on their platforms. And as long as they're making a good faith effort to
keep illegal material off of their platforms, people can say whatever they want, and the
companies themselves are not held liable. From Trump's perspective, he's saying, look, this is
being used to censor right-wingers and right-wing politics on these massive, massive communication
platforms. And from Biden's perspective, he's saying these platforms are being used to organize
hate groups and to spread hate speech in ways we've never precedented before, and it's causing
civil unrest globally and, of course, domestically for us in America. Something like that. I've
paraphrased both those arguments, but I think the heart of them is there. I think they would both agree
that that's a fair characterization. So they've talked about repealing it. Trump is currently
pushing, this is on Trump's priority list, way higher than it is on Joe Biden's, because
basically, Trump is under the impression, well, I mean, he's actually right. I mean,
it doesn't matter if you like him or not. He is correct about this. That Twitter is unfairly
targeting him, and they're doing that by whenever he posts something that is factually incorrect,
they're flagging his tweets and putting a little message at the bottom saying,
here's a link to some articles that counter the information, why it may or may not be true,
what he's tweeting about. But they aren't doing that for Biden, who the BBC,
assumedly, ostensibly unbiased source in this election. And even if they were biased,
it's almost like they would be biased in favor of Biden and not Trump.
They fact checked some of the claims Biden made, and he tweeted about on the day of the
first presidential debate, and they completely debunked them. They're like, these are not true,
but Twitter doesn't flag Biden's tweets. And so Trump is right, they are unfairly targeting him.
And his point is, as it gets closer to the election, he's basically threatening Twitter by
saying, I'm going to repeal section 230, which means any site that is just a forum for communication,
like YouTube would survive, I think Facebook would survive, but Reddit and Twitter would not.
Anything that's just a forum for communication would be sued into oblivion. The moment section
230 is repealed, which brings me on to what I mentioned earlier about the Kiwi Farms.
So one of the reasons why I like section 230, I'm no fan of the Kiwi Farms, but I like small
sites having the ability to basically come up. And Kiwi Farms was an experiment. I guess I won't
just say Kiwi Farms because Kiwi Farms and HAN were both an experiment in the same way,
which was basically they were going to be these very unique online forums that
I guess attracted that attracted people who were interested in a certain
certain subsets of internet culture. HAN was more experimental than Kiwi Farms because Kiwi Farms
was like specifically let's talk about and document weirdos on the internet. And HAN was,
I want to see what happens if we create a Reddit where basically users can create their own,
basically it was like Reddit. It was basically a more anonymous users can create their own
subreddits or subchans, whatever it's called, I don't know. So basically it was a image board
Reddit hybrid with very little moderation intentionally. And it was kind of an experiment
in that way. And so I like that idea. I'm not a fan of either of those places. I've talked about
that before, but the idea I think is great. And those sites, they never would survive if it wasn't
for Section 230 because they do enjoy this Section 230c1 protection, this one I just talked about.
As long as they're doing good faith moderation, they don't have any reason at all to be afraid of
starting a site. You right now don't have any reason at all to be afraid of starting a site like
more experimental than HAN or Kiwi Farms, for example. You don't have any reason at all to be
afraid of that because you would be protected under this American law. Assuming you were hosting it
or the business was started in America or based out of America, I think HAN famously, the creators
didn't live in America, the administrators didn't, but it was hosted out of America, which is why
actually I'm not going to pretend like I'm a lawyer on this. I don't know what the rules are
surrounding that. I'm not sure if you have to just have like an LLC set up in America for this
to work and you can host it anywhere. I guess you would have to because digital ocean operates under
American law, but they obviously have servers all around the world. That's one of the things they
offer is that you can use servers from anywhere. Anyway, sorry, I went back to check and see if
I was still getting that issue. I still am. Honestly, I guess I'll take this time to say,
if anyone sees this in the future, I'm going to start taking streaming and doing YouTubeing a
little bit more seriously. There was a guy I met years ago who was super into fitness.
I was always like, what is it with you? How do you do this? All he did was eat,
breathe, and live fitness. I thought that seems like such a crazy thing. I've never felt that way.
I was like, how do you stay so inspired to do it? Because every day he would spend a job's
length amount of time, like four to six hours just focusing on meal prepping or exercising or
whatever else he was doing. He said, every time I get demotivated, I buy myself something related
to it to kind of rekindle my interest and remind myself it's a hobby. I remember thinking,
that's stupid. That's one of the dumbest things I've ever heard, but I tried it recently.
Long story short, after Corona, I had a lot more work emergencies come up,
things I had to work on, and I stopped doing music. I used to do electronic and,
I guess, analog, non-electronic music a lot. I haven't done it at all since Corona started,
but I went out and I bought a new interface, and all of a sudden, I'm doing it again. I thought,
you know what, maybe that's a good idea. I was thinking about taking this a little more seriously,
and I thought, I should buy a new microphone, because the one I'm using now, I've had for like
12 years. If anyone has a suggestion, that was the whole reason I went off on that entire tangent,
was just to say, if anyone has a suggestion for a microphone that's not like, you know,
I don't need to start my own radio show, I don't need something crazy, but it would be nice to
have something nicer than what I have now. I just have a USB blue microphone, like from
before at Blue was a thing, before anyone knew what it was, before every streamer ever had a
Blue Yeti. This is before Yeti, I think. It's just Blue, it's like S2 something, I don't know.
Anyway, it's really old. So anyway, let me know. Okay, tangent, didn't mean to say that, sorry.
Overall, the reason why, and like I said, there wasn't really a point to this video,
I'm going to wrap up here in a bit, but the reason why I kind of wanted to rant about this and talk
about it and get back on to talking about 230 at all is because the internet, after the repeal
of 230, which again, I don't think it'll be repeal. I think Biden and Trump are both saying that to
threaten these companies into changing their behavior. I think what they're going to do is
they're going to revise it or amend it. There have already been proposed amendments. I think
actually one that didn't have a huge impact was passed recently. You have to fact check me on
that, don't quote me, but I'm pretty sure there was an amendment made to 230 recently that didn't
affect this part, C1, which I'm looking at here, I'm highlighting now on the screen if you're looking.
But it did affect something. So I think what these guys want to do is they want to amend it,
they want to change it, they want to make it so these companies don't have insane amounts of power
as far as controlling or in some cases not controlling from the Biden perspective,
powerful movements on their sites. But they also want to keep the idea that some company can start
some small experiment. Because remember, you guys have to remember, I don't know if anyone here is
old enough or who watches my channel is old enough to remember when Twitter wasn't a thing,
when it was a joke, people laughed at because it was back then it was like 120 characters,
I think, or maybe it was even 60. And it was just laughable. I mean, it was a silly goofy thing
where people posted like haikus and like, it was like vine for words for like witty people.
And then all of a sudden news started getting onto it, like people would say they would post
links to news articles. And it was all of a sudden the place where news traveled fastest,
like seconds after an event happened, you could find it on Twitter.
And you could almost always verify it was true. And so Twitter was an experiment. And Twitter would
have been sued into dust and ash if Section 230 didn't exist when it was created. So this law has
to exist in some way. I don't like how powerful these companies have gotten either guys, but
this law has to exist in some way for innovative ideas like that to exist in the future of the
internet. So anyway, kind of want to just get it out there, let people know my thoughts on it.
I'm a huge fan of Section 230, especially C one this part here. I agree that there's a problem
with how free. Well, free is the wrong word, I don't want to say we need to be less free. No, there's
there was obviously no foresight, because how could there have been for how quickly these
companies grew to be just massive giants that are playing huge parts in political games.
You guys, of course, would remember in the last election, if you followed the American election
at all from 2016, that Facebook was heavily accused of being a platform where anti Trump
and anti Clinton propaganda was propagated. Twitter was to there was, of course, you still
hear the meme about Russian bots, Russian bots on Twitter posting misinformation and FUD.
You still hear about that. And these companies never anticipated getting to that point. So I do
agree they're, it's almost like they're too powerful. It's almost like they're too important
for what they are, which were basically, they all started as cute ways to, you know,
cute things to show your grandma on the internet. That's how they all started.
But now they've grown into this thing where think about the fact that Twitter,
if Twitter were to ban one of the presidential candidates' accounts in America while they were
campaigning, just think of what that would do. If Trump's account got banned or deleted,
or Biden's account got banned or deleted, I think that would actually incite physical
violence in the real world, in meat space, not cyberspace. And I don't think they can do it.
If you guys might remember that liberal who was fired from Twitter in their last day,
they deleted the president's account, which actually I thought was pretty funny. I mean,
it's obviously, obviously it was a terrible idea. And I think that person actually faced legal charges,
but, you know, it's pretty funny to leave the president's account. But that highlighted the
whole issue, which is, oh, Jack Dorsey, the CEO of Twitter, is he just the like CEO in spirit,
or is he actually still there? Let's say he is because I don't want to fact check myself
right now. Jack Dorsey is the owner of this company, and he's incapable of deleting certain
accounts. It doesn't matter if the president says the most dangerous thing in the world on Twitter.
While he's campaigning, he is unable to delete his account without inciting some kind of very
serious real world backlash. Anyway, it's all very interesting. And Section 230 allowed them
to get here. So I understand the complaints about it needing to be revised. But at the same time,
if we get rid of it, small experimental sites, even ones that I may not be a fan of like the Kiwi
Farms or HNN, I think that the future of the internet isn't allowing those to exist. And Section
230 is unique to American law. It's nowhere else. Noel, the owner of Kiwi Farms, has talked about
this extensively. And again, whether you like him or not, we disagree on certain things, we agree on
others. But he said like he spent most of his young life living in other countries for various
reasons. And he spends a lot of time reading the free speech laws of other countries. And he said
he's read the laws of Uruguay, Rwanda, Ukraine, Poland, and nowhere, nowhere where he thought
he would be safe to host his site. Is there a law as powerful as Section 230 protecting
small site owners from the crazy things their users might say? So anyway, that's it. I'm probably
going to stop going live now. It's been about, I guess, 20 minutes, a bit of a rough start there,
if you were on. I expect most people will see this after it's published and not live. Recommendation
for a microphone, please, if you have one, that would be cool. If you thought this was cool, let
me know. Obviously, I'm going to do the WeChat video next. I just, after seeing some of the things
that just happened recently on Twitter and seeing Trump once again, pushing to repeal Section 230,
I just wanted to talk about this. And that's pretty much all I got. Thanks, everybody.
No, now I got to figure out how to stop streaming. Oh, God.
