Hey everybody, so this week I had three different machines break for three different reasons, and I thought man
I sure I'm glad I had that cloud video up
Hopefully someone took advantage of that cloud video and did something nice with it
And I thought you know I should put up another neat trick. I've done. This is of course not nearly as helpful
But it's pretty cool. So if you have ever
Done this let me just show it first. I guess I should make this
Make this bigger
Let's make a directory
Let's call it ASDF, and let's fill it with some things. Let's do
ASDF, and let's make three different files ABC. Let's make a bunch more actually
Why not?
LS ASDF you see those files are all there ABCDEF if I were to CD in that directory
Every time I CD I do this
Now this
Might not seem annoying
But when you realize how often you CD LS
You realize you know I really should just have a
Command for that the problem is CD is so heavily used in Unix environments
That you don't necessarily want to alias it to CD and and LS
You might want to use the built-in command to re-edit a
Built-in command something like CD something that you can't oh excuse me
You can't which it's like I can which LS
Which CD the reason why that doesn't work even though CD does work is because CD is what's called a built-in command
And so it's literally built in and not installed in the same way that user bin LS is
So let's go ahead and I'll show you how I do it in my
Config okay, so what I want to do is I want to define a function called CD
I don't remember if this is the right syntax for bash if it's not you will see a weird edit in the video later
But I'm gonna define a function called CD, which means if I run CD this will be run of course
I'm gonna make an if statement if statement will be
This which I actually know it won't be
It'll be this
And what this is what this is saying is if something is not defined so tax Z means not defined
The first argument of what I pass into it so CD whatever argument I pass into it
If that's not defined, but then the exclamation point is the not of that not, right?
So what this whole thing is saying here is if
The first argument is defined if there is an argument after just CD. That's what this is saying then
Oh god
Then what do I want to do?
Well, let me just finish this loop
Or this statement what I want to do is I want to do seed built-in because it's a built-in, right?
And you know when you redefine built-ins, this is how you redefine you can redefine them
I could just write an alias for CD, but for reasons. I'm not qualified to explain to you
Experts have told me that stupid. I don't know why I guess because you have to actually redefine a built-in
Which if you're dealing with a built-in anyway, you you you're probably at a level that noobs aren't so in my opinion
It doesn't make a difference, but
This is the way I've been told to do it is actually to redefine the built-in through built-in. So I'm going to do that now
I'm going to do
CD built-in then pass in the first argument and
And I'm going to LS now LS is already redefined down here as LS tack LAH
Tack tack color auto. Maybe I should put this after it. Is it I don't know if it reads it in linear order
I guess we'll test that we'll find out if I just put LS here
It might not print with color. I might have to put this entire command here because it's all being defined in the same file
But we won't worry about that right now, and then we'll do an else
Is it LF no, it's just else because we're only looking for one command it doesn't matter if there's any more than one command because we have other
Things we want to define. Well, I guess that would be
Well, let's see what happens see what happens
If we only pass in CD and nothing else, right?
What do we want?
CD home and and LS
So this should work again, you'll see a weird edit right now if this isn't how you define functions
I might have gotten this wrong
Okay, so there is a weird edit because something weird did happen. Let's look at this now
Well to first of all it was wrong funk was not right
I needed to function CD everything else was correct
but also I did move it after the LS definition here and
I was gonna say of course, but I guess it wasn't of course. It's all defined in the same file
It's hard to tell whatever things are linear or synchronous or asynchronous or whatever
But it does work if you define LS beforehand and I can show that now by of course just
And I guess what I can do is is also source that file. So you don't think I'm lying
Another trick to source a file is just to put a period there. I don't know if that's common knowledge or not
but anyway, you can see it's working and we have that
Not only without the extra characters to save us all of that awful carpal tunnel
But also we have our CD function ls-ing after every execution
