Okay, let's try to use, so I have 45 minutes, correct?
By the way, yeah?
That's the first.
Right, yes, yes.
You have to make, okay, then we'll push buttons later on, yeah?
So I have this kind of tricky title, yeah?
Power, space, and the bulk problem.
And I start with this bulk problem, which, of course,
This is not quite a mathematical problem, but rather
Scientific one, which I will not approach.
I will be going from the mathematical end.
I will never come to this, but this is a kind of
Guiding light for what I'm saying.
And the problem is, is imagine you have the following kind of
Situation.
You are a mathematician, but you want to solve some
Problem of chemistry, yeah?
And so you have some vessels, yeah, with someone
Unknown to you liquids, yeah?
And you can mix them, and something happens, and
There are dials, and after you mix them, it shows you
Something, right?
So you can make all these kind of mixtures, and you just,
You don't know what it is, but it's something like density
Or conductivity or whatever you can measure.
And you have in your mind the idea that this substance is
Made out of little tiny things, yeah?
Like molecules.
And you go on, and you'll get these numbers on these dials,
And you'll mix them in different ways.
We have different numbers, and you want to figure out what
Are these constituents?
What are these molecules?
And this is exactly how chemistry started, yeah?
They had no idea, even of molecules.
They were mixing at first.
In alchemists, and they were getting pure substances,
And they were mixing them, and something was exploding,
Et cetera, et cetera.
And eventually we came up with the modern theory of matter.
And the question is, if mathematicians could have done
That, yeah?
Yes, without understanding anything, and in a way,
We understand nothing.
We only see these numbers on these dials, after all, right?
Yes, we see them.
Temperature, density or whatever.
And then we come up with the theory of matter.
How it can happen mathematically, right?
And so I believe you can do it mathematically, just if you
Use some proper, very general principles.
And manipulate these numbers, you can reconstruct back what
Was in there.
However, it's even difficult to formulate, yeah?
Because you have to start with some modeling what are these
Little objects are, yeah?
This molecule sounds like unknown to you.
And actually, many fundamental things about molecules
You cannot quite get like that, yeah?
So in science, you have some data coming from this bulk
Measurements to measure some kind of averages.
But sometimes you measure, if not individual,
Out of the molecule, but something in between, yeah?
For example, if you look at the Avogadro number, right?
Something like 10 to the 25 or 26, I keep forgetting something.
Like that.
We know actually when and how it was first precisely measured.
And so what would happen if you replace this two by four?
And if it was four, it would be quite hard to measure.
And actually, it would be still very conjectural.
And it is kind of a, quite interestingly, it's kind of a
Half-way bulk experiment, which was, it has a long history.
But who first, you know, who was the first man who
Precisely evaluated the Avogadro number?
You don't know?
I think you never heard of him, probably.
It's Einstein.
It was his theory of Brownian motion, which allowed to measure that.
But the Brownian motion is interesting way.
So atoms are too small, you cannot see them.
Because they are the size of molecules of one nanometer, yeah?
Something like to the minus one, time to the minus 10 meter.
But inside, you may have particles of the size 10 to the
Minus six, yeah?
Of one micron, roughly.
And this you can see in microscope, because this number is
Comparable to the length of the visible light, yeah?
It's three times bigger, roughly, than the visible light.
So you can observe them directly in the microscope.
And this, on the other hand, react on collisions with
Individual molecules.
Well, not quite individual molecules, but to fluctuations in
The density.
And observing that, it was the first sharp measurements of
The Avogadro number.
It was the first really sharp confirmation of atomic
Structure of matter.
Though, actually, this has been done before, actually, by
Maxwell, by Kruder, and to you, about measurements.
So there are kind of all kind of experiments you make in physics
Or in chemistry, which you can interpret, kind of
Mathematically, on what scale they're being done.
And from my point, today would be what you can say about bulk
Of matter.
I'm sorry, what you can say about individual particles, if
You know them, how they behave in bulk.
And then you have to formalize mathematically.
In the moment you do that, you can, unfortunately, go very,
Very far away from physics or chemistry or whatever.
But this, I think, quite amusing question to make this
Formal chemistry, which may be not useful, chemistry is to
Develop, to make any use of that, but it may be useful for
Other subjects.
But now, coming to mathematics, so what happens?
In a very simplistic way, when you have many particles
Appearing, and they say all the same particles.
So you start with some space x.
And space, for the moment, just I don't say what it is.
And then your take is multiplied by itself.
So you have something, and you repeat it many times.
And the product, meaning Cartesian product.
And so this, you can think about that as a configuration space
Of the phase space of a particle.
Imagine a particle kind of interesting enough.
It's something like this line, maybe in this position,
Or maybe in this position.
So it's certain space.
And then flow and solution.
So I have many copies of that.
And that's actually also characteristic of systems we
Have in nature.
If something happens, it happens lots and lots of times.
That's characteristic for natural sciences.
Very unlike history or literature, where each phenomenon is
Unique.
And therefore you cannot study them systematically in a
Mathematical way.
But here, if you have some molecule, and you observe some
Molecule somewhere, be sure it will appear billions of times.
And so something can be a billions of times.
And for the moment it's just a set, and you multiply it by
Itself.
And then you look at this product.
And this seemingly simple operation creates kind of,
Immediately rather I'm using structures, right?
If you take just two points, whatever, it cannot be anything
Simple.
And you multiply it by itself.
Then you have this square.
And you do it again.
And then you have a cube.
And then you do it again.
You have cube in high and high dimension.
And eventually you have something infinite dimensional,
But number is very large.
Right?
So you have the zero one point thing.
And then you repeat it many, many times.
And here there is this number.
And how many times you repeat it?
So immediately if you got a mathematician that brought up
In a kind of modern language, you know this is already,
This is just a set of two elements.
And this I repeated n times.
So it was two.
So what I see is this square.
If it's three, I have this cube, et cetera.
But then already you see something wrong here.
Of course you always mathematician write that.
And this of course is nonsense.
Because you cannot take set to the power of a number.
It's just wrong.
You know it is wrong because it is a number is not an object
Of this kind of mathematics.
What you have here in fact, you have some set again.
And this is a big, big, big difference.
In a second we see what is the difference.
Now what I mean is that this is point is again somebody
Who has definite structure.
Maybe the structure of a set or structure of something else.
And in this model you may have this ball.
And they have this floating particles.
Or these particles may be in the lattice.
They can make a crystal.
And the number of course may be the same.
But the bulk of matter you get will be quite different.
So you cannot say that this is a number and this must be a set.
And then set meaning something having structure.
You have to specify the structure.
And just what I say will be kind of side remark.
Just showing how nontrivial it can be already for this very simple example.
So you have some respect for this seemingly simple operation of multiplication.
So what happens categorically?
Just imagine you have a very, very, very simple kind of
Explanation. You have three point set.
And to begin with the structure, we have to indicate what maps we love.
And so we can see the sets.
Like three elements is good enough.
And we can see the two types of maps.
Identity is necessarily must be there.
It's a category. And we only allow constant maps.
Okay? So we have three point set.
And it can be mapped to itself by identity.
Or everything goes through a single point.
And this is a rather boring object.
There is apparently nothing interesting there.
But if you go to the product.
And so we take this three point set.
And to the power big set.
Big final set or infinite set.
This becomes kind of a cube.
But now if you do it, once you have this picture,
Then you just add it again, again, and again.
Now, so what happens to this map?
So we have this map of my background set.
And we can see that all maps it generates.
It generates in this product.
And then there is also this set.
Also involved here.
So it is a function to variables.
Here we only allow the map to describe.
And here it will be just all maps between sets.
So you kind of mix these two categories.
And it's what kind of structure you see in very big products.
For example, what will be possible images of these maps?
Look at the images of these maps.
And then what you see in this picture,
It will be this, this, and this, and also diagonal.
You have constant maps times identity maps.
So you have these lines, these lines, and diagonal.
If you take q, it will be all partial diagonals.
And all directions, all partial diagonals.
So whenever you have to map f1 and f2,
You can take their product, right?
You have kind of something in one power times this.
This power, so you have this power plus, no.
And you have some map attached to this.
Some map attached to this. You can multiply them.
And if you look at just the image of this,
You have this kind of projective geometry.
You have huge product. You have this huge product.
And again, eventually, I want my set to be the
Infinite Countable Set. And in this very big space,
This structure of interest is defined by these directions.
So what can you say of interest of that?
So if you just start with this set, one, two, three,
One, two, three points, take this infinite product.
You have this semi-group of transformation,
Which was very trivial, having four maps,
Identity and three constant maps.
But here you have all their products,
And all permutation of this.
So you have a much bigger semi-group.
And this semi-group already has kind of properties,
Which are not so obvious. And the essential feature of this
Is a kind of famous theorem of van der Waarden says the following.
That if you take action, now we have this very big product space.
So one, two, three. I say infinity, but infinity
Meaning the set. And there is this huge group acting on this.
Semi-group, I'm sorry. You have this constant maps,
Diagonals and permutations. And it acts on this space.
And the void acts on the space of its function.
So you can see that functions with value, say, in a final set.
So it's now even bigger, something bigger.
I think this is now my background space, all these products.
And I take functions with varying final set.
That's in turn, in turn again, some compact metric space.
These things operate. And the van der Waarden theorem in this
Language essentially says that every minimal set is a fixed point.
Right? If you take any subset in variant under the action,
Which contains no smaller subset in variant, you have to
Say closed slightly carefully. It's not closed in a kind of
Quite obvious, but closed and categorically closed subset.
Then it will be just constant. In the usual sense, van der Waarden
You divide integers and two subsets, then one of them
Contains obituary long progressions. And this is a kind of
Essentially extract from that. So it says, on one hand, that
When you go to this product, you obtain objects with properties
Which you cannot quite see, which don't show up for
Individual set. Right? So there are artifacts
Coming from the fact that you take very big number of objects.
And this you have to keep in mind. You have to kind of always
Kind of filter this away if you want to reconstruct original objects.
Now, so these are kind of, on one hand, in this, by the way,
Not fully understood. We don't exactly understand which
Categories this kind of theorem takes place.
There was very big development recently, especially due to
Gowers, but this structure is still rather mysterious.
So what happens, what are the properties of this semi-group
And how it acts in function spaces. But now look at another
Example, which is of opposite nature, showing that when you
Go to the power, sometimes you even gain something about the
Original space. And the example which i keep kind of
Repeating in my memory. Repeating in my election
Because amazingly that's not very well known.
It's a heraldane equality. There is a classical heraldane
Equality between lp and lq norms of functions.
And this inequality, i just, i don't even remember.
And you don't have to remember if you say it correctly.
But now i just want to formulate it correctly.
And again the remarkable thing is that you can see it just
By this conception of power without any computation.
So what is this inequality? You take integral over some
Space of functions, say f1 of x to the power alpha 1
Times f2 of x to the power l.
Maybe i write beta, keeping tradition with physics here.
Etc. To the power alpha n.
And so you want to know, i'm sorry, beta.
It corresponds to the inverse temperature.
And i want to know how this integral depends on this
Variables beta. These are given functions.
And this you think about the beta as variables.
And the heraldetherum says you take log of this.
Or maybe minus. I never know. It will be convex.
Or concave without this. This always beats me.
But again it will be clear, clear from the proof.
So there's classical heraldian equality in the form, i think,
Going back to Gibbs. And so how to prove this?
So i just want to suggest to prove, again probably going back
To Gibbs or Maxwell, which doesn't require any computation.
But only the fact that there is some
Universality of this formula with respect to product spaces.
And the remark, the property which we use is, so it was
Leaving on a space x. But now let's go from x, for example,
To x plus x. So whenever i have function here, and i
Have the same function here. When i go to the product, i just
Multiply function. So i take f of x1 times f of x2.
This becomes function of the product. So i'll just do this for
Every function. So i go from x to x plus x.
Then everything is being multiplied. And so, and these
Just two things add up. So i take log, and if there is a
Reason why i take log, you could keep it multiplicative.
It's just easier to say, just to keep to the terminology.
Otherwise you have to say it would be log convex.
So every, this quantity multiply, integral multiply.
Therefore, you have the same function in betas.
It's just multiplied by two. So you just multiply, if you go
To the product space, the whole thing multiplied by two.
So whatever you prove for the original, for the new thing,
The same will be true for the product.
So that's kind of trivial. But then you just keep doing that.
And again, nothing happens. You just multiply, multiply,
Multiply, so this integral multiplies by n. So what do we
Again? But what happens when n goes to infinity?
This number of terms goes to infinity. You can use the law of
Large numbers. And the law of large numbers tells you that
All these functions become eventually constant.
Or rather constant, each on its own support.
And if you have constant functions, of course, this function
Naturally constant, this will be just linear function, right?
What is the integral? Just the value of the function, right?
So the constant will just become coefficient here, so it
Will become constant. Either of them constant on their own
Support. So the only here, the
Term disappears. So for the function,
Convex, concave, whatever, this integral of the product will
Be smaller than the contribution of each of them.
Because these things die away, right? So you reduce in this way
This general theorem to the special case when functions,
Each of them constant on its respective support.
And then it reduces to the case when functions are constant.
And when they are constant, it's obvious.
And so, but again, because it's very simple proof, except to
Use the law of large numbers in a weak form.
So now, weighing how it enters in a kind of more sophisticated mathematics.
So just, again, look at now three points.
But now imagine this being probability space.
So there are some weights here, right?
You can say one quarter, one quarter to one half.
And then the entity, which one likes, so that three weights,
P1, P2, and P3. The entropy of this, yeah?
And this, like this exponent, has this property that you
Will have two probabilities, finite probability spaces.
And there are weights here, and you multiply it by this one.
So I have a matrix, fill in this product, p, i, p, j.
Then this quantity is multiplicative under this operation.
And now you want to understand in what sense you can reconstruct
This out of the product. And this is slightly, slightly,
More, more interesting. So I have, say, finite probability
Space X, and I take its infinite power, but this infinity
Must be understood, what it means, and in what sense you can
Reconstruct this entropy in terms of some sort of this space.
And one way to do it, and this, this may be, this in a way
Can be thought as a definition of the entropy, is that I
Consider the high power when n eventually will go to infinity.
Now we have kind of table these numbers. But again, but the
Low, large numbers, almost all of them will be constant.
And you will have almost the same value. So on one hand,
Entropy, it's multiplicative. So entropy of x to the n
Equal n times entropy of x. So I put n here.
And so I have this formula. On the other hand, but the low,
Large numbers, here almost all points are constant.
And entropy of such space where all entries are constant is
Just log of the number of the points. On one hand, it interprets
Entropy as a limit of cardinality of essential points here,
Those which contribute to it. And this, one thing, but that's
Not, not, not exactly what one wants in here.
Because the problem which was kind of, which was, or kind of
The point if you were promoted by shannon and then by
Kolmogorov is somewhat different. So what is actually this
Infinite product? So we have this finite measure space x.
And you take this, the infinite power.
So what is this object? So we know it is again the
Probability space. But how you can see, how you can
See that this probability space, just without knowing what
Probability space is, but only knowing what are finite
Probability spaces. So there are finite probability
Spaces, there's finally many points with weights.
You go to infinity to this power. And in order to define the
Structure, you have to go through measure theory.
And this kind of, what you don't want to do, right?
You just pretend you don't know the things.
So one thing you can say, aha, this space being infinite
Product. And so each n plus one goes to xn.
And so it has infinite power.
And categorically we can say, aha, we have projective
Products of this object. Of course we have to say what are
Maps between finite probability spaces.
And you think about them as each of them being a bunch of stones.
And then you just have a, you can organize them into smaller
Groups, just transforming the stones, meaning they are
Measuring maps. And so when you go to the
Sleavement as a measure space, again, because you already
Know, you know you obtain just the standard backspace.
However, if you use this kind of projective, projective
Tower definition, you don't recapture, you don't recapture
All the morphism in the measure third. You only recapture
Continuous maps. However, if you slightly soften your
Approach, and when you work with finite spaces, you allow
Small errors, which eventually go to infinity.
And you make this kind of a softer limit in this category
Of projective limits, you do recapture the whole category.
So we can say that category of measure spaces is kind of
Almost like projective limit of category coming from finite
Measure spaces, but modular some weak limit property.
Yes, but it's kind of, everybody kind of can see how it
Happens. Any measure space can be partitioned to
Finantly many subsets and partitioned to finer and finer.
Therefore, it is this kind of projective limit.
But when you can see the morphisms, you may have errors.
And this is a kind of just absolutely obvious, but you
Don't have to say it. In a way, you can define measure space in
This way. And then you have this entropy.
But now in what context this entropy can be reconstructed?
So what structure you need in the power space?
To reconstruct, in the infinite power space.
To reconstruct the entropy. So if you have finite power,
I just take this entropy and divide by n.
But if i don't know this number n, it's not so obvious,
Because i have this infinity, i don't know how to normalize.
And then you need something in this infinity.
So you cannot do this exactly the point i want to make.
It's essential what this infinity signifies.
So in physics, this infinity, it may be either particle in
This space or it may be particle in the latches.
So they may be free removing in this space.
Or they make something in the latches.
But in other case, this set, this infinite set carries
Additional structure. Here is structure saying which
Points are close and which are far. So the structure of the
Euclidean space. And here is the structure of the latches.
But in other case, what is essential that there is an
Action of extra group here. And say in the case, if you have
Three dimensional latches, you have these groups operating
There. So as i was saying, one category
Involved, which morphism we allow for underlying space,
What are morphism here. And in the case of a crystal,
We have an action of this group.
Once you have this structure, for example, of the group, you
Have a natural exhaustion of this latches by big and bigger
Sets, something like by balls or whichever.
For example, by balls. Therefore, you can approximate
This infinity by finite n. And then you just make this
Kind of the following, the following words.
So entropy is multiplicative. And as a function, it is
Continuous. Therefore, it survives this limit.
And yes, if you go through that, you come to the theorem of
Synon Kalamagorov saying that the entropy of bernoulli scheme,
What is called bernoulli scheme, equals the entropy of underlying
Space. So we have, for example, this group
Acting on the infinite product, like three-point space to the
Power of that. The entropy of this dynamical system
Equal to the entropy of this space.
So the point that i want to make is that you don't use any kind of
Measure theory or partitions or whatever. You just absolutely
Formal manipulation with categorical property of the product
Non-trivial point is originally this function had this
Multiplicativity property. Okay, now, so how much time
I have? You are confused.
Ten minutes. Ten minutes, yeah. Now we can come to
Kind of talk to the question which i find more, more, more
Interesting is which i as follows.
As we were speaking about the bulk of matter, one typical
Measurement which is being done is done by calorimetry.
Calorimetry, right?
So you have some, your solution of unknown something and you
Heat it, yeah. And you see how much heat you
Need to raise the temperature. As temperature goes up, right,
The amount of heat needed to go by one degree changes the
Function of temperature when you do it.
And typically the hotter the temperature, the more you need
To heat to get extra degree. So the reason for that is this
Is kind of was known for simple guys for a long time.
We have say more atomic gas and two atomic gas and they
Have different specific heats, yeah. And because you have more
Degrees of freedom. So now i want to understand this effect
That you have a bulk of matter which each molecule has certain
Degrees of freedom and how bulk measurements tells you how many
Degrees of freedom are there, right? And then i mean the
Problem which is systematically used in chemistry and biochemistry
You understand the structure of molecules by looking at the
Specific heat, how much heat you need to go from one degree to
Another. So what it would be at a
Mathematical point of view. Again, from very limited
Mathematical point of view.
Now you can come to the class of problems which i
Much closer to what is more open and from
Certain angle is more interesting. So now imagine the x is
Truly a space, yeah, it's not a finite set like measure space
But it's something like metric space or topological space.
And again you go to this high power and this goes to infinity
Or it may be infinity but again it must have some underlying
Structure of this infinity. And what you want to understand
What happens to topology of that. So how much, for example
By looking at this infinite power, Cartesian power, you can
Reconstruct topology of the space itself.
And this already, this topology carries certainly much more
Use than just set theory if you take the simplest kind of
Interesting space like circle and you take it to large power
You have high dimensional torus and high dimensional torus is
Not topologically easy at all.
And so one point is if you can reconstruct dimension.
So just exactly this dimension is what enters the number of
Times per molecule. Can this be reconstructed or not?
And so what i want to say is up to some degree you can do it
But from some moment on it becomes not so apparent.
So if you follow this logic, if you follow this logic of
Entropy, so what we can do is as follows.
So on one hand we have this n and imagine this n being this
Infinite number, this infinity being a lattice like in z3.
So you think about atoms being positioned along the lattice.
This three dimensional lattice. And each of them has some
Internal degrees of freedom. So in each of them you have a space
X, it's either configuration of the face space of this molecule.
So it's an infinite product of these spaces. But it's not just
Infinite product, this infinity is this group. So we have this
Big space X and we have an action of this group.
And the question is how much this data.
So it means what kind of bulk measurements in varying
Under transformation of the group, which of them and how much
From them you can learn about individual space.
So first about dimension. And this dimension you can do that.
Dimension has the same identity property as the entropy.
And from that reason, this formal scheme which i described
Applied here. So essentially what you do, in this
Particular example, you can see the big set in your lattice.
You take this kind of partial product, take its dimension
Properly understood. You might be slightly careful.
Divide by the number of points and go to the limit.
And that will be quantity which depends only on how this group
Acts on this X. And this is a quite general scheme.
So it gives you a well-defined number of degrees of freedom
Per side. And this is not difficult.
However, so where it becomes interesting and the
Apology of this like a product apology is not that
Complicate. However, what is not so clear,
What are other invariants can be seen in a similar way.
So dimension is a good invariant.
Because dimension of the product is multiplicative or
Edit. So it behaves like entropy.
And so, but what are the kind of robust enough invariant
Behaving in this way. And, of course, you know,
There are some invariants which behave in this way, for
Example, early characteristic. But the early characteristic has
Unpleasant property because there are pluses and minuses there.
And when you go to infinity, to the infinite limit, yeah, it
Converges, yeah. So it is, and actually it is not,
So it is not clear. And this is a kind of a question.
So what are reasonable invariant of a space X such that when
I take it to the power n and divide by n, the limit exists
And is being neither infinity or zero and become invariant of
The space itself. And moreover, of course, we want this
To be compatible, compatible with the maps between the spaces.
So let me formulate a specific question in this regard.
So if you have just simple space, just the interval in the
Start multiplying it by itself, you have this cube.
Yeah, in this cube, of course, just you're getting bigger and
Bigger, but still you have only one cube. And then just for every
Space X, you may start covering it by cubes of dimensions,
Equal dimension of the space and define kind of the minimal
Number of cubes needed to decompose the space into cubes.
Yes, then you use this as an invariant of your space and then
Go to the limit, and this is sub-editive, sub-editive
Coincidence, so the limit exists. The question is if this limit
Zero or not, at least for some spaces.
And so sometimes, for example, what you can prove,
The point is unsatisfactory. If, for example, X and
The example we know where to look for, if you have many
Faults of negative curvature, for example, of even dimension,
Then you can show, I'm sorry, of constant negative curvature,
Of even dimension. Then you can show this invariant
Not zero, but it's either variable curvature or it's odd
Dimension, it's unclear. I just don't know.
So it's kind of quite simple, natural invariant to just use
What you know for cubes and kind of force it to obituary space.
And then we immediately run into kind of problem which is
Unclear. And this is a certain way to measure
Apological size of the space. It's more subtle, more
Defined than the number of degrees of freedom.
Do we have another two minutes? Okay.
So it's one question. And I want to conclude with another
Question. Well, actually, we stuck, maybe,
Related questions. So first, I want to reiterate an old
Question by ser, which was answered in a way, but still
Quite open, and it follows. Which I don't have time to
Explain why it is closely related to that.
And the question is follows. I have x file itself complex,
And I can see that the base loop space of this.
And you can see the Poincaré polynomial, kind of Poincaré
Serious of this. So it's the sum is better numbers of this
Creature bi t to the i. The question is, what kind of
Functions we get here? So ser asks at some moment if this
Always a rational function. And then count the examples we
Found. However, if you look at this
Count the examples, they kind of remarkable function, like
Ramanujan type function. Beautiful kind of very well
Organized creatures. And apparently all of them have
Kind of metamorphic continuation. They're not rational, but
They're very distinguished transcendental functions.
So what kind of function we have here? So you may expect if
It's simply connected. Finally, complex, you come to the
Some kind of remarkable class of functions. But we don't know
What these functions are. And another question which is
Closely related to that, but probably easier, is of very
Similar nature. I can see that, again, this product, but
I had no time to say it more. Of course, the products only
The beginning of the story, the interesting thing when you
Particle interact. And so inside of this product, you
Can see that some subvariety, say y, obtaining the
Following way. I just write one equation, p, so this
Variable xi, xi plus one equals something.
So imagine this x being projective space.
And so, and this is just generic polynomial of certain b
Degree. And I repeat the same everywhere along this
Slide. And so for every n, I have a non-singular
Algebraic variety, depending only on three numbers, on
This topologically, on this number n, and this b degree
Gris. Well, say just the same dg. So some
Variety, depending on n, d, and the block, I took this n.
So I have three numbers that define you topologically
A certain variety. So for each of those, I write
It's poncare polynomial. So there are three numbers, n
Kind of being fixed. Put it here. And here is d and n.
So I write s to the d and d to the n. And this is infinity
n, so this sum. So I have this function in two
Complex variables. So what kind of function you get here?
So it's unique canonical function. It depends only on two
Numbers, d and n. I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
What am I saying? It's a better number.
I'm sorry. It's a better number of dimension i.
I better to say it in words. So up to each n, you write
Poncare polynomial. It's some polynomial. And then there is
Parameter n. So if there is poncare polynomial, depending
On n, and then you write it to the n and take this sum here.
So this polynomial, one variable, so the resulting infinity
Sum is function in two variables. And what kind of function
You have? You can show something about them, but again, I
Don't know if they have analytic continuation of this function,
Kind of well-shaped, et cetera. And it's very similar in nature
This function, the one which appears in this problem.
And again, strangely enough, it's kind of very simply described
With a break variety, but when you try to directly compute
At least with my limited knowledge, computers become
Tremendous combinatorial mess. In a way, you see perfectly
What it is. But it's combinatorics with every
Step getting more and more complicated and you have to
Need some techniques how to organize it.
And this, I think this kind of quantities may be relevant
To understanding this multi-particle system, because this
Is the easiest thing you may ask about them and already you
Run into non-trivial mathematics. And the point, again, they
Repeat in the last question, it is followed.
So I have this graph. I want to really sort of
Those terms. It's very simple graph.
And you have variables here in each of them, running in the
Same space. And then there is equation
Between them, always the same equation between this space of
Points. And so you repeat, repeat, repeat
The same equation. So it's very simple, kind of
Chain-algebra equation where the same equation is repeated
End times. And then you give the algebraic
Variety and in a way it depends only on the degree.
But how topology develops with the number of the terms
Of the chain, it's unclear. You can, in this
Efficiency, you can expand it. It grows exponentially.
And the first term is easy to guess.
Because you can compute, of course, the early characteristics.
And this apparently is the dominating term.
But it's unclear. So, okay.
Thank you.
