I have to start with a very strong apology.
The title of this is correct.
It's the topic that I've chosen for specific reasons.
And it is based on the paper that I wrote recently,
and that I explained to, as yesterday explained,
cost me six or seven years of very great effort.
So I'm eager to say something about it.
But what am I going to say?
First of all, it has to be, I have written before I came here,
one text for the lecture.
I think perhaps before the lecture I wrote a,
before I came here I also wrote a second text for the lecture,
changing the first, because I came to understand that
if I was going to be understood by anybody,
a very small fraction of the auditors,
I would have to change the subject, at least the presentation.
And I appreciated last night, as I began to,
at midnight, as I began to think about today's lecture,
that a third version was necessary.
It's not always wise to try to write a third version
at two, three, four o'clock in the morning.
I tried, I did not succeed.
So this lecture is going to be extemporaneous,
and I apologize for that, but there really is an issue
in the area that I would like to,
about which I would like to present my views,
and in particular I would like to present them
when my colleagues, two colleagues are present
so that if necessary they can respond to my thoughts.
If not now, later.
So the Langland program bears my name,
and the question is, in its present form,
do all aspects of it enjoy my approval?
And the answer is no.
And that, it was the purpose of the paper I mentioned
to explain why and how and to justify my stance.
So I'll do what I can to explain that in a short time.
I have this here, it does not seem to work.
Can someone help me?
Oh, that's great. Thank you.
So there is, in what is called the Langland program,
there are perhaps four aspects or four different parts
that I want to mention.
Now, the one is, one could say the arithmetic.
Well, there's no need to write this down.
One is called the arithmetic, and that was the original one,
and it basically is a subject that began,
well, it began all through during the 19th century,
but then in the 20th century through the works of mathematicians
like Hekka and Siegel, and then by others.
There's one over what a finite field,
which is a different aspect.
It is still arithmetic, and it reflects the development
of the Bayes-Aida function and other things related to arithmetic
over finite fields.
And the fourth one is the geometric theory,
and it's certain that the geometric theory, which I think I called it,
it's basically due to the Russian school,
which has become Russian-American school,
but there are some aspects of it that at least trouble me,
and my goal in the paper which I spoke was to explain all,
I certainly can't do, but to give something concrete,
which express and justify to some extent my doubts.
It certainly is an important theory,
and one has to be grateful to those people who introduced it
for introducing it.
But that does not mean that one has to agree
that their approach was entirely correct.
I'm very eager for any comments that the two other speakers,
especially Edward Frankel, have about what I say.
And then there's something else which is particularly tied
to the third aspect of it,
and that is any physical implications.
Now, I must confess, whether or not I have no idea about that,
I've never attempted to understand that.
I've read, of course, Professor Frankel's expositions,
but I've never had the feeling, yes, there are physical applications,
although some people, even non-mathematicians are convinced that it does,
but I'm not sure to what extent their conviction has any just base.
So I will avoid this.
If someone could just, so to speak, remove my name from that part
and give it another name, I'd appreciate it very much.
All right.
So what I want to do is, today, if I can,
is discuss the geometric theory,
and I want to explain an example which is maybe too technical,
it is too technical, but one example, the initial example,
which creates a theory in which there is no intimation of any sort
with that theory, which is purely mathematical,
even though you will see as I go on that the name Yang Mills appears,
Yang Mills appears purified, so to speak,
in a form which is edible for mathematicians.
And that's what I would like.
Insofar as my name is there, I would prefer that it stop before it crosses that barrier,
and I would also very much like those who are familiar with the geometrical theory
and who are familiar with the possible physical applications
to tell us all about it, sometimes, even today.
All right. So let me just, I'm going to have to be careful.
So the original theory goes back to, it doesn't start with Heka,
but Heka was the principal developer of the theory in the first half of the 20th century.
And the central objects of the theory as developed by Heka are Heka operators,
you have to move the picture a bit down.
Pardon?
You have to move the picture down a little bit.
Oh, yes. Sorry about that. It was explained to me, but.
Heka operators now, Heka operators are linear operators,
and what you want are eigenvalues, basically, of these linear operators.
So you want linear operators that necessarily have eigenvalues,
and there's really only one kind that is Hermitian operators in the Hilbert space.
And so you want, in my view, you have to have Hermitian operators.
So you want a Hilbert space, and then you have them,
and Hermitian operators have eigenvalues, and so you have eigenvalues,
and then you can start to talk.
Do they have the properties you expect?
Now, what happens, as you see, if you look at the geometric theory as was developed,
there are no eigenvalues.
You have some kind of operators, but those that don't have eigenvalues.
I assume that everyone, almost everyone here,
I see that there are non-Mathematicians in the audience,
but mathematicians know that Hermitian operators have eigenvalues, whatever else.
Now, if it's a Hermitian operator in a Hilbert space
that has a continuous family of eigenvalues,
then that's a little bit more slippery.
So, now, I knew what I wanted.
I wanted somehow to create a theory in which the eigenvalues were there,
and so I needed Hermitian operators.
Now, I tried, for obvious reasons, to deal with the simplest case I could think of,
which was not completely uninteresting.
So, we have to introduce a group, and that group will be for me.
GL2, GL1 will be in the background, but as a preparatory study.
So, in the geometric theory, there's Dedekind Weber,
who observed at the end of the, I think it was the end of the 19th century,
perhaps the beginning of the 20th, that there was remarkable similarity
between the theory of algebraic numbers that had been implicit in Gauss's initial work
on cyclatomic fields, and that had developed over the 19th century.
There was a particular relation and a very close relation,
although between two dissimilar objects, namely what we would call a Riemann surface
and the arithmetic theory.
And that similarity appears, reappears, if you like, in the theory of automorphic forms.
So, and they say so, the geometric theory, the geometric theory about which,
about whose presentation I have some doubts,
reflects the ideas of Dedekind Weber, that there's a certain considerable,
a great deal of similarity between the geometric case which related to Riemann surfaces
and the arithmetic case, which was the case investigated by people like Dedekind himself
and Kronecker and so on.
So, we want now, we want to have, in order to see how it might look,
you would like to see the simplest non-trivial case.
Well, GL1 is not uninteresting, but it's best to have GL2
because there are complications that arise, and you want the simplest Riemann surface you can find.
You could try the Riemann sphere, but the Riemann sphere doesn't have any,
isn't of much interest in this connection because the kind of things you want to do
become very trivial, but the next simplest case would be an elliptic curve.
And we're going to have integrals on elliptic curves, and I suppose as everyone here well knows,
it was, Abel was one of the people who was first interested and first understood integrals on elliptic curves.
So, that's the example we want to consider.
It's simple, it's not so simple as I say, I wrote, tried to write down things as I thought about them
and in a coherent way at the end, and it cost 80 pages in order to express what I wanted to express.
So, there it is. Now, I want to tell you something.
So, you have, forget about how you define the Hermitian operators, but you can define them,
but they're operators on a function space, and this function space is the set,
I won't bother to describe it, there is something called fun g now,
but for Abel it would basically be the integrals of functions of one variable on a Riemann surface,
but he wouldn't have looked at it from our point of view, in particular he wouldn't have asked what kind of set was fun g.
The point is that fun g is the set on which those functions in the Hilbert space are defined.
Or rather, excuse me, it's the set, no, that's right.
So, it's, and how does it look? Now, it looks as a two-dimensional space plus a one-dimensional space.
Oh, I have to move the paper again, okay.
One-dimensional space.
So, we're going to have, or Hilbert space is going to be set on one-dimensional space and a two-dimensional space,
and we're going to have an integral operator.
Now, so you, I won't describe the Hector operators, so you write them down.
And what do you discover? It was a long time before I really came to that point, but what do you discover?
You discover that you look at this thing, you have functions on a two-dimensional space
and functions on a one-dimensional space, so you have two different Hilbert spaces,
and you have an operator, which is two by two matrix in principle.
So, it's not trivial what you see in the off-diagonal entries,
but look at, you see, the only possibility is that you're trying to take a function of two variables to a function of one variable
that only works if it's, the thing is zero.
So, you suddenly discover that your space seems to be some of two things, like that, orthogonal,
and these two spaces seem to be the operators such that although you see some fuzz off-diagonally,
it's in an infinite-dimensional space and it doesn't count.
So, it appears that you've trivialized your subject.
I mean, you've gone in and you wanted to see something which was at least interesting,
but it's going to be something, the two pieces are going to be separated and it's going to lose all interest, but it doesn't.
So, if you just have the courage, at least so it seemed to me to accept,
that if I got, it doesn't really look the way I expected it to look, but nonetheless it may be interesting.
So, let me say this, it is interesting and what happens is, so we're working with GL2
and that's the two-dimension here and this is a one-dimensional here.
Well, this GL2 part turns out to look more or less like a product of two GL1s.
So, from a normal point of view, considering operators, it's the continuous spectrum.
So, it's a continuous spectrum and it's not so interesting and if you've thought about HECA operators,
you have, of the principle series and the three representations, it's not so,
it's all refers ultimately back to GL1, but you do have this.
For me, at least, it took a certain courage to accept, well, maybe that's not so uninteresting.
Maybe you have a strong feeling when it dissolves like that, when it separates like that,
that it simply won't be worth looking at and that you have to go back and find something else.
But what I want to say is that it's worth looking at
and what I also want to say is that the techniques are there in the literature for studying it.
They leap at you and you find the relevant paper is a paper by Atiyah Bond
and this paper has broken up into several sections and there is one part of it
which is devoted to, what did it used to be called?
It had an old name and it had, tell us the variations of what they called it.
This is basically one part in which the mathematics is really pure mathematics
and it's the calculus of variations, which existed before Morse theory,
so to speak, Morse theory is the modern version of calculus of variation.
So what you do, this paper is there, there's one section, maybe two,
in which they examine very carefully, there are several sections in their paper
which is a very long paper, one has the feeling that some sections are written by Bach and others by Atiyah, I'm not sure.
Now, what they do is they study these calculus,
so you want the extreme element is some kind of variational problem
and you want the local minima and the local maxima and these are called,
so they're defined by equations to which the name of Yang and the name of Mills are attached.
So you can jump to the conclusion that these are physical concepts
but they're just from the calculus of variations.
They may have been introduced by these two physicists but they are really a part of quite classical mathematics.
But before you come to that, before you come to the Yang-Mills equations,
you continue in this simple example, as I said, you have eigenvalues,
you have a two-parameter family of eigenvalues here, a one-parameter family of eigenvalues there
and you can compute explicitly the eigenfunctions and therefore you can explicitly can,
but the Hacker operators vary from point to point on the basic curve, the elliptic curve,
so the eigenvalues are given as functions on the,
I guess let me be careful about that.
Yeah, there'll be functions on the elliptic curve.
So the eigenvalues of these, so there are a lot of operators,
there's continuous family of operators, they commute, they have simultaneous eigenfunctions
and therefore they have eigenvalues and the eigenvalues,
well it turns out there are some, you need something or other,
the eigenvalues are, so the eigenvalues really define you a conjugacy class of 2 by 2 matrices
which move as you move over the points on that two-dimensional space.
And you can compute them explicitly, so you just sit down and you compute them explicitly
and you have them and so you have to interpret them.
So you can calculate the eigenvalues.
The eigenvalues as I say, they're conjugacy classes of 2 by 2 matrices
so they vary from point to point on the elliptic curve.
Now, it was very, once I had the courage to accept that this was the way to go,
I had these eigenvalues sitting in front of me for a long, long time
and I didn't know quite what to do with them and without a T-abot,
I would never have known, and Yang-Mills, I would never have known what they were.
Now, let me make sure I can have this straight.
So, what I had was really when I started, when you start to compute these eigenvalues,
you discover that each is given by a periodic function on,
doubly periodic function on a torus on the elliptic curve.
So I have these doubly periodic functions on the torus and they look a little funny.
They have some extra information, they're not really quite periodic,
they're almost periodic, they don't come right back to the initial value
as you move from one end of the fundamental domain of the elliptic curve,
they change a little.
And it's not so clear what's to be done.
Now, if you're reading a T-abot and you're reading about Yang-Mills,
you discover that it has a lot to do with curvature.
Now, my problem with curvature is that although I once started course
on two-dimensional differential geometry, I had no feeling whatsoever for curvature.
Curvature is a question, if you have something that is a differential
so you can integrate it, then when you integrate a round-of-close curve,
you don't get zero, that curvature is responsible for that.
And you have to think about curvature for a long time.
All right, now, that's about where you sit for some time.
You have that and you sit, and maybe you correct all the false notions
you have about curvature, acquire some skill with curvature.
And then you begin to, so now you're asking, like I said, we have then,
we have explicit eigenfunctions, those associated to this part,
the others are not so interesting, so we have them,
we have their parameters, and that's it, the curvature,
you have to know to understand what happens next, but it's not immediately clear.
So, you look at the curvature and you try to understand it,
you try to understand its relation with the condition of yang-mil,
so the condition that you have an extreme point for this problem
and the calculus of variations.
What does that have?
You won't make much sense of it, but you have it.
And in fact, it's rather peculiar, let me tell you how it looks.
It's really, as I said, we have this supplementary family,
and this supplementary family has four discrete parameters
and two continuous parameters.
So this space that I wrote, that I put up there,
the second part is really a union of four two-dimensional spaces.
Now, one of those two-dimensional spaces is just a duplication
as far as the varying eigenvalues are concerned
of what already happens in the bigger square.
So they just provide a kind of multiplicity, but they're not what you're really looking for.
The others, while they're the fourth subtract, one is three,
so you have three families, and these three families,
so you should think, where are we here?
These three families look like this.
Namely, we have, this you should think of as a fundamental domain
for an elliptic curve, which is the quotient of the plane by the discrete group.
It's really, one is associated to this,
which you think of as a double covering of the elliptic curve,
the other is associated to a second double covering.
So one double covering is like that, one double covering is like that,
and the other is associated to the possible third double covering, like that.
So you can think for yourself what the third double covering looks like.
So you have three families.
So good, that's all right.
Let me see where I want to go from here.
We have these three families, so these three families are telling you,
in other words, it looks like physics with the Yang-Mills,
but there's no physics there, it's not as many.
And they're telling, and I'm just, what's interesting for the theory,
are these new HECA argument values, which are no related to GL1,
and they come in three families.
Good, and each family is associated either to a double covering, if you like,
or to a subgroup of index two of the fundamental group of the original elliptic curve.
So you should treat them one at a time, they all be the same.
So there are three things, and you treat them one at a time.
And you're still, say, when it's still fumbling around,
you don't, it doesn't make too much sense.
But of course, at the same time, I at least hadn't sufficiently thought about a teapot.
For those who indulge in such things, you could ask,
who wrote that part of a teapot?
And it's very geometrical part, the relevant part.
Well, I tell you, so you can imagine that the dependent, how do I put this?
So we see there are, as I said, because of this picture,
there are three families of these exceptional eigenfunctions.
And we've all, but we mustn't forget, and we can describe them explicitly,
but mustn't forget that somewhere, several months or several years ago,
we had calculated the eigenvalue, they're not eigenvalues, really,
they're eigenfunctions because there are so many HECA operators.
We had calculated them explicitly, and calculated them explicitly.
We saw, at least I saw the same phenomenon, the three different parameters.
There were three different periodicities, and the periodicities were funny,
with signs, SIG and S appearing.
I don't know what to do with it.
And you see, so they were, the HECA parameters were not given,
not by points in the original fundamental domain,
but in one of the three double coverings.
And there are some funny signs.
Now, let me tell you then what happens.
And it's really so built into the Yang-Mills theory,
because Tiabot introduced a group.
And this group is such, which is defined sort of rather simply in terms of the analysis,
which you're familiar with, perhaps, on the Riemann services,
where you put a pole at one point or the other.
So you have these funny signs.
And let me see if I'm just about out of time.
What happens?
What are these funny signs doing?
You see, we have a, I didn't say it yet,
but what you want always, in this kind of theory,
is that the connection between the geometry and the arithmetic,
that the possible eigenvalues are given by a representation of a group,
sometimes the L group, into the appropriate GL2.
So these parameters are given by representation of some group into GL2,
that's what you'd expect.
And let me try to tell you what happens.
It's easy enough.
And this group, but as I hate,
Atia Bart introduced a group which parametrized, whose representations parametrized
the Yang-Mills connections.
So we don't have Yang-Mills connections yet, at least not in any explicit way.
But now, it's something which is perhaps obvious for a geometry,
but I, as an innocent, really wanted to have something very concrete.
So if you're working in this, when you talk about Yang-Mills,
you have to introduce connections, you have to introduce a metric on the base,
a metric on the fiber, and so on and so forth.
And it's kind of nice, you can take the sigma function,
so a wire source, a slightly later period than the work of Abel.
And you can choose your metrics, for a novice like me,
that's just kind of amusing to choose the metric properly,
but it takes a while.
For a more experienced person, it would be rather a dull thing,
but for me, it was very pleasant.
If you're very careful, you can choose it so that the Yang-Mills connections
are basically constant, and you can integrate them.
So, Atia Bart says, the Yang-Mills equations are what these exceptional eigenfunctions are.
So, what we see, what do we want to see here?
We want to see, for reasons that I don't want to try to give,
you expect in any case that all the eigenfunctions of this opera
are given by representations of what I would call the, what I call it,
I would call it maybe the Automorphic Galois group, into GL2.
And what happens is just the following.
You look at these things and they puzzle me.
The fact that I have these three families of eigenfunctions
with a parameter in one of these three things,
and they give, I know the eigenfunctions of the HECA operators.
On the other hand, Atia and Bart are doing something different.
They introduce a group, and the group they introduce
offers these three possibilities,
and they give solutions to the extreme points of the Yang-Mills equation.
So, what you have, and then what you have to do,
you're not very smart, you've just made one calculation
and you've taken something from Atia Bart,
you're very precise, and you compare them.
And, lo and behold, they're the same.
So, you've accounted for your calculation,
not so easy, but your calculation of the eigenvalues of the HECA operators,
and then you're calculating, and it's a comparison with the Yang-Mills equation.
So, you have the situation, you see we have the Yang-Mills equation,
and then we have to think about it a little bit.
In other words, we know what's happening at this level,
or this level, but we want to get it at the level of the original things.
So, what these are, these of course are double coverings.
So, if you think of it, we want some kind of connection,
we get something in the double covering, we push it down,
and if you push a connection in one variable on the double covering,
you get a connection in two dimensions.
That is, you get this varying diagonal matrix,
which is what you want for the HECA operators.
So, indeed, if we think about, say, up here,
our calculations give something which belongs up here at this double covering,
a connection, we push it down with a two-dimensional connection,
and that is this two-dimensional operator whose eigenvalues are the ones we want.
So, that's perhaps not very clear, but the result is,
and then you can say at the same time you should look, for example,
at the group that Tiabat introduced to, let me not say why,
and what you see is that if you take this one-dimensional representation
on the double covering, that means the Galois group is awarded two,
you induce it, then you get the representation of their group,
Tiabat group if you like, that corresponds to this.
So, we have the representation at their level,
and you would like it at sort of a more number theoretical level,
and you just have to think a little bit and make some changes
to account for various restrictions, and you redefine not the Tiabat group,
but the Automorphic Galois group, and two-dimensional representation,
and one is the two-dimensional representation, and the other.
So, by this combination of direct image and induced representation,
and the numbers you obviously get, the numbers that you've calculated
for the eigenfunctions, they all match up, and you can say that the
eigenclasses are given by representations of a two-dimensional Galois in group,
and that's the theorem that you need.
In other words, that's the classification that gives you a theory
in for a particular case that you're dealing with an elliptic curve
and a GL2 bundle.
It gives you exactly what you expect, namely that the Hecker eigenvalue
correspond to a representation of a well-defined group into the L group,
and that's the theorem you want in general.
Now, you could probably do it quite easily in general for, say, GLN over an elliptic curve,
because the ATIA's analysis of bundles on for GLN over an elliptic curve
is fairly complete, and it tells you exactly what you must do in the general case,
except there's a great deal more to prove than the ATIA classification.
A bundle is replaced by something much more complicated, which I think,
as far as I can see, no one has made a real attempt.
This bungee that I spoke of is almost as old as Abel's work,
but I don't think anyone in the literature has actually tried to understand it,
but it's clear that now that you see its purpose, there's a reason to try to understand it,
and so there's a reason to try to understand, for example, bungee for an arbitrary G
over an arbitrary Riemann surface.
And if anyone is young, some of these people who are very young, they might think of it.
So I think it's a very worthwhile problem, and the geometry of this bungee
is quite concrete, I think, but it's also not simple at all
because this will be made up of varieties with many pieces and with various properties,
they'll be singular and so on, and you'll need something about some Gauss-Bonneille
churned theorem and so on.
But all I wanted to say was that I'm happy that this example, which I tried to work out fully in the paper,
really points to a complete mathematical theory in which the Yang-Mills equations
have no physical, I mean their physical interest is unimportant,
it's their mathematical interest which is important,
and so a question I think is what that I have, and I would be grateful for any answer to it,
is there really something beyond that?
In other words, what I'm saying is I think there's a completely mathematical theory
which I would be tempted to call, if you forgive me, the geometric Lang-Lenz program,
I would be tempted to call the geometric Lang-Lenz program.
So if anyone thinks there's something more to be added with physical implications,
then why?
I made it in 50 minutes and I'm very proud of myself
that I made it in spite of a missing night's sleep.
So thank you very much.
