We've learned a lot so far, and as you've seen, the opportunities and variations are
endless.
In this session, we'll talk about getting rid of the traditional container and using found
and recycled items as our pots instead.
We'll also take a look at using containers to decorate walls and fences and gardening
with limited light.
You may have several challenges when it comes to growing container gardens.
You know, here we've got this old fence, it's beautiful, but a little brittle, so we don't
want to put a lot of nails in it.
Now fortunately, the homeowner owns the property, has in-ground planting, and has trained this
beautiful shade-tolerant climbing hydrangea up the fence, but perhaps you rent, perhaps
you don't have any in-ground planting, and you want to add a little color and fun to
your landscape.
We've got some ideas of how you can manage it, but first we're going to go to our garden
studio to see how to select plants for your container gardens.
I like to follow this general approach, the right plant for the right purpose growing
in the right place, and that's for the growing conditions as well as your design.
When you do this, you increase your success and decrease the time and effort involved,
and for me, that means I can create and manage even more gardens.
Now don't worry if you're new to gardening, we've all killed a few plants, sometimes due
to our neglect or overindulgence, but often because we put the plant in unsuitable conditions.
Too much sun, shade, water, you get the idea.
Light, or should I say a lack of light, is probably the biggest challenge urban gardeners
like ours and many other gardeners face.
Light quantity or intensity influences growth and flowering.
Most plants, especially those that flower, prefer full to partial sun.
Gardeners often feel their options are limited with shade, but here are a few examples of
containers designed specifically for shady locations.
Brunnera and impatience here together make a wonderful combination.
The Brunnera with its variegated leaves top this planter, the silver foliage looks good
all season, and the blue forget-me-not-like flowers start out the spring.
The white impatience are a favorite for shady gardens and echo that nice silver foliage.
Here we've got Solomon's Seal, a perennial for many of us with white flowers in the spring,
red berries in the summer, but nice variegated foliage all season long.
The white tips of those leaves really brightens the shade.
Moneywort is trailing over this container.
This golden moneywort is kind of a chartreuse green.
It looks great.
Here it's with a red rubber tree, but it could also grow quite well with a large leaf philodendron.
Here we've got a combination of ornamental grasses.
This is a partial shaded location, just enough for that red fountain grass to get its good
coloration.
The beautiful Rexpagonias are the large leaves with the swirls of color going through it.
And of course, again, we have some impatience, some beautiful red ones that match the coloration
of the other plants we've used here.
Allocacia, an elephant ear, tops this planting with those big, bold leaves.
Spilling over the container are purpley sweet potato vine.
Notice how vigorous these are.
One plant goes a long way.
Up next to the elephant ears are the strobilanthus, wonderful plant with its silver, pink-tinged
and purple leaves.
A nice standout as a vertical accent alone, or complimenting this planter as well.
Papyrus in the center here is just getting a start.
You may see these growing in water gardens, but also in containers here.
The chartreuse leaves of the sweet potato vine are just starting to take over and cascade
over the pot.
The fine texture of the optic grass is right next to the bolder texture of the sweet potato
vine.
And of course, we've got some good shade-loving annuals as well.
And here, could you find a shadeier spot in this front entrance?
The coleus, a very shade-tolerant, colorful foliage plant, really looks nice on these
shelves.
A nice welcome to anyone coming to the front door.
And here we've got a giant banana.
Though this planting's in sun, it will tolerate shade.
And believe it or not, in the afternoon, this is a pretty shady spot.
All hydrangeas anchor that container in the garden.
And again, we've got moneywort spilling over the edge.
And this is a great use of containers for the shade.
As you can see, the shade's provided by a large tree.
We don't like to disturb the roots when we're putting plants in the ground.
This gardener avoided that problem by putting the shade plants in a container and setting
them right on the soil.
We've got a nice mix of fuchsia.
The gardenmeister fuchsia in the back give us a little bit of height.
The hummingbirds love those tubular flowers.
And again, we've got a nice combination of some colorful foliage plants as well as flowering
plants.
Here are some other shade-tolerant plants you may want to use in your containers.
Hostas, a perennial for most of us.
Bold leaves, either a blue-green or variegated, topped with flowers usually in the summer,
few in the fall that can be fragrant, white or lavender.
The hummingbirds love, and the junkos love the seeds.
The big leaves of fuchsia, some of us grows a house plant, but also do well outside during
the warmer months and for those in tropical areas year-round.
Caladium, I think of as the little cousin to elephant ears.
Colorful leaves, heart-shaped or solid green, great for shady container gardens, and can
even be moved indoors.
One or a favorite of the East Coast and Northwest here in the U.S. in more tropical areas are
leaves of plants that can get several feet in diameter, big and bold, dynamic in a container
just as it is in the ground.
The fine texture of the ferns, and there are many kinds available, help break up some of
the bolder texture of those big leaves.
And the grass-like sedges, most of which are shade and moisture-tolerant, really add a
fine texture again against some of the bolder leaves that we see with these other plants.
Browalia is a beautiful blue or white flowering plant that can add some color.
Turinia or wishbone flower reminds me a bit of a pansy, but with a slightly different
look.
Lots of new varieties being introduced.
Annual vinca will take full sun or part shade, but dry shade as well, and is reminiscent
of an impatient.
And Lamean, with the common name dead nettle, sounds awful but is a beauty we'll see later,
has some nice variegated foliage and pink, white or mauve colored flowers in spring
and early summer.
Now we want to keep in mind that sun and shade patterns are ever changing, so you'll need
to evaluate them at different times of the day throughout the year and over time.
Containers allow you to move your plants into light conditions they need and as those conditions
change throughout the season and over time.
That means you can take advantage of any little spot of sunlight, even if there's no place
to plant in ground but room for a container for sun loving plants, say tomatoes.
Now the duration of light, the day length influences flowering on plants like mums, calanchos
or poinsettias.
As days shorten and the dark period increases, they set flower and bloom.
Flowers allow you to move these plants into the landscape when they're blooming and out
of the spotlight when they're not so showy.
Light also influences watering frequency.
In shade or during the shorter cooler days of spring and fall, you'll water less because
the potting mix in your containers won't dry out as quickly.
Also plants don't grow as fast in shade, so they need less water and fewer nutrients
to fuel them.
You need to check your containers daily throughout the growing season and water thoroughly as
needed.
Now we talked about potting mix in lesson one and I promised you we'd talk about mixing
your own, so let's go do that now.
Now there's lots of different formulas.
You talk to different gardeners, they'll all have different recommendations, but I think
the basic one part soil, one part organic matter, one part drainage material is a good
starting point and then you can adjust accordingly.
So we're going to start with a good quality top soil.
You may want to purchase it at a garden center, you may be able to bite and bulk if you do
a lot of containers, a large quality.
And what I like about top soil is it tends to hold the water a little better than some
of those soilless mixes, but it does weigh more.
Now that can be good if you're growing tall plants and you need to anchor them, but it
can be problematic if it's too heavy for balconies or decks or things like that.
One of the other problems with top soil is it's hard to find good quality top soil that's
weed free.
Now we're going to add things like compost, you know, some we've made our own or you can
purchase it, or aged manure.
We've got some core here and then peat moss.
I'm going to use peat moss this time.
So we put about equal parts because it's going to be a 1 third, 1 third, 1 third mix.
Now we've decided to use perlite here, could also as I mentioned use vermiculite or wood
ash.
Really it depends on what's available and that's a good starting point.
Now this is for potting mix, not for improving your garden soil.
As you get to work with this you'll find that you know what, in this case I might just add
a little bit more top soil or since I have some compost handy, for me I'm going to just
kind of beef it up.
It's kind of like cooking, you just kind of want to amend it and work it until you get
a right sense and feel for that.
So give it a try, you may want to experiment with a few different recipes and I found I
changed my mixes based on what was available.
So give it a try, if you want to mix your own it's a lot of fun and you'll get a sense
of kind of being in a little bit in control and mixing something that works for you.
So I'm going to clean this off and we're going to look at some fun ideas for containers.
Nails hanging baskets and wall mounted containers are the design solution we're looking for
but there may be limitations on the space or ability to secure and display them.
Nails and hangers are the most common option but let's add a little interesting twist with
the shoe caddy.
This is an idea reader from Birds and Blooms sent into the magazine and I really liked
it so much that we tried it at our state fair.
We filled up the shoe caddy with a well-drained potting mix, one of the nice thing with the
fabric ones, if the fabric drains well you don't need to add drainage holes but test
it out first.
We used a well-drained potting mix and then used small sized transplants so they'd fit
into the small containers here.
We used a mix of herbs which was great because we had wonderful fragrance and all the herbs
you could imagine for cooking.
I placed it on the wall and got ready to leave because state fair wasn't for two months.
Ask who was going to water every day and it got really quiet and everyone looked at their
shoes.
It ended up going in the back of my Jeep back to my house so I could water it.
Small containers like this and especially if you're growing sun lovers like herbs need
to be watered twice a day.
Now that seems like a lot of work but the good news is you've got all these herbs right
handy for your cooking.
Picture this outside your kitchen door.
You walk outside, pick the herbs you need and go right back onto cooking or perhaps
hang them on a fence right by the grill.
Some popular herbs to consider, basil.
There are colorful varieties but we've just used the classic sweet basil.
Wonderful plant.
We're going to harvest it as we need it just pruning right above a good set of leaves.
Chives, if you grow them in your garden you can easily dig a chunk and plant it right
into the shoe caddy.
We've got a mix of thyme which will cascade over and really improve the looks of this.
And I love the sages.
Great for cooking but they're very decorative plants.
There's a bicolor sage but we also can find the tricolor with a little bit of pink and
purple as well as green and cream.
Parsley, a favorite for mine and the Swallowtail Caterpillars are great too.
And some oregano in case we're doing some pasta and tomato sauce.
So think about adding your favorite herbs.
If they outgrow the shoe caddy, no problem.
You can replant with smaller containers.
Now, I think this is a lot of fun but I've got an even wilder idea for you.
Maybe nails aren't even an option.
Well these step ladders provide the perfect support for small pots and they create a vertical
accent at the same time.
By elevating the pots, our small pots now have big impact in the garden.
Plus, it will be easy to change the plantings as the seasons change.
You may notice we have some mums there that add color and beauty but as they fade we'll
want to switch them out.
Maybe pansies in spring, maybe some asters in late fall and maybe some geraniums for
the summer.
And our begonias, great foliage, nice subtle flowers.
But if they're not giving us the impact we want, we can switch those out.
Maybe you have a small space as well so you'll want to go for a lower ladder.
Great for small areas, you'll still get that nice height and that great vertical accent.
We use Calancho's or Calancho's, depending on I think where you're from, great for full
sun condition, bold foliage when those flowers are done, deadhead them, you'll get a second
flush of blue and some nice foliage plant.
And you notice a little driftwood to dress things up.
Now you may want to secure those pots in place with wire or permanently mount containers
so that if wind or stability is a concern then you've got to take in care of them.
And the same goes for the ladder, you want to make sure it's nice and secure.
Well this old coat rack can hold a variety of items like these old purses we found at
a resale shop.
Now you may have a few in your closet that you could use or you may want to go shopping
instead.
If you do this indoors you'll need to protect your floors and furniture, maybe a large saucer
underneath.
Outdoors you'll need to secure the coat rack against high winds, wildlife and curious
visitors.
We're going to plant up a purse.
Now one thing to keep in mind is drainage is also important.
So if you're using leather or plastic you're going to want to punch some holes in the bottom
for drainage.
And with fabric test it out because you may need to punch some holes with the liner you
want to make sure you have good drainage.
I decided to use this basket like purse, it does have a cloth lining so we did punch
some holes in and I started filling it with potting mix.
We're going to use this beautiful fern, I love the nice texture because the purse is
so busy I wanted something solid.
We'll set this in the purse, kind of adjust and then fill the remaining space with potting
mix.
We want to make sure we have good root to soil contact.
And once we have it full we'll water it in place and do a gentle tap.
We can also dress it up with some Spanish moss just to cover the mechanics a bit and
add a little additional color to our planting.
So we're ready to go and hang that on board.
Now as I walk over to the coat rack you can see we have a fun collection of pots and interesting
plants as well.
If it seemed like too much work to plant that fern into the container, the purse, you might
want to try this method.
Take a small container like I did with this antherium, wonderful plant, indoors or out,
beautiful long lasting flowers and nice foliage.
Then just set this inside the purse and you've got a nice container.
The benefit, if you want to change things out, it's very easy to do.
So I've showed you a lot of ideas that you can use in terms of using nails without nails,
mounting with step ladders, but maybe you want something more creative.
We're going to try to show you a few new ideas in our urban garden.
Our homeowner wanted to create a warm welcome to her back patio and decided to use containers
to do just that.
Now a lot of us have used shepherd's crooks, maybe for our bird feeders or planters, so
they work quite well and they'll do so here.
Now here we have a traditional planting, wire vine, inpatients, perfect for the shady location,
but our homeowner wanted to add a little pizzazz and personality.
So she found this really cute birdhouse, adds a little bit of a different twist and a little
bit of artwork.
Or maybe it's a watering can you prefer, an old one that's a family heirloom or something
new that looks like a piece of art.
And I really like this hook that we can use to hang it.
Now we can also look for other finds, an old teapot or bucket will work just as well.
Now we have another challenge here because often we can't nail into the fence.
So we have an over the top shelf hooked on and these cute little planters, a great way
to add color and interest and whimsy in a very small space.
Let's look at a few more ideas.
Here's a fun idea, converting a kid's sand bucket, maybe it's your grandkids, into a
planter nice and colorful.
And check out these clay pots, very traditional, but we've got pink polka dot plants for a
little twist and they're hanging on monofilament on a shelf that you may be typically using
in your kitchen.
We've moved it outside.
Over here we've got some traditional plantings in Patience and Vinkus and non-traditional
pots works quite well and we use these S hooks so we didn't have to drill into the fence
and at different heights to add some more variety.
We also have bird feeders, one of my favorite combinations, colorful drilled holes in the
bottom always important for drainage and popped in some plants.
No matter what container you use, make sure it has drainage holes, make sure the plants
fit the growing conditions and most importantly, have some fun.
As you can see a few months have passed and on the other side of the wall is this beautiful
garden room, a sanctuary, appealing to all five senses.
Can you hear the fountain in the background, we have fragrance, we have color, just a wonderful
place, a retreat and within this retreat we've created small intimate spaces.
We've moved chairs around, we've used containers to create dividers or small walls within this
garden space and you may notice we have a collection of containers here, a container
garden per se, where we use taller planters and plants to create our vertical accent.
Individual plants that were our fillers and other trailing plants on the ground level
for our spillers, a garden of containers to create this nice divider.
Now when you look at this container you can see that in the middle we've got Swiss chard,
this was a fall addition, a frost tolerant annual that is edible, harvest those outer
leaves when they're 8 to 10 inches tall and they'll be tasty and can even take the shade
we have here and a light frost.
We included some greens, excellent the cool temperatures of spring and fall and again
edible, keep harvesting, they'll keep looking good and we added some pansies for beauty
but freeze a few in an ice cube tray and serve them in lemonade or sparkling water for a
fall surprise for your guest.
In this planter we had shade tolerant ferns and hostas, look good all season but we wanted
a little fall color to add to their appeal so we planted some pansies in the pot and
then left one pot intact, set it in the pot for a little added vertical height.
Now those planters that were on the wall, we moved them inside, when the homeowner went
on vacation, she wanted to make the job easier for her plant sitter so she put them in the
shade, grouped them together so it was easy to take care of them and a better chance of
success, something you might consider when you're going on vacation.
She liked them here so much that she added a little fall color, some pansies to go with
the vines so that they'd last throughout the fall season, something that she could enjoy.
Then we've really created a nice oasis that reflects the season, appeals to our senses
and a nice intimate space within our garden space.
Now let's take a trip over to the dark shade and see how containers help us solve that
problem.
We use some low light tolerant indoor plants to fill this dark corner of our garden room.
It kind of has the look and feel of a greenhouse creating an intimate space around this bench.
The palm and the ferns are typical low light indoor plants that really dress up this corner.
Our fern over here gets just a bit more light and you can see it's nice and full and robust.
The fern in this corner is doing its job kind of detracting our vision from the meters but
it's a little bit thinner due to the low light.
And with a little turn, we can see that we have a lot of dead fronds.
Now one thing we can do is throughout the season, clip these off.
Regular maintenance is a great way to keep all of our plants looking good whether they're
in ground or in a container or simply hide that bad part.
The other thing we can do that's much easier and more effective is to flip flop these ferns.
Move the one from the higher light to the lower light, the lower light to the higher light.
Do that every few weeks and both benefits, both plants will benefit from the high light
in this corner and tolerate that low light exposure.
Now the next question is, do we move these indoors for winter?
If your winters are tough, you can definitely do that.
This fern is for those that like a challenge while the palm and the firm that are in good
shape really are much easier to do.
So we're going to talk about that a bit later but first, I want to show you how to use containers
to bring the outdoor landscape right to your back door.
As you can see, I've cleared out some of the furniture to make room for this last project.
The wall behind me is pretty bare and we needed something to brighten it up and what better
way to bring the landscape right to your back door than with a dried flower arrangement.
Now we usually think of doing those for indoors but they'll work great outside.
Anything that'll last in your landscape fall through winter will do great in this container.
Now the first step is to find a planter that'll work.
You can use a plastic hanging basket if it's freestanding, a has style pot like we have
for this wall or something decorative like we see here.
Now we've lined this decorative container with cocoa mat and then we're filling it with
soil.
You can also use sand, anything to help anchor those stems.
Now once that ground freezes, if you're in a northern climate, those will lock those
stems in place.
Now until that happens, or if you're in a warmer, milder climate, you might want to
use some wire to wire those pieces together or to the framework as well.
You may want some garden shears for cutting the smaller stems and pruners for some of
those harder, woodier stems to keep those cut to shape.
So let's look at some of the things you can use.
Colorful stems like yellow twig dogwoods work great.
Red twig dogwoods, birches, corkscrew willows, they have some nice form, all would make nice
additions to this type of container.
Rose hips, things with fruits and berries, just watch out for the thorns.
When they're done blooming, your roses form these hips great for birds, nice winter interest
and good for your fall arrangement.
No grasses or wonderful additions outside their motion and their texture add a lot of
interest to the fall and winter garden, they'll be great fillers in our outdoor container
dried mix.
We harvested some fennel, the fragrance is still lingering, and as these dry, they're
nice and lacy and a good memory of our summer garden.
You may recognize goldenrod, it doesn't cause hay fever, trust me, I have it, but it is a
wonderful addition to fresh flower arrangements and dried flower arrangements.
The yellow will fade to brown and make a nice addition to the garden.
Hydrangeas have become quite popular, this is unique, look at that huge flower.
This will last through the fall and into winter and even spring in your garden and also in
our arrangement.
Nice light airy and definitely a focal point in an arrangement like this.
And last but not least, purple majesty millet, an annual that forms these really cool seed
heads when the seeds form and mature, the birds will be sure to clean it up, but in the meantime
nice deep rich brown that will add some interest to our garden and a lot of contrast in color.
So I've set up an area outside the fence where I can spread out my material so it'll be easier
to grab, arrange, cut to shape and organize them.
So give me a bit of time to get this together and we'll come back together when we hang
it on the fence and do our final touches.
As you can see, we've used some of our basic container garden design strategies in our
dried container arrangement.
We've got vertical accents with the purple majesty millet and the ornamental grasses.
We filled in the middle with some Joe Pie weed and some colorful berries and we have
items spilling over the edge as our spillers.
Now we always want to take a step back and take a look at our arrangement and see if
it's missing anything.
When I did that, I thought, you know, a little more orange just is what this arrangement needs
right in this corner.
So I'm going to tuck this last twig in here and then I thought about including some gourds
or ornamental corn and I thought maybe over here, but on second thought, just leave it
as it is.
Sometimes it's good to just walk away and enjoy the beauty.
Hopefully you've gained some ideas of how to bring the landscape right to your backyard,
whether it's plants and containers that change throughout the season or some dried material
from your landscape that you put in a pot and enjoy fall through winter.
As you've seen, there are no limits with containers.
You can take ideas from this session off the wall and into the garden on a bench, front
steps, patio or deck.
In our next session, we'll cover ways to quickly create privacy on a very large deck.
See you then.
