Okay, so it's my understanding that was already a talk on quantum energy teleportation this
morning, so I won't introduce it too thoroughly, but this is joint work with Affium and Edu,
some of this is published and more work will appear in my soon-to-come thesis, hopefully.
Okay, so a review of quantum energy teleportation. We have Alice and Bob. You supply energy to Alice,
she makes a local measurement on a field in its vacuum, and if you mess with the vacuum,
you're going to inject energy, hence you inject local energy density here. When you do this
measurement, you get an output bit, you send that bit to Bob, and then Bob does a local unitary
in his region, depending on that bit, and if he does the right unitary, on average, he's going
to extract energy at point B, and hence do a negative energy density over here. So I'm just
going to go over again how this works intuitively in this talk a bit, and then show how this intuition
can lead us to developments. So an analogy for quantum field theory is a bunch of coupled
harmonic oscillators. If they're all in their ground state, then they wiggle around,
and if they're connected, then the wiggles are going to be correlated, and the further you are,
the less correlated you are. So to explain how we could exploit these correlations to
teleport energy, I'm going to take a little detour to analogy land in Quantum Casino,
where we play the quantum roulette, and the quantum roulette has a color and a number observable,
and usually it's a maximally mixed state, and if you bet on a certain outcome,
you can't really win on average, you know nothing. So well, even the casino rigs it so that you'd
lose on average. So let's say I have a maximally mixed state of roulette, on average I wouldn't
be able to win, but if I bet on something and I win, then my payoff is adjusted in terms of
kind of the spread of the probability distribution, or depending on my amount of uncertainty, so the
number observable has kind of a bigger entropy, and I get a bigger payoff because it's more rare
for me to win. But what if this maximal mixedness arises from maximal entanglement with another
neighboring roulette? What would you be able to do, for example? Well, let's say Bob knows about
this entanglement, but Alice doesn't. So Alice just plays the usual game, she bets on an outcome,
she loses on average, but she collapses the state onto a certain outcome. If Bob's able to peer over
to her table and say make out the color of the outcome, he could bet on the same thing,
right, and then get paid pretty much every time on average, if the correlations aren't 100% then
you know it's in statement on average, and of course if he could peer over and see the numbers
instead of the colors, then he could bet on that and get bigger payoff, but the numbers is,
it's more information he has to extract from Alice's table, right? So another thing,
classically correlated roulette would work if you try the same exercise. So basically what's
the key here is if you have mutual information. Mutual information is this quantity. Basically,
if I know a result at A, so if I condition B on A, then my entropy at B, my knowledge about B
gets better when I know stuff about A essentially, and that's what we use in quantum field theory
to teleport energy. So the analogies that the roulettes are like, you know, quantum fluctuations
in regions of the quantum field for Alice and Bob, and instead of money it's going to be energy,
right? So okay, so the usual QET protocol with quantum fields, the information carrier is just
a bit, and right that has a certain maximal amount of information content. So what if we use a QBIT,
you know, quantum spatter often? Well, that's also the same maximal amount of information.
And what about a QDIT? That's a higher dimensional Hilbert space, it has a bigger
possible entropy, more information content, more possibility to be entangled or correlated with
something else. So basically that was our work. We looked at, you know, QBITs as the information
carriers and the probes, and also QDITs and what happens when you send more and more information
per single shot of the protocol. And we had to devise a way to do this. So basically,
we were betting on the numbers instead of the colors in my analogy. So now it's going to get
more technical just because this is a specialist conference. Okay, so the ground state, you could
represent it as a superposition of a bunch of global field configurations, right? Just, you know,
functional expansion. And your two-point correlations, depending on the dimension,
they're going to decay with the distance to some power. And these fluctuations have a certain
variance. It's kind of gaussian in some sense. You all know this. Okay, so what do I want to do?
Well, let's say I have a bunch of possible global configurations. Well, locally, that gives me a
lot of uncertainty. I don't know which color it is, right? So, you know, if I do a measurement,
a local measurement at A and I collapse it to a certain palette of colors or whatever,
then that could be useful. And if I inform B about which subset of the possibilities I
collapsed it onto, then I reduced the local uncertainty at B, right? Entanglement, this
quantity is negative, so the mutual information is positive. So that's essentially what we're
going to try to do. And now I'm going to get into a bunch of unruly wits stuff. Not yet. All right.
Okay, just my notation. So a coherent state, basically, you don't really change the probability
distribution. You just displace it, right, by some bump, let's say. So it's the same probability
distribution. So that wouldn't be collapsing it onto a subset. So we can't just displace
the field. We've got to do something slightly fancier. Okay, so the interaction we used in
our paper, I'm going to run you through the qubit stuff, and then I'll just tell you how we general
as the qubits. It was this interaction, so instantaneous in time, spread out over space.
And then you look at the unitary. It's a coupling between a qubit and the field, obviously. It's
unruly wits like. So essentially what you get is a controlled unitary. You push the field up or
down with this distribution, depending on the state of the qubit in X. And then you get this
entangled state when you apply it to a spin-up state in the ground state, let's say. So you get
this entangled state. So it's entangled, well, as displayed here. And you could change that
decomposition into a cat state in plus and minus Z. You just change the bases. So if you were to
project in the Z basis, you would collapse it onto one of these cat states. But in our protocol,
we just keep everything coherent and we don't necessarily project. So these cat states are
superpositions of coherent states. And what happens is in your field expansion, some terms
that were differing by just two lambda, you can make them interfere with each other a bit like
this, like the Wigner pseudo-probability distribution interferes. And that kills off some
possibilities. So you don't kill off a lot, but you kill off some measure. And the probability,
the amplitude of this cancellation is the interference term like this, and it's a Gaussian.
Well, you see that if I crank the energy up, I spread these coherent states, you know, I
pump them bigger, then the interference lowers. That's not good. We want to input more energy and
output more energy. We want to turn the crank on QET. So I'll see how we get around to that.
For now, we have the qubit as the probe and the information carrier. And we just send the qubit
to Bob, as is. And then Bob does a control unitary in the Z basis of the same type. He
displaces it. And because of the two-point correlations, you get an energy exchange term
that has the quantum interference I talked about. And then this is like a two-point
correlator weighted by the energy. And then, of course, you have switching costs for Bob
of that counter, yeah. You pay some energy, just a couple. So that's the energy extracted.
But, you know, there's this interference term that's a problem. So what we did, we generalized
through QDITS. And so, okay, so QDITS, we use the Heisenberg-Weil operator, which are like
clock and shift operators. We expand the field operator. And then we do kind of a counter-rotating
wave approximation. And that has some non-localities, but I'll get to that in a second. And then we
use that. We use the same kind of couplings, X and Z, but Heisenberg, X and Z. And then the
coherence, basically, we want a better measurement. So the more, let's say, I pump in more energy,
I get a bigger radius for this kind of polygon, but then I could pack in more of these coherent
states to get more interference when I pump in more energy. The non-locality, well, there is
something called Flanagan's theorem that if you have a purely local protocol for QET, you have
an absolute bound on the energy output. And the fact that our counter-rotating wave Hamiltonian
introduces some degree of non-locality that decays pretty sharply compared to our teleported energy,
well, in some limit, far away, we're not cheating, right? We're recovering some degree
locality, and we still get a good amount of teleported energy. And then we found a limit,
okay. We found a limit pushing a bunch of parameters in a bunch of different ways.
We go very far away. We could teleport as much energy as we want without really cheating
considerably. And that's all the time we got, I think, so thanks.
