After I finished graduate school, I spent a couple of years doing research at this place
called the Salk Institute.
It was named for Jonas Salk and it was down in San Diego, actually, La Jolla, just north
of there.
And it has one of the most famously beautiful buildings out there, built by Louis Kahn.
It's right out overlooking the Pacific, cliffs over there, absolutely magnificent building
that's constantly inundated with architecture students.
Nice place to work.
And it just happened that next door to the Salk Institute was a hang glider facility,
a hang glider place in Torrey Pines, and it's a place where people would go to rent their
hang gliders or bring theirs from home.
And I don't know how to describe this or defend this.
For reasons I can't understand, I've never liked bungee jumping.
I've always thought that people over age 20 who jump with bungees are somehow suspect
that's indefensible.
And for even less rational reasons, I decided when I was there watching these hang gliders
that there was something just ridiculous about this sport and that they were all cowboys.
I have no idea why I reached this conclusion, but nonetheless getting there, I imprinted
with a negative impression of hang gliders.
So I'm in my lab one day and it was on the top floor in this building and it happened
to be way at the corner overlooking the Pacific, which is pretty nice.
And one of these hang glider guys came past and the weirdest thing, the guy was low enough
and close enough that glanced over and for an eighth of a second we actually had eye
contact with each other.
And it occurred to me we're having the exact same thought.
I'm there with my Joe scientist lab coat on pipetting and he's flying past and it struck
me we were both thinking there's no way I would want to be in your shoes right now, buddy.
I'm looking at him saying this fool has paid good money and he's going to crash into the
Pacific at any point.
He's looking at me having no idea that I would pay to get the chance to do lab research
like that.
We're looking at each other and what's the message there?
Obviously, we are not all the same in terms of what we consider to be stressful or pleasures
or hobbies, tremendous individual differences.
Now in terms of what counts as stressful, in some domains there's no individual differences.
You have been mauled by a lion unexpectedly in the parking lot, you still are alive, you've
managed to stuff your innards in, hold them in with your hands and you're running for
your life now with a lion still coming after you and no matter who you are, no matter how
calm and self-actualized, you're going to be having a stress response at the time.
Your heart is going to be racing parts of your nervous system that we will learn about
soon.
All of it will be kicking in gear, you will be secreting stress hormones, adrenaline.
All of it will be perfectly logical under that circumstance because what the stress response
then is about is saving your life, saving your life in the face of the sort of stressor,
the sort of crisis that mammals have been having for God knows how long, which is an
acute physical emergency.
The lion's running after you, you're running for your life, what do you want to do?
You want to mobilize energy out of the storage sites in your body to hand to the thigh muscles
that are saving you.
You want to deliver that energy as quickly as possible, your blood pressure, your heart
rate, your breathing rate increases, all is part of the strategy, get that energy to your
thigh muscles in two seconds instead of three, you're that much more likely to survive.
You turn off all sorts of things in your body which use the energy for that stuff later
if there is a later.
You suppress growth, you suppress reproduction, your immune system gets a little bit sharper,
you blunt pain perception, all of this makes wonderful sense as you're sprinting away from
the lion.
But in the world of being stressed or being euphoric, hang lighting, or being stressed
or being euphoric, pipetting little bits of fluid into little test tubes, what we've
transitioned to there is a world in which the stress response is not about running for
your life in a short term physical crisis, where instead what it's about is some of us
perceive this to be stressful more than others.
And the cornerstone of the whole field of stress physiology is built around this simple
fact, the stress response evolved in our bodies for dealing with these short term physical
crises and then we turn them on for chronic psychological stress.
And that's where we get into trouble because the system didn't evolve for being chronically
activated.
Running away from a lion and your blood pressure's increased, that's great, that saves your life.
Increase your blood pressure chronically because every day instead of getting to do neurobiology
research you're forced to hang glide, or every day instead of getting to hang glide you're
forced to study the brain.
You do that chronically and you chronically increase your blood pressure.
You're more at risk for cardiovascular disease.
You're more at risk for metabolic disorders if you're constantly mobilized energy.
If you're constantly shutting down growth, your immune system eventually is shut down.
Tissue repair, infectious diseases, all sorts of stuff is likely to mow you over more readily.
What we have here is a very, very clear punch line.
If you're a basic animal out there, what stress is about is three minutes of screaming
terror in the savannah after which it's either over with or you're over with and for us humans,
us cognitively, socially sophisticated humans, the stress response could also be turning on
chronic activation for purely psychological and psychosocial reasons.
And in this domain, if you do that chronically, you're more at risk for getting sick.
So that's great.
We can now understand the relationship between psychological stress and health.
But that still doesn't tell us much about that hang glider and me with a pipeter.
It still doesn't begin to tell us about individual differences.
And to get a sense of that, individual differences flying up in the air, sitting and spending
15 hours a day trying to solve the same scientific issue in terms of getting at this question
of why these individual differences, essentially what we're asking is what makes psychological
stress stressful?
Because the two of us in that circumstance were definitely differing as to whether this
constituted a psychologically stressful situation.
Okay, so what makes psychological stress stressful?
Beautiful literature by now showing the building blocks of this.
For the same external reality, for the same external misery challenge, challenge to homeostatic
balance to well-being.
For the same external reality, you're more likely to feel stressed, you're more likely
to activate a stress response, and you're more likely to get a stress-related disease
if you feel like you have no control over what's going on out there.
If you have no predictability over what's coming, how bad is it going to be?
How long is it going to last?
If you feel like you have no outlets for the frustration caused by the external unpleasantries,
if you feel like you have no social support for it, this is what psychological stress
is about, and this could be shown in wonderfully elegant studies.
For example, you've got a test subject, your proverbial volunteer sitting there, and they're
sitting in a room, and in one scenario, every now and then, without any warning whatsoever,
you play a blasting 110 decibel burst of noise for half a second, which is really unpleasant.
So they're sitting there, no control, no predictability over what's happening.
Second scenario, the person is sitting there with that same blast of noise every now and
then, but they've got a little lever here, and they've been told, if you keep pressing
this lever, it's not going to get rid of all the blasts of sound, but it's going to
decrease the frequency with which they occur.
That's what they've told you.
In reality, you're getting the same blasts of sound as the person in the first room.
What's the difference?
Ah, I feel like I have some control over what's going on here.
I'm decreasing the frequency of this.
Look how effective I'm being.
This could have been happening every second.
Have a sense of control in that setting, and you don't get as much of a stress response.
Or in the third situation, the person is sitting there, and the blasts of noise are coming,
and they don't have any of this placebo sense of control, but you give them a sense of predictability.
You say five seconds before each blast is coming, a little light is going to come on.
You note it's the same frequency of stressful noise as the first person, the same time distribution,
but you get a little predictive information.
Here it comes, hunker down, close your ears, whatever, and you don't get as much of a stress
response.
So what we see here is, in those examples, and in lots of other studies, the power of
context, psychological context, loss of control, loss of predictability, in one setting that
can greatly modulate the stress response, in other settings, it has no effect at all.
Here's an example of this.
This whole business, okay, so loss of control is bad for you, loss of predictability is
bad for you, that's clearly the case as shown in these studies, modulate those, and that
could be highly protective.
But there's domains where we love loss of control and loss of predictability.
We love it, we will pay good money for it to go on a roller coaster and unpredictably
have our inner organs flung against the side of us.
We love unpredictability when we're listening to a comedian and the punchline is totally
unexpected.
What's the difference there when it's in a setting that we view as benevolent?
We like loss of control and predictability, we're willing to relinquish it in order to
be surprised, what do we call that?
We call that stimulation, we call that play, and it requires a benevolent setting.
You get on the roller coaster ride and you know the worst possible outcome is you're
going to feel a little queasy afterward, not that you're going to be inadvertently decapitated
at some point.
So in a benevolent setting, loss of control, loss of predictability, we're willing to
give up to be happily surprised to play.
And in a malevolent setting, loss of control, loss of predictability, loss of outlets, loss
of social support, these are all ways in which your innards are chewed on just as surely
as they were being chewed on by a lion.
So what we see here is the importance of context.
Wonderful recent example, not a scientific study, but a great anecdote that taps into
this showing how much context, social context, can modulate whether somebody finds something
stressful or not.
Here it is.
There's this place up in San Francisco near where I am.
It's connected with UCSF Medical Center, University of California, San Francisco, called the Friedman
Institute named after Meyer Friedman, the cardiologist who first described type A personality.
And this is a place where you get people mowed over by their type A personality.
We'll hear more about that in detail shortly.
People who at age 40 or so have just gotten their first heart attack and not because they
have some congenital weirdo way in which their body deals with cholesterol, these are people
who just have a behavioral profile all over them of being impatient, hostile, low self-esteem,
this profile that constituted the original view of type A personality.
Wonderful ways that this is documented in this institute when they get someone who's
first had that heart attack, they come in and they will videotape them having a first
interview when they first start this whole program of combining cardiovascular care with
a change of diet, with a change of sleeping schedules, with a change of emotional style
with any luck.
They come in and they videotape the person at the beginning and you look at these and
they're like amazing.
Part of what shows this type A profile is the person is sitting there being asked about
their life, about their illness and they're fidgeting, they're clawing at the edge of
the seat.
You can't even get halfway into your question before they interrupt you to answer this.
This is this whole type A profile.
So here's what they did.
A film crew wanted to film somebody, a type A individual, having a highly stressful morning
and they wanted to take advantage of a new type of technology which is called ambulatory
cardiology.
That's one of those deals where you can put a little machine, little thingy on you which
can monitor your heart rate, blood pressure in real time as you're going about your day.
Huge advance in cardiology because now you could study people's hearts not while they're
in your office running on a treadmill but when they're out in the real world.
What this film crew decided they wanted to do was get some incredible type A over the
top individual and hook them up with one of these ambulatory cardiology devices and let
them go through a stressful morning while you're in there filming with them so they
come to these freedmen people and they say give us like your all star type A. This is
someone who in the video the questioner like inhales to begin a question and they're already
being interrupted.
This person is so agitated and patient so they get there like king of all type A folks
in there and they wire the guy up and he agrees to do this experiment and it turns out sort
of one of the things he found most stressful in life was every day he had this long commute
into San Francisco driving in going through this one miserable tunnel that's this huge
traffic bottleneck and that's always this real problem there and they bring him in and
they're filming him through this and what's the expectation hits the traffic there and
his heart rate is going to go through it doesn't budge.
It doesn't budge he has as low of a heart rate as if he was the Dalai Lama or something.
What's going on this guy was having the time of his life the worst the traffic was the
more he was turning around to the film crew saying can you believe it can you believe
how bad this is 27 years I've been putting up with this can you believe what I've had
to go through the heroism the stoic this guy loved this no stress response context
being very important in this case validating his misery over all these years this was like
one of the best days of his life context being very important here.
So we begin to think some more about these individual differences how they are working
where the pathology comes from and we could begin to design what would be the ideal profile
for stress response in someone and what we see is pretty obvious in the absence of the
stressor you want nice low resting heart rate blood pressure level of stress hormones all
of that along comes a psychological stressor don't get suckered in by it don't budge from
down there along comes a real physical stressor and you explode through the roof their massive
stress response up as fast and high as possible and the second it's over with you want to
recover as fast as possible this is the ideal profile and a fascinating classic study done
decades ago showed exactly how this emerges this conditioning emerges over time famous
study young recruits in the Norwegian military and these were guys who had just gotten assigned
to parachuting school where I guess this is viewed as some elite something or other and
this is this intensive stressful training of over the course of a few months becoming
some crack adept parachuter and what the researchers did was wire these guys up to be able to look
at heart rate blood pressure take a sample before to look at hormone levels take samples
afterward major major study looking at these guys starting with the very first jump they
ever did and then coming back months later when these guys were just polished professionals
at this very first day six hours before these guys woke up they were already having massive
stress responses oh my god I'm getting up today and jumping out of an airplane in the
plane through the roof not literally been massive stress responses there they jump massive
stress response they hit the ground they go about their business after hours later that
evening they still have the massive stress response huge huge mobilization for this challenge
and now come back umpteen jumps later and these guys are these polished cool professionals
and see what their bodies are doing then and it looks very different what you see then
is when they jump at the height of their physical challenge they've got just as big of a stress
response then as they did on day one where's the difference 10 seconds before they jump
out of the plane they're sitting there gossiping and talking about sports with the guy next
to them until they get tapped on the shoulder your turn and they get up and jump out zero
stress response up until seconds before they hit the ground and 10 seconds later all they're
thinking about is lunch zero response there what has happened what was originally a huge
anticipatory stress response and then the actual event and a huge slow recovery has
now turned into getting rid of the anticipation getting rid of the delayed recovery only having
the stress response where you need it classic work looking at another very stressful occupation
showing a very similar outcome air traffic controllers not one of those like sit back
in your chairs and kick back and relax kind of thing and apparently there's this sort
of bimodal pattern people who become air traffic controllers either are frazzled burnouts after
six months or they go decades happily doing it what do you see as a difference the folks
who four hours before already having the stress responses and hours afterward they're not
the ones who last the ones who come in from the parking lot and they're still in this
monkified blood pressure state sit down in the chair turn things on finish the shift
and go those are the ones who last forever so where do these individual differences
come from some work has been done to get insight into this looking at animals nonhuman primates
looking at and I dare use the word here in the context of another species personality
differences and that's absolutely valid to use terms like those personality differences
how reactive a primate is to a novel environment how befuddled it is by a new setting how it
deals with ambiguity some of my own work as I noted with baboons in East Africa has looked
at individual differences in the stress response and you see remarkable differences there for
example you see differences in stress related physiology levels of certain stress hormones
in some male baboons as a function of their competitive style what do I mean you're a
baboon and the question becomes can you tell the difference between the big things and
the little things the big stressors and the minor ones in your life what does this look
like in a baboon baboon is sitting there his worst rival on the entire planet shows up threatens
him in his face from two feet away what's this guy do now what's he do this is a crisis stop
what you're doing get into this defensive stance in contrast your guy is sitting there and his worst
rival on the planet shows up and takes a nap 50 yards away what does he do keep doing whatever
he's doing this is not a big deal when you look at male baboons who were really good at
distinguishing between this is a big deal that's nothing nice low resting stress hormone levels
and when you look at the guys who get just as crazed having their worst rival snoring over at
the end of the field as if the guy was in their face highly elevated stress responses and you see
all sorts of individual differences like those among these baboons can they seek social support are
they effective at social outlets can they tell the difference between big things and little things
when it's a bad thing do they have a coping outlet tremendous individual differences you even see
the same thing in laboratory rats where people have bred different breeds of rats for differences
in how they react to novelty how exploratory they are in a new environment anxiety differences and
you can see physiological differences in these animals as a function of having bred them for how
they react to psychological stressors in their world the question becomes of course where this
comes from how much genes how much environment this is an area of endless ongoing research now this
whole notion also applies to humans in a particular realm which is making sense as some of the most
common psychiatric disorders and a way to think about a lot of them is that there's a mismatch
there's a mismatch between the external reality and the stress physiology that people have in
response to it there's a mismatch what do I mean first example anxiety disorders what's anxiety
about it is basically seeing stressors seeing men is seeing threats that other people don't what's
that about it means you're turning on the stress response at times when other people are not
perceiving it in the slightest and you look at the bodies of people with general anxiety disorders
and on the average they have more activation of a part of the body called the sympathetic nervous
system we'll be hearing lots more about that for our purposes right now that's the source of
adrenaline more activity in the adrenaline part of your nervous system more secretion of another
class of stress hormones and an increased risk of cardiovascular disease if you and your body
stress response see stressors that other people don't there is a chronic activation of the stress
response another realm the type a individuals just referring to the much more modern incarnation
of type a personality is instead a personality style built around hostility the term given is
toxic hostility everything that occurs in the world around you is proof that they're out to get you
preferentially and the only defense you have is to watch your back 24-7 with the knives drawn and
what are you doing you are not only seeing threats that other people don't you're seeing a very
specialized attribution response you're supposed somebody could have held the elevator door open
for you and doesn't that is grounds for going berserk somebody cuts you off in traffic here
experimentally is how to show anybody's toxic hostility sort of tendencies to the extreme put
them in some sort of team task thing and have their partner intentionally screw up over and over
type a individuals are ready to have coronaries right there what is type a originally famous for
and this toxic hostility profile still being valid increased risk of cardiovascular disease
over activation of that sympathetic nervous system controlling adrenaline another example of this
is seen with clinical depression and this is another realm in which there is a mismatch between
external reality and the stress response this is different from anxiety and toxic hostility
where you're basically seeing stressors that other people don't in depression you are seeing
hopelessness and helplessness that other people don't you have circumstances where you can cope
with a stressor where you can manage it where you can triumph over it and you don't bother because
it's hopeless because you're helpless where you try a coping response you stumble into it and it
works and you don't recognize it for the efficacy that it has this being another case of a mismatch
major depression characterized very frequently by elevated levels of one class of stress hormones
as being recognized more and more non-trivial increase in risk of cardiovascular disease another
realm where individual differences if they produce a dramatic mismatch between the stress
response and what's actually going on in the outside world there are pathological implications of
it so all of this begins to frame this in the context of normative individual differences me
pipetting in the hand glider you know I have absolutely no trouble lecturing up here but if I
were so much as like the fourth tree from the left and some Christmas pageant having to act I
would be a mess and obviously people in other tastes in the opposite direction as well all that
realm of normative individual differences and as we've just seen this realm of differences
associated with psychiatric disorders one of the most interesting examples though has to do with a
personality profile one having to do with a repressive style of dealing with emotions okay
here's the personality profile it's called a repressive personality style these are individuals
who are not anxious they are not depressed they say they're not you give them the test and prove
they're actually not what are they about they are about very tight regulation of their emotions
these are people who have super egos out the wazoo these are people who don't like surprises
these are folks who can tell you what they're having for dinner two weeks from Wednesday these
are people who don't express a lot of emotions they're not good at reading them and other individuals
very very tightly regulated is this a psychiatric disorder no absolutely not and in fact these
people tend to be highly functional highly successful these are the college roommates where
you look at them and say I wish I could be one tenth as disciplined as this person is and
they're very successful they're disciplined they are productive they are not unhappy they often rate
themselves as being happy this is a personality profile about five percent of people or so so
you say well maybe what's going on with them maybe what's going on is they're secretly miserable and
they're just claiming not to be anxious and they're just claiming to and you give them what are
called a psycho psychologist implicit emotional tests ones that are hard to lie on and it turns
out yeah they really are fairly happy and they're not anxious and they're not depressed and what's
going on with these folks and we begin to get an interesting hint built around the fact that they
are so tightly repressing emotions so regulating as we will hear about in a bunch of lectures to
come a fascinating part of the brain called the frontal cortex what the frontal cortex does
is keep you in check regulating emotion emotional expressivity keeping a lid on it gratification
postponement don't do that it's tempting to do that but you're going to regret it frontal cortex
as the nearest neurobiological equivalent of a super ego as we've got wonderful research
Andrew Tamarkin and colleagues at Vanderbilt showing people with these repressive personality
styles their frontal cortex is going like crazy in addition they have elevated levels of stress
hormones and again these are people who are not anxious they're not depressed they're not stressed
they're happy what's going on with this and I think what we begin to see here is something very
subtly important these are people highly regulated thanks to their frontal cortex working like Matt
these are people who are squeezing their psychic sphincters closed 24-7 keeping everything very
tightly regulated so what does this tell us the world out there is a pretty unpredictable vibrant
place some of the time it is unpredictable in the most scary and malevolent of ways some of the
time in the most wondrously surprising ways it is a world where there is limited control there
is limited predictability for good or for bad and what this personality profile is about is
people who are expending enormous amounts of energy building a wall between them and that
vibrant unpredictable world out there and lots of ways this business individual differences in
the stress response and what it looks like in individuals with these repressive profiles teaches
you something very surprising and important sometimes it can be incredibly stressful to create a
world for yourself in which something stressful never ever occurs
