He's passed on to a better place.
He's a stiff at peace at last, at St. Peter's Gate, at the People Farm, become an empty vessel,
been taken from us, big sleep, bought the farm, cashed in his chips, climbing the stairway
to heaven, croaked, doing the graveyard shift, ended his days, final resting place, final
sleep free at last, given up the ghost, gone the way of all flesh, gone on to his reward,
happy hunting ground, he's had a negative patient care outcome.
In Motel Deep Six, in Paradise, in the Great Beyond, in the Hereafter, in the Invisible
Choir, in the Permanent Safety Deposit Box, in the Pinebox Palace, in the Skull Orchard,
is at the Dirt Disco, is in cold storage, kaput, kicked the bucket, meeting his maker,
meeting the maggots, other realm, out of business, passing over Jordan, pasture of peace, place
of eternal rest, pushing up daisies, shed his mortal coil, six feet under, sleeping without
bail, snuffed, sporked, taking the dirt nap, the big offline, the fat lady is sung, taking
the one-way trip, told you he was sick, with God, with the worms, and my favorite, playing
harp duets with Jimmy Hoffa.
What does all of this teach us?
Something very obvious, we don't like saying that somebody's dead.
We don't like the idea that all we've got very squishy, ambiguous feelings about dealing
with mortality, especially the fact that our own mortality is inevitable, and as a manifestation
of that, bodies kind of creep us out.
As we'll see in a later lecture, despite that, we often go to extraordinary extents
to retrieve bodies, and as we will see, that has all sorts of ritualistic meanings, but
for the most part, bodies kind of unnerve us, and bodies and what could be done with
them afterward, the notion that someday a bunch of medical students may marvel at the
degenerative tissue inside your torso, or that your spleen may wind up pickled in some
dusty corner of a lab.
Now, it's not always been this way, or not with all individuals.
In 1829, there were some pamphleteer, some Brit named Peter Baum, and what he left was
this just festival of pragmatism.
He left very strict instructions as to what should be done with his body after his death.
His bones should be used for teaching.
His skin should be tanned and used for a chair.
His innards should be used as fertilizer.
Okay, most of us are not like that.
Most of us are not that pragmatic.
Both of us are just creeped out by bodies, and especially by the fact that someday we're
going to wind up as one.
So one result of that is that the incidence of autopsying has gone way down.
People are much less likely to agree for a loved one to be autopsied.
People are much less likely to agree themselves when their death is impending.
And this has some medical consequences, because autopsies can be very useful.
For one thing, they could sometimes tell a cause of death when nobody had a clue while
the person was still alive.
Sometimes they can confirm or contradict a diagnosis that the doctor has made.
Sometimes they could be used for research, they could be used for teaching.
Now the teaching part is particularly interesting, because in order to get trained as a physician,
you need to learn gross anatomy.
You need to learn from a corpse.
You need to get the corpse.
And as the centerpiece of this whole lecture, throughout the history of medical education,
of medical research, it's not random whose bodies were studied.
It's not random whose bodies were autopsied, and the central point of this whole lecture
is over these centuries, it's disproportionately been the bodies of poor people.
As we'll see, this has produced some oddities, but what it also proceeded to generate was
one of the odd corners of medical history.
A disease that accidentally got invented around 1900 was invented because people didn't know
that something was different about the bodies of the poor versus everyone else, and this
odd quirk of mistaken pathology before it was over with was the cause of tens of thousands
of deaths.
Now all of this begins in the 16th century with King Henry VIII.
Now Henry did not have any particular interest in anatomy, but nonetheless he should be
the patron saint of anatomists and autopsists, because he made a law during his reign, which
was criminals who were executed would then be dissected by the anatomists, dissected
in the middle of the town square, pulled to pieces in front of everyone in the leftovers
tossed to the dogs.
And what was clear about that period was folks who were getting executed were disproportionately
the poor.
This was a time where stealing a loaf of bread could cause you to meet the gallows.
Now by the 18th century, this trend had been growing for the simple fact that there were
more medical schools, something beginning to resemble our modern notion of what a medical
school is, and out of that came a wonderful new occupation.
You could work the graveyard shift, you could be what was called a resurrectionist, you
could do that for a living, or in the term that is more familiar to us, you could be
a body snatcher, because what you would do is get the bodies of the dead and sell them
to the people at the medical school, the anatomists, in order to learn about the human body, do
an autopsy, learn some gross anatomy.
Now this involves all sorts of wild unlikely things.
Not only were these resurrectionists often out at night digging up corpses from in the
graveyard, they were sometimes raiding funerals and stealing the bodies right at that point.
In some cases, they were wrestling people for it.
Now this was far more likely to occur with the bodies of the poor than the wealthy.
The wealthy during that period would often pay for an armed guard at the funeral so
that resurrectionists could not crash the party.
What you also saw during that time was a rule of, in the hospitals, whoever came and paid
the bill got the body, and the resurrectionists would often be there, and once again that's
going to be a bias towards getting the bodies of the poor.
And more so would be the fact that poor people were buried in potters fields, often not in
coffins or made of flimsy material, fairly shallow, and in contrast, the wealthy in some
impregnable coffin way down their underground.
This even gave rise to a new invention somewhere around 1820 or so, a patented triple coffin.
A triple coffin where the body of the wealthy individual would be put into this multi-layered
coffin and locked so that the resurrectionists were not going to get to them.
And just in case that wasn't good enough, there was even something that emerged during
this period in the cemeteries of the wealthy, something called the dead house, where you
would have the body of the individual left there under armed guard, and this wealthy
gent or gentle woman's body allowed to reach such a point of genteel putrification that
nobody would try to steal it, and at that point they would be buried.
So we've got this bias here for the bodies of the poor.
Now this period gave rise to a very interesting verb in the English language, burking.
Burking was named for a gentleman, William Burke, who was an aging resurrectionist and
presumably he was getting a little bit tired of the night work and all the physical labor
of having to dig stuff up, and what he did was he opened up a soup kitchen, a soup kitchen
for the poor, and the poor would come in and he would find some means of luring them out
into the alleyway, bop them over the head, slit their throats and soon Mr. Burke had
burked somebody and they were off to meet the anatomist.
Ironic ending here when he was eventually convicted of this, he himself was hung and
his skull sent to the neuroanatomists there trying to figure out how somebody could do
such an offensive crime.
Now the poor sure noticed that they were being disproportionately autopsy, that their bodies
were being stolen at funerals, that their coffins, if there were coffins, were being
dug up at night.
There emerged a awareness of this and as a result all sorts of resurrectionists and anatomists
and doctors and medical students would be lynched by angry crowds, you would have crowds
of people burning down hospitals where the bodies of the poor were being dissected, burning
down the homes of the anatomists, this was all going on at that time.
Around 1780 an event happened that is historically known as the Doctors' Rebellion at Kings College
in New York, soon named instead Columbia University, Columbia College, the Doctors' Rebellion.
It was discovered that some medical students trying to get some cash on the side, students,
grad students being what they were even in the 18th century, trying to get some cash
on the side, cut the resurrectionists out of the business, cut out the middleman and
were caught one night digging up bodies out in Potter's Field and this generated a go figure,
a riotous displeasure on the part of the poor, major riots, this Doctors' Rebellion, the
anatomists and faculty of Kings College Medical School had to take refuge in the house of
Alexander Hamilton, the militia was called out to fire on the crowds all because of this
preferential, stealing and autopsy of the body of the poor.
Now this also gave rise by the 19th century to a law in a number of European countries
that actually formalized this process, laws that were typically known as Anatomy Acts,
which said that if a person died in a poor house, their body was turned over to the anatomists.
If a person had died and the relatives could not pay for the medical expenses, the body
was automatically sent to the anatomists.
Now really interesting book, if you're looking for some fun holiday reading, by a historian
Ruth Richardson, book Death, Dissection and the Destitute and she makes the very convincing
argument that these Anatomy Acts were introduced to punish, to terrorize the poor.
And here's the argument that she makes, in 1829 in England there was the first introduction
of a proposed Anatomy Act in the British Parliament and it was roundly voted down by everybody
saying this is appalling, this is inhumane, doing this to the poor, automatically turning
over their bodies just because they were poor in 1832, there were major riots in England,
the reform riots mostly by crowds of the poor and in the aftermath Parliament considered
the act again and passed it resoundingly.
Richardson's thesis very convincingly that sending the bodies of the poor to the anatomists
is a great threat, a punishment to the poor for their unfortunate and infra-dig uprising
there, don't even think about trying that again.
And by the mid-19th century, best estimates are 99% of the bodies that were autopsied,
99% of what medical students learned from were bodies of the poor.
Now a version of this is still going on these days, there is still that disproportionate
bias, not quite as dramatically but it is still there.
I know a guy who for a living would wander around India, this was a physical anthropologist
and what he would do was buy the bodies of the deceased from poor people there to be
shipped back wherever and turned into a skeleton for educational purposes and he had no shortage
of people who were willing to sell off the remnants of their loved ones, what was really
disturbing is after a while he had a fairly clear sense that in some of these cases the
relatives had worked kind of hard to hasten the demise of their relative there just for
a little bit of extra cash to tide you over, this still goes on these days.
Now out of all of this comes what is the really interesting thing about this whole lecture.
Amid all of these emphases and autopsied biases as to the bodies of the poor being autopsied,
disproportionately this wound up having a major consequence.
As we'll see in a later lecture, people as a function of their socioeconomic status have
different diseases and the poor aren't as healthy and what we see here is the fact that
the poor were not equally being autopsied were being preferentially so gave rise to
this very surprising outcome.
So the main story here has to do with an interesting thing that happens during stress.
Now during stress you secrete all sorts of stress hormones, do not write these terms
down, glucocorticoids, epinephrine, one of the things that chronic stress does is it
causes atrophy of some parts of the body, hypertrophy of other parts, for example hypertrophy,
the adrenal glands are the source of glucocorticoids and of adrenaline and over the course of chronic
stress they will get bigger.
What we will see here is there's another organ that gets smaller and that's the cause of this
medical disaster.
Now by the early 20th century physicians were wrestling with the cause of a disease that
is commonplace these days, a disease that then was known as crib death.
These days we know it is sudden infant death syndrome and it was just being recognized
as a disorder, a disorder where a perfectly healthy child, typically a baby, is put to
sleep at night and for no obvious reason dies during the night, the mystery of sudden
infant death syndrome.
So it's around 1900 and you are a medical scientist, a biomedical researcher and you
are trying to understand where sudden infant death syndrome is coming from and it turns
out that there's something critical happening back to that business about stress, its effects
on the body.
Yes, stress and this chronic secretion of these adrenal stress hormones make your adrenals
bigger, meanwhile, north of that in your throat there is a gland called the thymus gland.
The thymus gland which has something to do with immune defenses and what was found very
soon after the discovery of the stress hormones is that they cause atrophy of the thymus gland.
They cause it to shrink and there's reasons why this makes sense.
It's got something to do with the fact that stress suppresses immune defenses so you've
got this immune organ, the thymus, getting shrunk by stress.
Now I do not mean a subtle effect here, I mean go have a stressful week and your thymus
will have lost three quarters of its size.
That's like saying go have a stressful week and you've lost three out of four of the chambers
of your heart, this was a big effect reversible and a huge, huge effect.
And out of this effect and the fact that people didn't understand the role of stress
and the fact that they were learning their anatomy disproportionately from the bodies
of the poor, out of this came this catastrophe having to do with SIDS, sudden infant death
syndrome.
Now these days we're getting some insight into what the disease was about but it's 1900
and you're trying to understand this newly recognized disease so what do you do?
You don't have molecular biology, you don't have imaging techniques, you've got the cutting
edge of 1900 science which is to cut the person open, anatomy.
And during that time a German anatomist named Palteth did one of the first studies, try
to understand what's different about the bodies of kids who die from sudden infant death syndrome.
Now note again the requirement for SIDS is the kid wasn't sick.
The child dies mysteriously at night, the child was healthy.
So what we already have as a bias is that infants who die from SIDS tend to be middle
or upper class.
So down sits this anatomist and what he's done from day one learning about the body
as an anatomist is information derived from studying the bodies of the poor and that introduces
a bias.
For the very simple reason that it was not recognized that the body of a poor person
is not a normal body, it is a body that bears the wounds, the scars, the stigmata of poverty.
Now one of the things that that does is a life of chronic stress.
For infants, chronic illness if you were poor, malnutrition, infections, these were infants
in normal autopsy studies that were dying of chronic stress.
In other words, when anatomists at that time were learning the anatomy of what the baby
human body was about, because of the fact that they were disproportionately studying
the bodies of the poor, what they were learning was a totally incorrect idea as to how big
the thymus gland is supposed to be.
They thought they were looking at normal sized thymus gland, but in reality they were looking
at thymus glands that had shrunk as a result of the stressors of being a poor child dying
of chronic diseases.
In other words, what they thought of as a normal sized thymus was in fact one that was abnormal,
abnormally shrunk.
But they don't know this, so down sits this anatomist and he's one of the first to now
autopsy the bodies not of poor infants, poor children, but children who were middle classed.
Children whose bodies were not warped by poverty, children whose thymus glands had not shrunk.
So he's studying the bodies of these SIDS kids, these middle class kids, and comparing
it to everything he knows about anatomy of the body of an infant with its normal quote
thymus gland, and what the guy immediately does is say, oh my god, look at the size of
the thymuses in these SIDS kids, they're big, they're abnormally enlarged.
We know exactly what was going on here, which is he didn't know what was normal.
He was the first anatomist looking at what normal sized thymuses were because he couldn't
appreciate that by disproportionately looking at the bodies of poor during his education,
he had a totally wrong idea as to what the normal sizes of the thymus.
And out of this came a very simple conclusion, which is SIDS involves an abnormally enlarged
thymus.
And he came up with a perfectly plausible theory, which is for whatever mysterious developmental
reason, some kids have an enlarged thymus gland and at some point during sleep it presses
down on the trachea, suffocates the child at night.
Here is the theory to explain all of SIDS, an abnormally large thymus which compresses
the trachea at night.
And we know this was totally wrong, he was looking at normal sized thymuses and he didn't
have a clue that the thymuses he learned on were abnormally shrunken by the stress of
poverty.
Okay, so he comes up with this very influential theory and by the early 20th century it's
catching on, it's being accepted, and it was so accepted that it even got a name.
There was a name for this imaginary disorder of having an abnormally enlarged thymus gland.
A disease was invented called Statysthymicolymphaticus.
This was the description for this supposed abnormality of an enlarged thymus, which causes
you to, as an infant, have an increased risk of your trachea being compressed and here
was the name of it.
We know that was nonsense, but here is a new disease, cutting edge, every top of the line
physician, pediatrician understood that SIDS involved something about abnormally large
thymuses.
This was wildly influential.
By the 1920s, this was in every pediatric textbook out there, and by the 1920s people
had a pretty good idea as to how you prevent these SIDS, how you prevent these enlarged
thymuses, you take advantage of a wonderful new technology, you irradiate the throats
of babies.
If you, concerned parents, want to protect your child from the risk of SIDS, take them
in, have their throat irradiated to shrink the abnormally enlarged thymuses.
We know that's nonsense.
We know that's ridiculous, and we then discover that there's a really bad outcome because
right next door to the thymus is the thyroid gland, and marinate the thyroid gland in radiation
and you've greatly increased the risk of thyroid cancer.
And before it was over with, best estimates are that this wonderfully helpful intervention
of shrinking abnormally large thymus glands was the cause of death of at least 10,000
people.
Now by the 1920s, the first hints were beginning to appear in the literature that this was
gibberish.
Somebody discovered that babies who were killed in accidents and car accidents, all of them
seemed to suffer from status thymical lymphaticus.
They all have enlarged thymus glands.
What is that about?
We know what that's about.
They had normal sized thymuses, and they died by an abrupt accident rather than the chronic
thymus shrinking consequences of being poor.
What's that about this weird thing reported in the medical literature and roundly ignored?
And it wasn't until the 1930s that people began to understand these effects of stress
on the thymus gland, and it was put together the pieces by a man, anyone who went through
medical training and studied pediatrics knows this guy's name, Nelson, of Nelson's
textbook of pediatrics.
He was a young intern at the time at University of Pennsylvania, and he was the first one
to put this together and say, oh my God, they've gotten it backwards.
It's not abnormally large thymuses in these kids.
These are normal sized thymuses.
And what are you doing, irradiating them?
And he was the first person in 1930s editions of his textbook to say, don't do this.
And nonetheless, it persisted for a remarkably long time afterward.
And I've met people who in the 1950s in their childhood had their throats irradiated to avoid
this imaginary disease and have gummed down with thyroid cancer.
This is one chilling thing to contemplate.
If you want to do something really spooky, go to a medical library and go down to the
basement, the caverns down there, and go through the old textbooks and look at pediatric textbooks
from the 1920s.
And there it is, this really dangerous disease, statis thymical lymphaticus.
You will see pictures of the supposedly abnormally enlarged thymuses.
There's deep detailed protocols there about how much radiation on which days to avoid
this disease, all of it wrong.
All of it asked backwards, all of it fatally wrong, and all you can do in the context of
a little bit of humility is sit there and say, what kind of mistakes are we making these
days?
In what ways are we deciding there's a diseased state and it's not really diseased because
we don't know what a normal body looks like?
Okay, so this is an incredible piece of medical history.
What it also should be obviously is instructive because there's all sorts of lessons that
come out of this.
As we will see in a later lecture, as I mentioned, there will be a focus on this simple fact
that your socioeconomic status has a whole lot to do with your health.
If you get a choice in the matter, don't be poor, especially when you're growing up.
Don't make the mistake of being born into a poor family.
Your health is going to suffer for the rest of your life.
You could come up with a very good soapbox sort of theme there of can we do something
to erase the health inequities in people as a function of their socioeconomic status?
Okay, obviously that's not going to get me very far here.
Let's shoot for something a little bit more manageable.
If people can't live equally in their health as a function of their socioeconomic status,
at least they should be autopsy to equal rates because this bias has caused all sorts of
problems as we've seen.
Now what other lessons come from this?
If you look at what counts as cutting edge biomedical research and medical advances these
days, it's amazing stuff.
It's sequencing the genome.
Soon there's going to be personalized genomics where your own genome will be sequenced in
order to give a doctor a sense of what drugs will work better on you, what interventions.
Sequencing the genome, artificial organs, transplanting neurons in the brain, stem cell
biology revolutionizing the whole field.
What we see here is some of the time you need to have people doing idiotically simplistic
biomedical research, ridiculous things like asking the question of, well, what's the normal
size of the thymus gland?
That's ridiculous.
That's 19th century anatomy.
Why would anyone want to study that?
Because as we see, sometimes it's not so easy to be sure what is a normal sized gland with
disastrous consequences.
But at the end, the biggest lesson that comes out of all of this is one that transcends
medicine, transcends biomedical research, transcends science, one that is relevant to
virtually every aspect of how we go about having judgments, decisions, deciding on actions,
how we go about this, which is be very, very careful when you have decided what counts
as a normal state, because the second you've decided what normal is and convinced yourself
of it, the second you have pronounced that, you have forever after distorted your ability
to look at an exception to that supposed normality and see it for what it really is.
