Welcome back.
Now as I mentioned in one of the earlier lectures, part of my research involves field work, studying
population of wild baboons in a national park in East Africa.
And as part of that research, you get to know the animals reasonably well.
And thus, let me tell you the tale of Rebecca and Jonathan, two baboons in one of my troops.
Now Rebecca had everything going for her.
Female baboons spend their whole life in the same troop, so you essentially inherit your
rank from your mother, and you could be in a particular lineage, a high ranking lineage,
low, medium.
What Rebecca came from the highest ranking lineage, her mother was the alpha female.
She was popular.
She ran in the right crowd of baboons.
By any standards of a male baboon, she was considered hot.
She did something very, very atypical for a female baboon, reflecting her confidence,
which is male baboons will try now and then and succeed every now and then at killing
a rabbit.
Male baboons do not hunt rabbits, Rebecca hunted rabbits successfully.
This was a confident, popular baboon in the center of all that was it.
This was one of the cheerleaders who make out with the quarterback by the bleachers.
Meanwhile, there's Jonathan.
Jonathan was this adolescent, and he was this inoffensive beast.
He was kind of low ranking, and he bumbled along.
And basically, this was a guy who was destined to be vice president of the chemistry club.
Now what occurred was that Jonathan developed this God awful crush on Rebecca, as if she
was so out of his league she didn't even know he existed, but he had this desperate tragic
crush on her.
So what would happen?
Rebecca would go about her business out foraging during the day, and there's Jonathan loping
along after her, wanting her to notice him, wanting to groom him, to actually groom him.
Something baboons do a lot of the time, wanting her to probably wanting her to do something
more than that, but he would have settled for just grooming.
He would have settled for grooming her.
She ignored him.
She just gave him the cold fur covered shoulder.
She had nothing to do with him.
What should Jonathan have been doing?
He should give up, because he's getting nowhere with this.
In psychology jargon, the behavior of desperately following around this hot female baboon should
have been extinguished by lack of reinforcement.
He should have given up on it, but he didn't.
And he's loping after her day after day after day, and every now and then, she would let
him groom her.
She would let him groom her, and then once for about three seconds, while she was mostly
distracted looking at some hot alpha male, she groomed him offhandedly.
He was ecstatic.
This was heaven for him, and what this did was redouble, triple, quadruple the energies
he put into loping around after her.
This galvanized him.
Okay, so I'm out there studying these guys, pretty much living alone, and this whole
situation with Jonathan was frustrating me enormously.
Before I knew it, I'd find myself like standing on top of my Jeep, or rating loudly, saying
here we see the non-human primate roots of the magnificent human capacity for gratification
postponement.
Here in this pathetic dork of a baboon, stumbling around with this pitiful success rate, here
is the path to our greatness.
Here is the human capacity for a 50-year unrequited courtship, the obsessive who spends a decade
making a full-life replica of Elvis, had a bottle caps.
This is all of us working hard in high school to get into a good college, to get into a
good job afterward, to get into a good nursing home someday.
This was, I'm up there, r-rating, yelling at the zebras.
It's obvious what was going on here, which was I was kind of over-identifying a little
bit with Jonathan, and I probably could have used a little bit of social grooming myself
if you know what I mean.
But what we have mostly coming out of this is this central question, why did he keep
doing this?
Why did he keep dealing with failure after failure, lack of reinforcement?
Why did he keep doing this persisting?
Why are we, we primates, including non-human primates, why are we willing to deal with
such long delays in gratification?
What's gratification postponement about?
Now what we begin to see, what's going to be the corner piece of this whole lecture,
is the thing that was just getting to the very essence of Jonathan's frenzied limbic
system, which is the power of intermittent reinforcement.
And what we're going to be seeing in this lecture is how it works and where it gets
this extraordinary power from, and some of the plus sides and downsides of this capacity.
And to understand this, we hurdle back to a subject of the previous lecture.
We are back in the frontal cortex.
In case you haven't sort of committed the previous lecture to memory, recapitulate what's
the frontal cortex about.
It's the most decidedly human part of the brain.
We've got more of it than any other species.
Baboons have a frontal cortex, but not a ton of it.
They are not famous for their capacity to do long-term planning and long-term stocks
and bonds.
Human frontal cortex is the last part of the brain to develop.
Interesting implication.
It's the last part of the brain to develop.
It's the part of the brain that is least constrained by genes and most shaped by experience.
What does the frontal cortex do?
As we heard in the last lecture, it makes you do the harder thing when it's the right
thing to do.
It sends those inhibitory projections down to that emotive, disinhibited limbic system.
It tells you, don't do it.
I know you're tempted to do it.
Don't do it because you're going to regret it.
Hold off.
Hold off.
Show some discipline.
What it's particularly good at is show some capacity for gratification postponement.
It turns out, scientists are beginning to understand this, and it's got to do with a
really interesting neurotransmitter, neurotransmitter chemical in the brain that sends information
from one neuron to the next, a type of neurotransmitter called dopamine.
Dopamine.
Some of us are familiar with dopamine.
Coke, cocaine, works on dopamine neurons, gets them to release dopamine.
Dopamine has something to do with pleasure, with reward.
There's a whole paradigm in neuroscience called self-stimulation, where you can take
a rat and find the dopamine, dopaminergic part of the brain and put an electrode in
there, and the rat can press a lever, and as a result of pressing the lever doing the
work, it gets stimulated there, and rats will work like mad to get stimulated in these
dopaminergic pathways.
A part of the brain do not write this down.
A part of the brain called the ventral tegmentum, another called the nucleus accumbens.
This is where the heart of those dopaminergic neurons that are about pleasure, about reward,
this is where they are sitting.
Where do they send their projections?
What part of the brain do they talk to?
This is, of course, you guessed it, projections into the frontal cortex.
And what we see is this dopamine projection has an awful lot to do with where the frontal
cortex gets the energy to do the right thing, even if it's the harder thing.
So how would the frontal cortex be working in response to dopamine?
What happens to dopamine in the face of reward?
Should be pretty obvious.
You take some monkey and you have it there, and from out of nowhere, from out of the heavens
drops mana, some reward that it did not anticipate.
And what you could see, say with brain imaging, is that dopaminergic reward part of the brain
suddenly gets all activated, reward, unexpected, and you have this part of the brain activate.
And what it does there is serve a very important role.
It's instructive.
It's part of that process that any good organism would go through at that point saying, whoa,
I just got this reward coming out from the middle of nowhere.
What did I do just beforehand that caused it to occur, this need we have for agenticity,
this need we have to understand, cause and effect.
What did I just do to cause that?
And the frontal cortex and the dopamine system have a lot to do with the feedback that occurs
at that point, which allows you to update your valuation to figure out, aha, what behaviors
that I just do to bring about that reward, that reward that was really great, that reward
having more value to me.
And what then goes into these calculations in the brain are things like time discounting.
How long do you have to wait to get the reward?
And as we know, things become less valued by us, by our frontal cortex, by our dopamine
system as you have to wait a longer time for the reward to come.
More realms where you see interesting stuff with dopamine in this regard, what dopamine
is playing a big role in is helping you discern of two different options, which one is more
valuable, which one you should devote more of your efforts to obtaining.
Parke-Relman clinical medicine, where you can see an example of this Parkinson's disease.
Parkinson's disease is a disease, a neurological disorder, where you lose all of the dopamine
releasing neurons in some completely other part of the brain, a part of the brain having
to do with smooth movement, completely unrelated to this.
But it turns out Parkinsonian individuals also lose some dopamine neurons in this reward
pathway ventral tegmental system.
And what you see is Parkinsonian individuals are not very good at shifting their game strategies
when you are shifting the size of the rewards.
If you do this, you get X number of reward units.
If you do that, you get Y, begin to change the reward rates, and people can modify their
behavior accordingly to maximize the reward based on updating their valuation.
People with Parkinson's who are a little bit pokey in this part of the neurochemical
system of dopamine, people who have Parkinson's are not very accurate at doing that shifting.
And remarkably, there are drugs, medicines that you can give to people with Parkinson's
L-dopa being the most famous that will boost up dopamine levels and back comes the accuracy
at choosing what's the optimal strategy, what's the optimal set of behaviors I should do to
maximize my reward.
Now sitting in here is one of the true tragedies of human nature.
When you consider a tough task that the dopaminergic reward system has to take on, which is this
is a world in which our pleasures are incredibly heterogeneous, are incredibly, this is a world
in which pleasure can come in the form of hitting the lottery, where it could come in
the form of the faintest of smells, a breeze, a memory that floats past.
How can this dopaminergic system deal with such a wide range of reward hitting the lottery
is rewarding?
Noticing that spring is coming is rewarding.
How does it manage to code for all of this?
And the secret for how it does it is it's got to habituate to any given reward very
quickly.
It's got to reboot so that it's ready when it's finished with the I just won the lottery
reward responses to the nice breeze reward responses.
And out of this, you see something miserably depressing that impacts all our lives as follows.
Okay, so you've got an organism, like a human for example, and you are studying them in
a brain scanner, and they've been trained that they do some activity or other, some
task, and they get X amount of reward.
Simply from out of nowhere, you give them two X, you give them twice as much, and dopamine
levels shoot through the roof at that point.
Now what you show is you come back the next day, and you give them that two X, dopamine
doesn't go up.
That's gone from a wonderful surprise from out of nowhere to forget two X as a surprise.
I deserved, I am entitled to two X, go back to the one X, and not only doesn't dopamine
go up, it drops.
You've already habituated to what counts as the norm.
Two X yesterday was fabulous.
Two X today is just mundane, what I better be getting if I'm going to remain satisfied.
Okay, so that's the first pass at what this dopamine system has to do with reward.
And what we'll see now is that's totally simplistic and incorrect.
And a lot of these more subtle insights come from the work of terrific scientist, a man
named Wolfram Schultz, and his colleagues at the University of Cambridge in England.
What he has done is begin to show that, in fact, dopamine is not really about reward.
Here's the sort of paradigm that he would have, and this is research done with monkeys,
where they could do imaging to see when these dopamine pathways get excited.
Okay, here's the paradigm.
You have trained the monkey to do some task, pressing a lever, some such thing, in order
to get a food reward, a little pellet of food, of something that it likes, a grape.
And what you do is you've also trained the monkey to recognize when you were starting
one of those lever pressing and get a grape reward sessions.
A light comes on, which indicates, here we go, it's the start of one of those sessions,
start lever pressing, and you're going to get rewards.
So when does dopamine go up under these circumstances?
What everything I've told you in the last five minutes suggests is, the monkey does
the work, gets the grape, up goes the dopamine.
That's not when the dopamine goes up, as it turned out.
What Schultz shows is, once the monkey understands how the whole thing works, dopamine doesn't
come up when the reward occurs, dopamine comes up when the light turns on.
What's this about?
This is the monkey sitting there saying, lights on, I know what's up, the lever pressing
deal, piece of cake, I know how this works, I know I pressed the lever, I get the reward,
I am all on top of this, this is going to be great.
What is dopamine about?
It's not reward, it's about the anticipation of reward.
And out of this comes a psychology term, that dopamine fuels appetitive behaviors, appetite,
what you are willing to do to get some sort of reward, a consumatory event.
There was a guy in my dormant college who had an extremely caustic and probably cynically
accurate view in far too many cases of relationships.
Here's what he would say, a relationship is the price you pay for the anticipation of
it.
Okay, that's pretty grim, but nonetheless what this begins to tell us a little bit about
is dopamine is not the reward, is not the increase that you get in response to reward,
dopamine is about anticipation.
But dopamine turns out to be more than that, it's not just about the anticipation, back
to the work that you need to do to get that reward, where is the fuel for that coming
from, back to where we were a few minutes ago, where does the frontal cortex get the
energy to hold out and do the right thing even if it's harder to work away at that
lever when you'd rather be just lounging around, where does that come from, it's from
the dopamine.
How can you show this, for example get one of these paradigms and if you block the dopamine
from rising when the light comes on, you don't get the work, you don't get the behavior.
What is dopamine about, it's not just anticipation of reward, it's about the goal directed behavior,
it's about what you are willing to do, the effort you are willing to expend to get that
reward.
Now this dopamine begins to give us even more insight, because at a first pass it explains
things in a very easy sort of way, but as we'll see, this really doesn't explain much
at all.
Back to Rebecca and Jonathan, we now understand dopamine is not about happiness, it's about
the pursuit of happiness, it's about the labors you are willing to do to get your reward
and your happiness, and what's our scenario now based on that knowledge, you got Rebecca
and you got Jonathan, Rebecca manages to groom Jonathan once, and now in Jonathan's mind
Rebecca equals grooming, he has a cause and effect relationship, he's got all of this
work out, how rewarding works, and you have a scene where Rebecca appears at the end of
the other field and winds swept and her fur and Wagner starts playing and they run to
each other because dopamine and Jonathan's brain is motivating him because by going towards
her he is going to get groomed, but that's not what's happening, because as we saw the
vast percentage of the time, instead of grooming fest at that point, nothing happens, he doesn't
get the reward, and as we saw what he gets instead is very, very intermittent reward,
it shouldn't work that way then that you get the behavior out of Jonathan, what we just
saw was you form an association, do this behavior, get a reward, run across the field with Wagner,
you get groomed by, run across the field with Wagner and like once out of every 47 times
you get groomed, something's wrong here with the seemingly straightforward relationship
between dopamine forming the motivation for goal directed behavior and then you get the
reward, and this is where some of the really subtle work by Schultz comes in telling us
something about the neurochemistry, the dopaminergic basis of not just reward but intermittent reward.
Here's an absolutely brilliant paradigm that he did, now what we heard about before in
these monkey studies is light comes on signaling the start of one of these sessions, monkey
does the work, lever presses gets the reward, lever presses gets the reward, 100% relationship
guaranteed, do the work you get the reward, now what they did was shift it to only 50%
of the time would you get the reward, and what happens at that point, up comes the light
seeing the start of one of these sessions and dopamine blasts through the roof, dopamine
goes crazy, what have you just shown, intermentancy fuels dopamine like mad, what have we just
introduced into the equation, we've just introduced the word maybe, and maybe is incredibly, incredibly
motivating, now how could they show that this was how it was working, here's where this
study got particularly elegant, 50%, 50% and you know what that individual is doing, they're
saying yes I know how this works when the light came on, I know what to do to get the
reward but I never get the reward because I'm a total screw up but today I'm feeling
lucky but we know other than back and forth, just teetering on this fulcrum of maybe, because
50% maximizes the uncertainty, here's what they did, they now shifted the reward rate
either to 25% of the time the monkey would do the work and get the reward or 75%, going
from 50, these are diametrically opposite, 25 things are getting worse, 75 things are
getting better, totally opposite, they have one thing in common though which is they have
a greater degree of predictability than 50% and what you then see is 25 or 75, you still
get a burst of dopamine but it's not quite as big as 50% and it's still bigger than 100%.
What does this begin to tell us, this is the neurobiology of gambling, this is the neurobiology
of willing to put enormous amounts of goal directed behavior into the possibility of
an intermittent reward because nothing boosts up dopamine like that.
Interesting interaction with stress, because an awful lot of what stress is about, psychological
stress is loss of control, loss of predictability, a world in which reward and punishment becomes
unpredictable, intermittent, wonderful study a few years ago looking at brokers in the
London stock market and what was shown was what predicted secretion of stress hormones,
it was not when the market was doing badly, it was when the market was gyrating, the more
variability, the more intermittency, the higher the stress hormone levels, more gyrations,
more fluctuation, bigger stress response but at the same time, there are circumstances
where we love to give up control and predictability, that's what happens when we go into a scary
movie, what you generally see is in a malevolent scary setting, intermittency is about the
stress response but in a benevolent setting, intermittency is about dopamine, is about
that wildly addictive burst that you get as soon as maybe is brought onto the scene.
Now what we see there is the 50% maximizes that anticipatory goal directed tidal wave
of dopamine and what some amazingly good social engineers are good at is being able to take
humans in a circumstance where you have like .0001% chance of getting a reward making you
think in fact you've got a 50% chance.
What am I talking about?
This is Las Vegas, this is the whole world of the hints of reward are that much more
addictive and powerful when something that's really unlikely instead you are engineered
to think it's highly likely this is my lucky day, hello sir, welcome to our Las Vegas hotel,
hooray you've just gotten a free upgrade, a free drink, this is my lucky day and this
infinitesimally small chance of getting a reward I now perceive as shifting to a much
much higher range towards 50% and you are on that fulcrum of maybe and you are working
like mad to get this reward.
So what does this begin to tell us about how this reward system works?
How this whole world of intermittent reinforcement?
Now Schultz brings up something very interesting, very striking in his work because we've got
something very tough to explain not just that incredibly big rewards like you haven't eaten
in weeks and you finally get to eat has the same neurochemical underpinnings of a breeze
feeling nice, that business about the huge extremes but we humans get reinforced by some
very odd things a quote by Schultz in one of his papers this behavioral definition attributes
reward function also to certain non-alimentary and non-sexual entities including money, technical
artifacts, aesthetic stimulus attributes and mental events.
What am I talking about here or what's he talking about?
It's that we humans can also get reinforced by stuff, by things not just by eating when
you are hungry or sex or those basic animals.
We get reinforced by stuff by these things that we have invented with culture.
Our culture suddenly we have a world in which getting some giga is capable of tapping into
that same neurochemical system as has been working in our mammalian ancestors for God
knows how long in response to hunger, sex, safe location, all of that sort of thing.
So we are using our dopamirgic system in a very different way than lots of other species
and where the keys to it are first the incredible speed with which the dopamine system can habituate
and the incredible power that dopamine has to generate behavior, to generate goal directed
work to have you do that when maybe comes on the scene.
This begins to explain some of our greatest triumphs of human accomplishments, our capacity
to postpone reward the human realm, a phenomenal motivation of reaching higher and higher up
for your achievements.
What it also begins to explain is some of our most crippled realms of human behavior, our
addictions, our dissatisfactions, the neurochemistry of why the grass is always greener on the
other side, the neurochemistry of boredom, of you needing something new of serial marriage
is this whole neurochemical world where something that was brand new and wonderful yesterday
is exactly what you're entitled to today and isn't going to be anywhere near enough tomorrow.
And herein lies the tragedy of intermittent reinforcement and what dopamine has to do
with it.
And what should be clear as we've transitioned from dopamine is about reward, no not really,
dopamine is about the anticipation of reward as it turns out not really that either.
Dopamine is about the goal directed behavior, the work, the frontal cortical muscular aerobic
control or the limbic system.
Dopamine is about the anticipation of reward and the work you're willing to do to get it.
And as we see within that framework, nothing, nothing stokes that system like when you put
a maybe into the equation because we and our dopamine go wild at that point.
So that's what this whole lecture is about and we now have a very good sense of how all
this works.
Oh, Jonathan and Rebecca, what happened to them?
Well, for the most part, their paths diverged for the most part, they had nothing to do
with each other in the troupe for years to come, except, except for that wild 24 hour
period once where they had this sort of unorthodox, surprising sexual consortia.
And unfortunately I see from the clock, that's a story for another time.
