This is lecture 5. It's going to deal with alchemy and its relation to chemistry. Most
of us have at best a vague acquaintance with alchemy. It conjures up all kinds of images.
The first things folks usually think of when alchemy is mentioned are the search for the
philosopher's stone, or how to change lead into gold, and the quest for a medicine that
imparts immortality. The only illusion to alchemy I've made so far in this series was
to note that Newton was vitally interested in it. We're going to become more familiar
with alchemy today, especially as the practice of alchemy began to be criticized in the 18th
century. Of course, today we immediately want to distinguish alchemy from chemistry. Chemistry
we know about, at least today's chemistry. When I mentioned chemistry last time in our
exploration of mineralogy and the analysis of rocks, I didn't stop to tell you much about
what I meant by the term. There I simply said that the German mineralogists were interested
in what chemists knew about the interactions of earths with acids and bases. Both chemistry
and alchemy were pursued in the 18th century, but as we'll learn next lecture, the second
half of the 18th century saw major advances in chemistry. By the end of the 18th century,
chemistry had taken on a new status from what it had earlier. In this lecture, I want to
examine how this new status emerged from the older links chemistry had to alchemy. We'll
see how, in spite of alchemy's continued presence in the 18th century, the new Enlightenment
emphasis on reason had an impact on it. What happened was this. As the Enlightenment value
of rationality became more and more visible and desirable, it provided a means by which
some attempted to differentiate themselves from alchemists. This began happening in the
early years of the 18th century. I have to tell you, it wasn't as simple and straightforward
a matter as it might sound. Looking back on this development, it's hard for me to see
the ones who began complaining about alchemy the loudest in the early decades of this century
as all that more rational than the others, the ones that weren't. The one German physician
and natural philosopher who we'll talk about wanted to call rational chemistry a different
enterprise from the alchemy that he saw all around him. Now, he thought he was being rational
and I know what's important here is that he thought he was being rational and the alchemists
were not. I agree, that's important. But if from our vantage point we can't see what
being rational meant as clearly as he did, that suggests that maybe there were other
reasons as well why he railed against alchemy. It wasn't just that it was so irrational,
even if he thought it was. There were other associations that also possessed. They were
undesirable. Social, for example, or religious associations that made him want to dissociate
himself from alchemy. It's as if he were saying, look, I'm not one of those guys, but I'm
getting ahead of myself. Let's learn a little bit about alchemy and chemistry. The general
context of our considerations in this lecture has to do with understanding how material
substances combine. In the 17th century, there were different approaches to this subject.
I should let you know right away that here in the 17th century, we have both the terms
chemistry and alchemy. But they're not cleanly distinguishable in this period. Chemistry,
spelled incidentally C-H-Y-M-I-S-T-R-Y in English, is in fact the more inclusive term.
Chemistry involved the study of elements and the essential principles that combined to
form bodies. What did this mean? Well, there were several schemes of elements and principles
according to which all bodies were thought to be composed. I'm sure you're aware of
the four ancient elements, earth, air, fire, and water. To these were added various material
principles. A common scheme included three principles, mercury, sulfur, and salt. Any
substance that was volatile and vaporizable clearly possessed the principle of mercury.
Things that burned and were combustible were imbued with the sulfuric principle, and the
quality of being fragile or separable meant that the principle of salt was present. So
it wasn't merely a matter of elemental substances. There were principles present, and that played
a part as well. Chemists were the ones who knew what the elements were and what principles
were present, so they could use this knowledge to bring about chemical change. For example,
chemists wanted to learn if it was possible to extract principles and elements from bodies,
then later add them back to reconstitute the bodies. Now why? Why would they want to learn
how to do this? Well first, there's just the idea of learning something new, knowledge
for knowledge is sake. But more fundamentally, the new knowledge also adds to our philosophical
understanding as well. Especially as what's been called the new science of the 17th century
gained more and more visibility, chemists had a larger agenda to be part of. For many,
it functioned to bring greater glory to God, the same motive we've already met so often
in other areas of natural philosophy. But there was more to it than this as well. They
wanted to know how to take substances apart and put them back together for practical reasons
too. This kind of knowledge could be helpful in purifying substances of impurities, for example.
Or it might help you learn how to transmute one material into another. And depending on what
you started with and what you ended with, that could be very useful. And who knows? Experimenting
with chemical change might lead to new, stronger medicines or metals. But there was an implication
of this practical side of chemistry that I have to call your attention to. You see, just like in
our own world, in early modern society, there was a social hierarchy associated with various
vocations. Those who engaged in the practical arts didn't stand as high up on the social scale as
those whose pursuits were purely intellectual. Pursuing philosophy was one thing. But vocations
where you got your hands dirty, that was another matter. Now, I'm going to say more about this.
But for now, let's just realize that chemistry was kind of caught in a bind since it had an
interest both in philosophy and in the practical arts. In the 17th century, as long as it kept
its association with the practical arts, it was going to be hard to enjoy the status of pure
natural philosophy. So much for chemistry. Let's turn our attention now to alchemy.
Then as now, alchemy was seen as an endeavor primarily interested in the process of transmutation.
That's one reason why I identified chemistry as the more inclusive term. Chemists, too,
experimented with transmutation. But they were just as engaged with other things as well.
Alchemists, by contrast, were known for their interest in changing one material substance
into another. Now, the classical alchemical pursuit of transmutation was very much alive
in the 17th century. This is evident, for example, in the great number of works published on the
subject. Not only so, but numerous outstanding figures from the period were among those who wrote
them. That included natural philosophers like Robert Boyle and Isaac Newton,
both of whom investigated the possibility of alchemical transmutation. So we need to notice
something here. If men like Newton, natural philosopher Par excellence, if his like was
engaged in alchemy, then clearly he didn't see it to be contrary to his work as a natural philosopher.
What I'm saying is that increasingly, alchemical experimentation was pursued
with a view to advancing natural philosophy. Now, I find this interesting because it means that
alchemists were caught in the same bind as chemists. As long as they remained associated
with the practical arts, they would have lower social status. In fact, of the two, chemistry
and alchemy, it would seem harder for alchemists to overcome the stigma of the practical arts
since that was what they'd always been known for. I do find it interesting, however, that
some natural philosophers of the 17th century and some noted ones at that believed that alchemy,
in fact, had an intellectual side. It contributed to natural philosophy.
Now, there were signs prior to the beginning of the 18th century that chemistry was beginning to
differentiate itself from alchemy. For one thing, chemistry had begun to see itself
as a separate investigative enterprise. One way this showed itself was in the chemistry of salts.
Experimentation in the chemistry of salts led in some quarters to a replacement of older
conceptions of composition. Remember that in the older scheme, substances were made up of elements
and principles. Some chemists were now working with new schemes where salts were concerned.
They were using what they felt were more practical notions of acids and alkalis.
Another measure of the separation of chemistry from alchemy could be seen institutionally.
When the French Academy of Sciences was founded in 1666, it incorporated chemistry as a major
activity from the start. Now, if anything could make chemists visible or associate them with the
new natural philosophy, inclusion in this new institution of natural philosophy would surely
do it. This is not to say, of course, that none of the chemists in the academy was interested in
transmutation. That I doubt very much. As I mentioned earlier, chemists were interested in the process
of transmutation. They just felt that it was only one kind of material transformation.
It simply means that chemists were coming more and more to the fore as chemists. The lines between
them and the alchemists that had earlier been more blurred were becoming more distinct.
After the turn of the century, the chemistry of salts, which resulted from the interaction of
acids and bases, had developed to a point where we begin to see attempts to summarize what combines
with what. A prominent professor of chemistry in France did this in 1718 at the Garden of the King,
that scientific institution I first mentioned in lecture one. The chemist's name was Etienne
Géfoire. Here's what he wrote. Every time two substances, which have some disposition to join
together, one with the other, are found together, if a third one arrives, which has more affinity
with one of the other two, it unites with it, causing the other to be let go.
Now, I realize that doesn't sound terribly profound to your ear, especially if there's a basic
chemistry course somewhere in your past. But what Géfoire was saying was that there are degrees of
affinity. This is implicit in what he said because some affinities, being stronger, displace others
that are weaker. If so, then we might be able to arrange the substances in a table according to the
strength of their affinity. In fact, he published tables of what were said to be the affinities
observed between different chemical substances. All right, let's review what we have so far.
For much of the early modern period, the line between chemistry, which was concerned with
all kinds of ways that material substances interacted, and alchemy, which was primarily
interested in transmutation of one substance into another, the line between chemistry and alchemy
was blurred. Both involved experimentation and that associated them with the practical arts.
Both also contributed to natural philosophy, increasingly so as the 17th century progressed.
Already before the beginning of the 18th century, however, there were indications that chemistry
was being distinguished from alchemy. One indication of this was institutional. Chemistry held a
place in the French Academy from its very start. Another indication was the growth in the chemistry
of salts, especially after the turn of the 18th century, which distinguished chemistry as a separate
investigative enterprise. But because chemistry and alchemy, for that matter, retained an association
with the practical arts, the social position of chemists was not as high as it would have been
if it had been a purely intellectual field. What we see occur in the 18th century is something new.
Some chemists saddled with a status they believe was unworthy of their field, decided to try and
upgrade it. Now, they didn't get together and say, look, we've got to do something about our status.
I'm not saying that the tactic I'm about to describe was even a conscious ploy they used to
improve their status, but clearly their attitude was to bring new respect to the practical side
of their work. The problem was that the folks in society who were associated with what's been
called the craft traditions were often regarded as artisans, people who worked with their hands to
produce a product, and they stood lower in the social scale. These were the people concerned to
make a livelihood. They weren't valued in society like others. And that association that chemists
and alchemists had with the practical arts made many see them as artisans. Let me be a little
more specific about the social divisions here. Above artisans stood the educated ranks of society.
Some of the educated enjoyed very high social status. For example, the clergy had exemptions
from paying the kind of taxes people who worked had to pay. In this, they were like the nobles.
They enjoyed a privileged role in society. Clergy, especially the higher clergy, were
often very educated people. That stood to reason since they supplied the theologians. So we shouldn't
be surprised that many natural philosophers from this time were members of the clergy. But many
natural philosophers were members of what was known in France as the Third Estate. That was a
designation given to everyone who was neither clergy nor noble. The Third Estate was known as
those who work. The other two estates, the clergy and the nobility, were those who pray.
And since the military officers often came from the nobility, those who fight. The vast majority
of folks then were in the Third Estate. Now within the Third Estate, education made a difference in
your social status. It couldn't by itself raise you out of the Third Estate, but it could bring
you more respect within it. Clearly lawyers, physicians, and professors commanded a higher
social status than artisans did. Back to our chemists and alchemists. Saddled with an association
with the artisans of the craft traditions, chemists in particular wanted to improve their status.
What we begin seeing in the 18th century is an attempt to bring their education to bear on the
craft aspect of chemistry. Some chemists began to expand the craft traditions with which they'd
been associated to include a rational intellectual focus. They began arguing that is that chemical
experimentation was not at all the work of mere artisans, but an intellectual enterprise
that required a special understanding. Well, nothing I've said so far would not also apply
to alchemy. I said, didn't I, that men like Newton had begun incorporating alchemy into their
natural philosophy? Wasn't that the same thing as what the chemists were doing when they demanded
that chemical experimentation was an intellectual matter? Yes, it is. But the chemists were making
a claim that the alchemists could not. They were saying that the particular kind of intellectual
activity that one must master in order to do chemical experimentation was rational activity.
As we know, rationality was the emerging value of the time. I virtually identified the enlightenment
with it, so chemists were on the cutting edge with this claim. They were going with the future.
Alchemy might have been philosophical in the eyes of Newton and Boyle, but although Newton
regarded it as natural philosophy, not unlike astronomy, most people didn't see it as Newton did.
Most did not think of it as being distinguished by its rational qualities. This then gave chemists
a means by which they could try to upgrade their status. They could argue, look, chemistry is an
intellectual matter, even when it conducts experiments. It did mean that they'd have to
distinguish themselves from alchemists, but so be it. I want to give you an example of what I mean
here by telling you about the work of an important figure from the history of chemistry from the
early 18th century. I'm talking about a physician named Georg Stahl, who was professor of medicine
at Halla, and later court physician in Prussia. Stahl is important because he tried to create
what he called rational chemistry, and in doing so he set it in direct opposition to alchemy,
which he did not believe was rational. Stahl insisted that the meaning of the words alchemy
and chemistry, which he acknowledged had been used for a long time interchangeably, had recently
come to denote two completely different undertakings. Now in what follows, I want you to listen to see
if it's clear to you exactly what Stahl means by rational, whatever it is that made it so different
from alchemy. You'll hear a lot of reasons why chemistry is different from alchemy, but I want
you to watch and see if it's as clear to you as it was to Stahl what being rational means.
Stahl begins by identifying alchemy as the mostly confused and largely vain attempt to make gold.
Chemistry, he said, was different because it was devoted to rational experimentation as a means
of expanding fundamental knowledge of natural substances. Now Stahl did not think transmutation
was impossible. Chemists were interested in transmutation as one of the kinds of chemical
change, but things had gotten blown all out of proportion by the alchemists. Stahl thought
that's all they were interested in, and their motives were suspect.
Both Stahl and his followers criticized alchemy severely for its negative impact on society.
How? For one, it encouraged swindling and promoted a longing for gold and fantastic medicines.
One can hear the subtext here. Honest and upright chemists aren't the kind of people who engage
in swindling. That's beneath the dignity of a natural philosopher. As if to make the subtext
clear, Stahl, who was a very religious man, added that in enticing folks with the prospect of
quick riches, alchemy distracted its enthusiasts from their obligations to God. Clearly the base
motives many followed when they practiced alchemy were incompatible in his mind with the
moral virtues that God expects of us. Finally, as if to give a practical reason why alchemy
wasn't worth pursuing, Stahl threw in that there were no teachers capable of giving rational instruction
in alchemy. Stahl then goes on to say what he called true chemistry was. Notice as he does so
that he doesn't abandon the association with the craft tradition. His goal is to impart
to the practical side of chemistry the emerging value of rationality to claim for it an intellectual
and natural philosophical status. What was true chemistry? Well first, Stahl said it was inspired
by rational enthusiasm for research. It came from a desire to know the true knowledge of material
composition for its own sake, not for material wealth. And finally he said it resulted from
rational chemical process. Those who knew this rational chemical process could use it to understand
how to improve medicine or mineral processing or distilling, brewing, glass making, other useful
things. Stahl was not in other words dissociating himself from the practical aspects of the world
of the mineralogist or the brewer or the glass maker. He was claiming that the chemist's relation
to these folks was part of a greater rationality. Now I can't find in all this exactly what Stahl
means by rational. He keeps saying that chemistry is rational and he makes clear that he doesn't have
much use for alchemy, but he never where I can see spells out in words why alchemy is irrational
and chemistry is rational. We said before that it was important even when we couldn't understand a
historical figure that we at least have to give him the benefit of the doubt. Stahl felt that
chemistry was rational and alchemy was not. That's where he was casting his lot. But fortunately,
Stahl does give us a way to see a little more of what he understood by rational chemistry.
It's when he actually explains chemist chemical process. There we begin to see what he meant.
He tried to construct a chemical system that revealed the intimate composition of substances.
Best known feature of this system was Stahl's treatment of combustion. So let's take a look at
it. In putting together his ideas on combustion, Stahl drew on the work of Joachim Becker,
a predecessor from the 17th century. Becker had created a system of elements and principles that
drew on two giants from the past, Paracelsus and Aristotle. What Becker did was to keep only two
of Aristotle's four elements, water and earth, and of them he left only water intact. He expanded
the Aristotelian element of earth into three different kinds of earth. These he seems to have
based on the three Paracelsian principles of mercury, sulfur, and salt. So he ended up with
four component parts of material substances, water, and three kinds of earth. It was one of these
earths, terapenguus, or oily earth, that Becker regarded as the constituent present in all bodies
that could be burned. Now it was in 1702 that Stahl introduced his interpretation of combustion,
which was based on that of Becker. He modified it a bit. For example, he adopted the name
phlogiston for Becker's combustive principle. It was derived from the Greek word meaning burnt,
or flammable. He wasn't original with this word. It had been used by others for almost a century
when Stahl picked it up. But he's the one who made it famous. Let's explore this phlogiston a little.
Phlogiston for Stahl was an imponderable substance. What does that mean exactly? Well, it was substantial,
a substance, but it didn't weigh anything. He also believed that by itself it couldn't be
detected by their senses. Now phlogiston is found loosely present in some substances.
That's what combustion was. Combustion occurred when bodies lose their phlogiston. So phlogiston
is a weightless substance loosely present in combustible materials whose release constitutes
combustion. Take substances that burn easily, say charcoal and oils. They are obviously especially
rich in phlogiston. Bodies that can't be ignited or burned, on the other hand, have either lost
their phlogiston already or they don't contain any, never had any. Now Stahl was careful to say
that phlogiston was not the same as fire. Fire, after all, can be detected by the senses.
Phlogiston was the motive power of fire particles. Using this understanding, Stahl constructed a
theory of combustion. Followers of Stahl in Germany then elaborated on his system. The main context
in which Stahl illustrated his theory was in the rusting of metals, which he regarded as a form
of combustion. He explained the rusting of metals called calcination as their loss of phlogiston.
Rusted metals, or calxes, contained no more phlogiston and could not be further burned. So
calcination is the rusting of metals to form a calx. Now you might well wonder about this,
if metals lose their phlogiston when they rust, how come they gain weight? If you've lost
something, even if it doesn't weigh anything, how come you gain weight? Well the simple answer is
that Stahl was not concerned with weights. He might be giving what he thought was a rational
explanation of combustion, but it didn't include weighing, not for him anyway. That of course didn't
mean that others didn't notice. An early convert to Stahl's phlogiston theory, a man named Johann
Junker published a history of chemistry in 1730. In it he praised both Stahl and Becker,
but he misinterpreted Stahl on a crucial point. Junker thought that Stahl's phlogiston was something
material. Now I said before it was substantial, by which I meant that it was something, but as we
know for Stahl it was not a material thing. Junker thought it was material, and because of that
he couldn't overlook the gain in weight during the rusting of metals. To get around the problem he
suggested that phlogiston must possess negative weight. In other words, phlogiston buoyed up the
metals that contained it, so that when the metal lost its phlogiston to become the rusted calcs,
the buoyant effect was lost and the heavier weight emerged. That may sound like cheating to you, but
aside from that particular adjustment to the theory, Stahl's overall system did provide a
pretty interesting account, and it could also be used to give a coherent account of forms of
combustion different from merely calcination. Take an ordinary candle, for instance. The theory
predicts that if you were to put a burning candle under a glass jar, it should go out after a while
because the enclosed space becomes saturated with phlogiston. Once that occurs, no more can be given
off. The burning process stops. Of course that's exactly what happens. Or take the digestion of
food, which can be considered a form of combustion. If digestion of food involves burning,
then when we exhale we expel phlogiston-rich air. They did experiments to confirm this.
Put a mouse under a bell jar like we did the burning candle. Same thing should happen. That is,
the air should eventually become saturated with phlogiston as the mouse keeps exhaling. Sure
enough, the mouse in the experiment dies. So the theory, like good theory anywhere, was linking
together rather consistently phenomena from different and related areas. In this case,
it was three different forms of combustion. Over the course of the 18th century, the phlogiston
theory continued to gain adherence in Germany, France, Sweden, Britain. This was because many
were finding it very useful in their continued exploration of chemistry. Of course, prior to
the middle of the 18th century, Stahl's approach was most well known in the German states. That's
where it had originated and been developed by others. But the theory didn't remain confined to
the German territories. One reason why not was that there were ever increasing demands from the
growing interests in industry, especially concerning metallurgy, that aroused greater
interest in German chemical texts. And as we saw in lecture four, if you wanted to know about
mineralogy and metallurgy, you'd do well to become familiar with the rich German tradition in that
area. So it's not surprising that many German chemical texts were translated between 1750
and 1760. And by 1770, there was a new saga in the history of chemistry about to unfold.
And by that time, phlogiston theory enjoyed wide popularity in France and Britain and had already
for 20 years. What new saga in the history of chemistry? Well, that will be the subject of our next lecture.
