Welcome to Lecture 6. Today we're going to learn about a chemist par excellence in France,
in the period leading up to the French Revolution. He was Antoine Lavoisier, and he was the
principal architect of what I'm calling the New French Chemistry. We're going to learn
about this development, sometimes referred to by historians as the chemical revolution
of the 18th century. But of course, the New French Chemistry didn't come out of nowhere.
I described last time how, as we got closer to the beginning of the 18th century, chemists
had begun to differentiate themselves from alchemists. There was a variety of ways in
which this was done, and several different reasons why it became more and more common.
We don't need to go back into all of that now. Let me just focus on one of the developments
from the early 18th century that confirmed the growing separation between chemistry and
alchemy. I'm referring to the appearance, development, and flourishing of the phlogiston
theory as an explanation of combustion. I described to you how this theory was perceived
as a rational enterprise by Georg Stahl, a German physician, who was trying to discredit
alchemy by erecting a rational chemistry to oppose it. Briefly, he said that when something
is burned, it lost an imponderable substance that it possessed. It lost its phlogiston.
He was trying, in other words, to say more than what an alchemist would have said. An
alchemist was more interested in the procedures that were successful than in why they worked.
Get the formula right. Don't worry about why it works. That's why there was always something
a bit mysterious about alchemical procedures. They didn't question why. Stahl was questioning
why, and he was giving a reason. Something burned because it lost its phlogiston. Well,
it caught on because phlogiston theory began to spread beyond Germany, into France and
England, especially during the years 1750 to 1770. Now, I want to focus in this lecture
on the last three decades of the century and the new French system of chemistry that arose
in those years. But before I do, there are two other factors that should be mentioned
before we turn to our main concern. The first of these was the work of a man named Stephen
Hales in England during the 1720s. Hales was an Anglican cleric who, like many of his vocation,
was vitally interested in the world of God's creation. In his case, he was particularly
interested in botany and chemistry. He conducted a lot of experiments in these areas. For example,
he was curious about the fumes produced when various substances, especially plants, were
heated in a flask. Now, at the time, the only gas known was atmospheric air. What I mean
is that when Hales and others encountered foul-smelling fumes of some sort, they thought of it as atmospheric
air that had been polluted. They didn't perceive it to be a separate gas. Now, when he noticed
that there were fumes given off as a plant burned, he assumed that they came from the
plant, that air had somehow been fixed into the plant and that the burning had set it free,
polluting the air in the process. So he called the air produced when he burned plants fixed air
for that reason. Fixed air was the air bound to a plant released when it was burned. So,
Hales helped to establish the idea that air was bound up or fixed in solid substances. I have to
tell you that Hales was interested in the rough amounts of air he could release from its fixed
state in various substances, but he didn't inquire about the properties of the air he obtained.
Hales' work is the first factor then I wanted to describe to you before we get to the 1770s. The
second factor has to do with the realization that weighing the fixed air released in a reaction
could be important. Traditionally, experimenters were uninterested in the air, what we would call a
gas produced in chemical reactions. It simply disappeared at the chimney. I mentioned that
even Hales, who did care about the fumes produced, even he wasn't interested in the properties of
the various polluted airs or gases he got, only in the rough amounts. To get a basic idea of that
incidentally, he learned how to collect them over water, at least the airs that weren't soluble in
water, but this began to change. One investigator around the middle of the 18th century who realized
the importance of weighing was a man named Joseph Black. Black held chairs in several different
disciplines, because anatomy and botany, medicine, chemistry, and the universities in Scotland,
in Glasgow, and in Edinburgh. And he did important work in more than one area as well. He was clearly
a first rate mind. Anyway, what we're interested in is some of the work he began in medicine. He
was investigating the value of something called Magnesia Alba as an antacid. Now that's something
we can appreciate. It's kind of nice to know we're not alone in the hectic times of our own modern
era and suffering from indigestion. Well, Black was the kind of person who noticed things that others
don't. In this case, he noticed that the exact same weight loss occurred in two different experiments
involving this substance he was working on called Magnesia Alba. We know it as calcium carbonate.
Here's the two experiments. In one, he added an acid to the Magnesia Alba. In the other,
he heated the Magnesia Alba. When he added the acid to the Magnesia Alba, there was a reaction,
and he was left with a residue. Let me call it residue one, and there was an air or gas given off.
When he heated the Magnesia Alba, he also got a residue. It was different from the one produced
by the acid, so let's call it residue two. But there was also in this second case of
heating the Magnesia Alba, an air given off. Now, as I said, Black noticed that the Magnesia
Alba he started with lost exactly the same amount of weight in both cases. That tells us he was
paying attention to the weights, something unusual for his day. So anyway, when he realized that
the weight loss was the same in both cases of adding the acid to the Magnesia Alba and of heating it,
he naturally concluded that the release of the air in both cases had been fixed in the Magnesia
Alba, and it was the same. This triggered his curiosity, and he decided to investigate the
properties of this fixed air. Black was able to show that the air given off was the same,
and that it was different from ordinary air. For example, if you put a candle in it, the candle
went right out. One of his students showed that a mouse eventually died if forced to breathe the
air produced in these experiments. Now, as I said earlier, it was generally assumed at the time that
the various fumes encountered in nature were polluted forms of common air. Had this been a case
of combustion, Stahl might have said that the common air had been polluted with flogiston,
but adding the acid to the Magnesia Alba was not a case of combustion. For whatever reason,
Black decided that what he had produced was not polluted common air, but a different gas
with its own properties. Black appropriated Hales' generic name, fixed air, for this specific new
gas, which it turns out is what we call carbon dioxide. And from this point on, the phrase
fixed air was used by chemists to identify Black's new gas. But notice what Black had done. By identifying
a new individual gas with its own properties, Black opened up to chemistry the possibility that
there might be many new airs or gases. And as you might predict, once this was realized,
chemists quickly began devising new means for producing and investigating the properties of
new airs. He did one more thing too, and it was because of Black, well, because he was the kind
of philosopher who's able to think outside the box that he was able to do this. To appreciate it,
I want you to visualize with me two chemical equations, one below the other. Now these are
in your booklet, so if it helps to get the booklet, you might be able to see what's going on there.
Okay, in the first equation, we have magnesium alba plus an acid on the left side of an arrow.
And then on the right hand side, it yields a residue. We'll call it residue one plus fixed
air given off on the right side of the arrow. All right, in the second one below it, we have
magnesium alba again plus heat on the left side. And then that yields on the right a second residue,
residue two, plus fixed air given off. Now here's where he thought outside the box.
Black essentially treated these two chemical equations like algebraic equations. What I mean
is that he subtracted the one below from the one above. So what happens when you do this? Well,
when you subtract the left sides of the equations, the magnesium alba in both cancels each other.
So the only things you have left are the acid and the heat. But the heat was not
thought to weigh anything, so Black thought he could ignore that. That just left the acid on the
left side. When he subtracted the right sides of the equations, the fixed airs were the same,
so they canceled each other. He was left with the first residue minus the second residue.
This very unorthodox procedure ended up with the acid on the left side of an arrow
yielding the difference of two residues on the right. If you think of this as an algebraic
equation, you have acid equals residue one minus residue two. From this, Black got the idea that
if he moved the second residue, which has a negative sign in front of it, to the other side,
he'd have the acid plus residue two equals residue one. So he did the experiment. He added
acid to residue two. And lo and behold, the result was residue one. Now, you might want to say,
he has no right to do this. Chemical equations aren't algebraic equations. It doesn't matter.
He did it. And he got an interesting result. And he had to assume that the result wasn't accidental.
He surely didn't understand everything that was going on, but here's the important point.
He had come to this result because he had paid attention to the weights of the chemicals he
started with and the ones he ended with. That was the basis of the whole result. So when the
experiment worked out, when he added the acid to residue two and residue one resulted,
he knew that paying careful attention to weights was extremely important.
So this is the second factor I wanted to emphasize. By the time we arrive at 1770,
weighing things, at least for those who knew of Black's work, was a very important thing to do.
In the latter part of the 18th century, one particularly successful gas chemist was the
Englishman, Joseph Priestley. Now Priestley was a dissenter, one of those Englishmen who wouldn't
go along with the state religion of Anglicanism. He taught one of the dissenting academies. He met
with Benjamin Franklin when Franklin was in England. He was very interested in electricity,
lots of other things. It was Priestley, who as much as anyone identified and named
numerous gases during the latter part of the 18th century. Now Priestley was convinced of the
phlogiston theory of combustion. He used it to help him explain the results of his experiments.
Like Stahl before him, Priestley explained the rusting of metals as the loss of phlogiston from
the metal. Now Priestley and other phlogistonists had gotten used to reversing this process as well.
They essentially tried, successfully, to add the phlogiston back to the calcs to get the metal
again. This was called reducing the calcs. The way you did it was to heat the calcs.
There's nothing mysterious here. If to obtain the calcs from the metal, its phlogiston was
separated out, then to get the metal back, all you had to do was recombine the phlogiston with
the calcs. There is one slight problem here. Where are we going to get the phlogiston? We
can't use the phlogiston we got when we originally separated it from the metal. That's long gone.
So we need a new source of phlogiston. Priestley and others assumed that the new phlogiston was
supplied by the charcoal that was burned to produce the fire he needed to reduce the calcs
back to the metal. Obviously charcoal was extremely rich in phlogiston. That's why it burned so
readily. So when charcoal was burned, it set free lots of phlogiston, some of which joined with
the calcs to reproduce the metal. We see here again the power of the phlogiston theory to account
for the results of experiments. No wonder Priestley was so convinced of it. Well, all this was well
and good, then something happened that confused things. It was the summer of 1774. Priestley had
gotten hold of a large 12-inch burning lens, kind of like a very big magnifying glass that he could
use to focus the sun's rays. Others had started using burning lenses and experiments, and Priestley
was doing the same. Over in France, for example, Lavoisier, whom we'll meet in a minute, used a
big lens in the French Academy in 1772 to subject diamonds to a more intense heat than they could
produce using furnaces. So there were advantages to using a lens. Priestley used his burning lens to
heat some mercury calcs he had that he wanted to reduce back to mercury metal. You say, wait
just a minute. I thought you said that if you want to turn the calcs back into a metal, you had to
have a source of phlogiston so it could rejoin with the calcs to form the metal. Exactly. So you
can imagine Priestley's surprise when he found that using the lens worked. He was able to reduce
the calcs to mercury metal, and he did it without using a source of phlogiston, like the charcoal
he'd used earlier. How could that be possible? Where was the phlogiston coming from? Priestley,
of course, assumed that it had to be coming from someplace. But that wasn't all. Priestley noticed
that when he performed this experiment, a gas was produced. In itself, that wasn't new. He'd
noticed the presence of a gas when he reduced calcs using charcoal. No, it wasn't that there
was a gas given off. It was the nature of this gas. Remember, I told you that Priestley was an
expert at identifying new gases. He'd done more than most of the chemists of the 18th century.
Well, this was an interesting gas. The most obvious property it displayed was that it readily
supported combustion. If you put a candle under a jar with it, candle burned brightly. Priestley assumed
that what he had on his hands was laughing gas, which he'd discovered just a little earlier.
That appeared to support combustion, so that must be what it was. Well, that's where things stood
that fall. Again, this was 1774, when Priestley took a trip to France in November. Naturally,
Priestley sought out French chemists during his travels, and he explained the curious experiment
I've just described to them. As it turned out, the French had also done the experiment earlier
that fall in September. One of the members of the academy reported on an experiment he'd done
to reduce mercury calcs without using charcoal. But they hadn't noticed anything in particular
about the gas produced, as Priestley had. That was no doubt the real news to the French chemists.
This gas supports combustion. Priestley still thought the gas was laughing gas when he was in
France. But after he came back to England, he did some additional tests on the gas and realized
that it was different from laughing gas. It was a different gas, a new air of some kind. Supported
combustion better than anything he'd ever seen. That must mean that it was so devoid of flogiston
that when a candle burned in it, it just soaked up the flogiston readily. Likewise, a mouse seemed
happy in an enclosed space filled with this gas. It readily received the flogiston, the mouse breathed
out for a much longer time than common atmospheric air did. Yes, of course, the mouse eventually died,
and the candle did eventually go out. But not for a long time. Priestley called his new gas
deflogisticated air. Deflogisticated air was air with no flogiston in it, so it readily absorbs
flogiston. Now, while Priestley was in France, one of the French chemists who heard Priestley
describe his puzzling results was Antoine Lavoisier. Lavoisier was a gifted experimenter
who had only two years earlier been promoted to an associate in the French Academy of Sciences.
He was part of a generation of brilliant natural philosophers in France during the latter half of
the 18th century. He was, for example, six years older than Pierre Laplace, whose work on celestial
mechanics we heard about in lecture two. Lavoisier was, like so many we've met, interested in a lot
of things. He's become known to us primarily because of his contributions in chemistry.
So, Lavoisier was among those who met Priestley during 1774 and who heard about his experiment
with the burning lens and mercury calcs. Like the other French chemists, by itself the experiment
wasn't that revealing. In fact, Lavoisier had been one of the chemists that had confirmed the
September report of his colleague who had reduced the mercury calcs without charcoal.
When he learned from Priestley that the gas produced supported combustion,
something the French hadn't realized, he decided he'd do the experiment again.
Now, earlier that same year, Lavoisier had translated and become familiar with the work
of Joseph Black, whose careful quantitative approach he liked a great deal. He liked paying
attention to weights. He'd been doing it for a while when Priestley came to France. In fact,
two years earlier in 1772, Lavoisier had been investigating why metals gain weight when they
rust. Being the critical kind of mind he was, he'd become unhappy with Stahl's logistic account
of calcination, the rusting of metals. He characterized it as seriously flawed because,
in his mind, it contained an inconsistency. Not that he yet knew how to reconcile things,
just that he thought there should be a better way to account for the fact that metals gained
weight when they rusted. Clearly he didn't buy Junker's suggestion of phlogiston having negative
weight, if indeed he knew about it. What he suspected was that when a metal rusted, it was
fixing air into itself. But how could it be doing that and losing phlogiston at the same time?
That was why he didn't like Stahl's phlogiston theory. It didn't appear to be compatible
with his new line of thinking. So he resolved to find out. By the time Priestley came to France,
Lavoisier had been engaged for some time with experiments on fixing air into various substances.
And he also did experiments on the release of fixed air from substances that contained it.
It was back in the fall then of 1772 when Lavoisier was working on this series of experiments.
He knew about the work of a colleague with phosphorus. The colleague who had collaborated
with Lavoisier on the diamonds with the burning lens had shown that if you burn phosphorus,
a vapor is produced as the phosphorus burns away. If you collect this vapor and then condense it,
you get an acid. And the weight of the acid is always more than the weight of the phosphorus
that burned away. So when phosphorus burns, it appears to gain weight. Where's the weight coming
from? Lavoisier suspected that phosphorus was fixing air into itself. But the additional
weight could be coming from water vapor in the air that was condensed along with the vapors.
Clearly, there had to be some water vapor condensing along with the acid.
By October, he'd figured out a way to tell what was what. He repeated the experiment. That is,
he burned the phosphorus, collected the vapors, and then condensed them back into acid.
As always, the weight was more than the original phosphorus by itself.
Now, he poured out the acid that he'd gotten and filled the beaker up with water to the
same level that the acid had been. Next, he weighed the water. That weighed less than the
acid had. So he subtracted the weight of the water from the weight of the condensed acid.
This then removed from consideration any water vapor that had condensed along with the phosphorus
vapors. Now, he had the weight of just the condensed phosphorus vapors. And it was still
more than the original phosphorus, considerably more. Clearly, phosphorus was fixing air into
itself when it burned. So, by the time Priestly came to France since November of 1774,
Lavoisier had been convinced for some time that combustion involved the fixing of air
into the substances that burned. Priestly's visit spurred him to redo the experiment on
mercury calcs. This time, he did the experiment using two different means of heating the calcs.
One, with a burning lens, and two, with a charcoal fire. And of course, he was alerted now to pay
attention to the properties of the gases produced. What he found was that the gases he got in the
two different experiments were very different. When he reduced the mercury calcs using the
burning lens, the gas was, as Priestly said, it really supported combustion well.
But in the other case, when he used charcoal to heat the calcs, he got a gas that did not support
combustion at all. A candle put under a jar with it went out immediately. The gas produced in the
lens experiment wasn't soluble in water. The gas he got when charcoal was used was readily dissolved
in water. Lavoisier was aware that the air he got when using charcoal was Black's fixed air,
what we call CO2. He concluded that the air he got when using the lens was pure common air.
Since, like common air, it supported combustion. But it did so very well, so it must be common air
that's very pure. He didn't realize it was a gas different from atmospheric air.
Now, all this, he reported to the French Academy in the spring of 1775 in a famous
Easter memoir. When metals like mercury rust to form a calc, he said, their gain in weight is due
to the addition to the metal of the purest part of the air we breathe. Now, meanwhile,
over in England, Priestley had figured out a way to make crystal clear that the gas produced
with a lens was a new gas, not common air. When Lavoisier reported his findings to the Academy,
Priestley felt slighted. He hadn't been named. He felt he should have been given some credit.
Furthermore, he corrected Lavoisier for having failed to see that the gas was a new specific gas.
Now, the aftermath of this fascinating story contains several ironies I want to point out,
and I don't think they should be missed. First, although it was Priestley, who was the one who
realized that the air produced using a lens was not pure common air, but a new gas, it was Lavoisier
who named the new gas, oxygen. Lavoisier named it oxygen in 1777 because he thought it was the
cause of acidity, so oxygen or acid maker. There was an error on Lavoisier's part,
incidentally. Subsequent developments would reveal that he should have given that name to hydrogen.
So that's the first irony. Another has to do with a real advance for which Lavoisier deserves credit.
I'm speaking here of the law of the conservation of matter. You know, the law that says matter can
neither be created nor destroyed, but can be transformed from one kind into another.
Lavoisier didn't claim that he originated this rule for experimental physics, but he did think
that he played a role in bringing it into chemistry. In 1789, he published his famous capstone book,
The Elementary Treatise on Chemistry. In it he said, it's a fundamental truth that in all operations
there's the same quantity of matter before and afterwards, or something like that.
For his service in bringing this law into chemistry, he's been frequently heralded as the father of
modern chemistry. With it, we do seem to have come a long way into what Stahl liked to call
rational chemistry. Now, a consequence of this achievement was that Lavoisier dispensed with
the imponderable substance called phlogiston. Combustion was not the release of phlogiston,
it was the addition or fixing of oxygen. And that's another reason why Lavoisier is called
the father of modern chemistry, because he got rid of imponderable phlogiston and insisted that
all material substances had to balance on both sides of the process. Here's where the second
irony comes in. Not quite. Lavoisier himself believed that there was a weightless substance
involved in the process of combustion. It was heat. We're going to talk about this again when we
get to lecture 29 down the road. But for now, you should know that lots of people thought of heat
as Lavoisier did as a weightless elemental substance. And that idea would stay around for a good
long time, as we'll see, and it would be a very profitable idea. It would be a very profitable
idea. Lavoisier thought that heat was a weightless element that combined with air. So during combustion,
as the air becomes fixed into the metal, the heat is separated from the air and released. So you
have heat given off. Now the release of heat does not disturb the conservation principle,
since it doesn't weigh anything. The presence of a weightless substance in both the old and the
new chemistries of the late 18th century meant that it would take some time for the new oxygen-based
understanding of combustion to become the consensus view. Many Germans, for example,
remained completely devoted to their countryman Stahl's theory well after Lavoisier's theory
became known. And Priestly, for that matter, never gave up his belief in Flogistan.
So does this episode tell us anything in particular about the process of scientific change?
Of course it does. For one thing, it shows us that major changes in our views of nature
often don't occur suddenly as the result of a single person's insight in which everything
becomes clear. Sometimes in retelling the story, we make it a little clearer than it actually was.
I suppose we have to forgive ourselves somewhat for that. We want to make it a nice logical
development. That's our image of natural science. But lots of contemporary scientists will tell
you that science can be messy business, trying to get things straight and consistent. It's very
hard to do, takes time. So history is good here. History can keep us honest. Tell us what it's
really like. Breakthroughs in the history of science have more often come about because many
people contribute to a complex sequence of events that eventually produces a consensus view.
That shouldn't really surprise us. After all, natural philosophers of the past and scientists
of the present have this very much in common. They're just human beings who have a passion
for understanding nature. We'll see this again in future lectures. In fact, we'll encounter it in
the next two lectures, this time in attempts to understand the nature of living things.
