Welcome to lecture 22. Today we're going to talk about science, life, and disease. We've
just been considering the issues surrounding life in its past that arose during the latter
half of the 19th century, and we're going to continue that in this lecture, but we're
going to change gears a little bit. There were some other controversies going on in
these years different from those examined in the last lecture surrounding Darwin's
theory. We're going to take a look at some debates that were not directly tied to Darwin.
Darwin did capture the attention of the public with his theory of evolution. I noted last
time the ironic effect Darwin had that he helped to popularize the idea of evolution, even
though his own theory of how evolution occurred by natural selection didn't fare as well
as the general belief that life had in fact descended from more primitive forms. Darwin
was of course most influential in Britain. Across the English Channel on the continent
he was widely read as well, but if there was one country where he did not cause as great
a stir as in others, it was in France. There were a couple of reasons for this. One was
that the French people had lived with the idea of evolution for a long while. Since
the time of D. Malay back in the middle of the 18th century, even more to the point however
was the heritage of Le Marc that survived from the early decades of the 19th century.
So the French were perhaps not as outraged at the prospect of evolution as others were,
but the Germans had also considered evolution, so it was more than just that. There were
also national rivalries that continued to live on. We considered this matter back when
we were talking about how Newton's view came to displace Descartes in the 18th century.
Well, these national feelings didn't stop there. I'm going to tell you more about this
in lecture 33 where it's more the physical sciences from the 1840s that are involved.
Here in the aftermath of Darwin's work there was still very much a national consciousness
present where matters of natural science were concerned. The natural tendency of the French
to see the world in their own unique way helps us to understand why they were particularly
good in my opinion at failing to appreciate the role of natural selection in Darwin's
theory. This awareness of nationality was an additional reason why they often blurred
the distinction between Le Marc's ideas and Darwin's. Many Frenchmen felt that they'd
been through all this before. They felt like the issues surrounding the question of evolution
of life had long been staked out and well defined. Sure, there were folks on both sides
that all this had been going on for some time. They didn't understand why there was so much
fuss over Darwin's version of it. And of course, this reluctance to give Darwin credit for
something new was only reinforced when they heard about all the dissatisfaction with his
theory. If the scientists couldn't agree about it, then it clearly wasn't something they
had to pay a lot of attention to. But there was another controversy brewing in France
that commanded more attention than evolution. It had to do not with the origin of species,
but with the origin of life itself. That was something Darwin had sidestepped in his book.
The question was whether the appearance of life had occurred naturalistically without
the direct and intentional participation of God, or whether some kind of direct supernatural
act had been necessary for life to have originated. The issue arose in France in a way that could
not be sidestepped. It involved a young French scientist, Louis Pasteur, who emerged into
the public eye for his work in chemistry. In today's lecture, we'll meet this famous
scientist, not only as he participated in the controversy over spontaneous generation,
but also in other aspects of his fascinating career. Pasteur's name first came to public
attention in France in connection with his work on crystals. It was in the late 1840s
when Pasteur, as a young professor of chemistry, got interested in crystals. He was especially
intrigued by the interaction of crystals and light, and he discovered a rather dramatic
fact. There were crystals that were identical in every respect, except that they were mirror
images of each other. How could Pasteur tell that? Well, if you passed polarized light through
these crystals, they rotated it in equal but opposite directions. Now, Pasteur was not
one to pass up an opportunity to bring attention to himself in dramatic fashion. So he made
impressive demonstrations of his new discovery. And in fact, when he announced his conclusions,
Pasteur emerged as a force to be reckoned with. Here was a young man with obvious talent
and a public presence to boot. People sensed that he would go far, and indeed he did. Pasteur
continued working in this general area. He didn't confine himself just to crystals. He
learned all there was to know about work in what is called the optical activity of natural
substances. Optical activity refers to the ability of crystals and other natural substances
to rotate or otherwise affect polarized light. Both inorganic and organic compounds had been
tested for optical activity. What Pasteur did was, again in typical fashion, bold. He
noted the way optical activity could be associated with various compounds, and based on that,
he declared that optical activity was linked to life itself. By the same token, he associated
optical inactivity with death. These were pretty sweeping conclusions, but that wasn't
a problem for Pasteur. This general stance had implications for the way Pasteur understood
another of his interests, fermentation. Many of the products of fermentation were optically
active, so given his association of optical activity and life, Pasteur was predisposed
to understand fermentation as the result of biological activity, and this landed him right
in the middle of a controversy. You get the feeling that Pasteur enjoyed his role, I mean
the role of a combatant in a controversy. In this case, he took fermentation to be due
to the vital activity of brewer's yeast. There were others who said different. By that, I mean
others senior to Pasteur who were also much better known than he was. They were famous for holding
that fermentation was a purely chemical process, not a biological process at all. In particular,
young Louis Pasteur found himself on opposite sides in a debate with the great German chemist,
Justus Liebig. Now Liebig was a formidable presence of his own. He was an extremely well
established, well known, well connected chemist, and he delighted in ridiculing the idea that
fermentation relied on living organisms. So Pasteur had bitten off quite a bit as a young chemist,
just starting out. But in an 1860 memoir, Pasteur successfully confirmed that alcoholic
fermentation did involve a biological process. Now, while debates like this are often cast as
matters of an either or decision, as we saw in the earlier geological debates over neptunism
and volcanism, they rarely are as clear as all that, and they weren't in this case either.
It eventually emerged, actually after Pasteur's death, that both biological and chemical processes
have to be acknowledged in alcoholic fermentation. From fermentation, Pasteur was led to another
subject, one that had much greater potential to involve the public at large. The issue over
alcoholic fermentation had engaged mainly scientists, and of course members of the brewing industry,
but this new issue cast a much wider net. It was the question of spontaneous generation.
This is the claim that living organisms can arise independently of any parent.
Life suddenly and spontaneously emerges, fully formed, even if the structure of the organism
is simple as opposed to complex. Now, spontaneous generation takes two forms. They're known as
abiogenesis and heterogenesis, and we need to keep them straight. Fortunately, it's not that hard
to do. In abiogenesis, we're talking about the rise of living forms from inorganic matter. Here,
there's no question that you're starting with something that has no life associated with it.
That's not the case with heterogenesis. In this case, we mean the rise of living forms
from organic debris, organic materials that have been rendered lifeless. So, this debris is not
living, but it once may have been. It's this second kind of spontaneous generation, heterogenesis,
that Pasteur considered. The question is still the same. Can living organisms arise spontaneously
from material that is lifeless? Pasteur was involved with living ferments, the biological
organisms he believed were present in fermentation. Where had they come from? Pasteur considered
two possibilities. Either they arose spontaneously when oxygen came into contact with organic
substance, a kind of bursting into life, so to speak, or oxygen acted as a mere stimulant.
There was a fully formed germ already existing in the fermentable materials and the presence
of the oxygen merely activated it. All this came to the attention of the public in a debate on
spontaneous generation that began in France in 1859. The occasion was the appearance of an
extensive treatise on spontaneous generation by Félix Pouche, who was the director of the Museum
of Natural History in Rouen, and a respected naturalist. Pouche had conducted experiments
in which microorganisms had suddenly appeared in boiled hay infusions. He had the infusions in a
mercury trough and exposed them to artificially produced oxygen. Now clearly no pre-existing
germs could have survived the temperature produced in the boiling process. So the microorganisms
hadn't come from the hay or the water. And the oxygen was artificially produced, so it could
not possibly have introduced the germs. And the mercury was purely inorganic, so it couldn't be
responsible for the organisms. Pouche concluded that the microorganisms had therefore spontaneously
appeared from organic debris of the hay infusions. There's another dimension to this story that we
have to include, and it comes out when we note that Pouche also defended his conclusions about
spontaneous generation with arguments from philosophy and religion. For example, he asserted
that spontaneous generation was not different from other natural processes. It was, for example,
like the birth process. It was not a question of producing a fully formed adult organism.
What happened in spontaneous generation, he said, was that the primitive elements of the
future form were brought together. Of course, there still was a difference between what he was
talking about in the birth process. There was no ambiguity that the elements in his experiment
were not alive. They came from the organic debris of hay infusions, but the same could not exactly
be said about the sperm and the egg. So it was heterogenesis he was talking about. It was the
production of a living form from elements that were not alive. Pouche was also careful to insist
that his view did not undermine belief in the Creator. He used the old argument of deists
before him. We've seen it in several different individuals, from bouffant to chambers. Pouche
said that the spontaneous generation he had demonstrated in his experiments actually increased
our appreciation of divine majesty by revealing how God had produced life. The more we learn,
the more wonderful God's handiwork appears. Now I've said repeatedly in this series that
while deism of this kind was increasingly an option, it didn't convince the great
majority of people. And that included Pasteur. He began a series of experiments in 1860 that
resulted in a public lecture on spontaneous generation early in 1864. It would be one of the
several key public demonstrations that would make Pasteur famous. In the lecture, he dealt with
Pouche's experiments. His approach was to assume that Pouche was wrong, that spontaneous generation
hadn't occurred. But then, of course, the burden of proof was on him to show where the
microorganisms had come from, because they were clearly there. Pasteur agreed with Pouche that
the germs hadn't been in either the hay or water since they couldn't possibly have survived the
temperatures both were subjected to. He also agreed they hadn't come from the oxygen since it was
artificially produced. Where then? Maybe Pouche was right. Not so fast, said Pasteur, and here he
invoked his flair for the dramatic. He had the lecture room darkened and then projected a beam
of light into the hall. He then pointed to the dust particles carried in the beam of light.
There was your source of the germs. Dust. Not airborne dust as in the theater in Pouche's
experiment. It was the dust on the surface of the mercury Pouche had used. To prove his point,
he described other experiments in which no microorganisms appeared on organic infusions
as long as they were exposed only to dust-free and therefore germ-free air.
Pasteur then went on to link spontaneous generation to larger questions. It was, he said,
closely tied to the theory of evolution. And it also suggested, in Pasteur's mind,
that matter was eternal. Finally, he claimed that spontaneous generation was deism.
He called it the notion of a useless God, and it wasn't for him. His view was that if spontaneous
generation were true, then living forms originated without God. To Pasteur, spontaneous generation
was the equivalent of materialism. And we know that for most folks, materialism was just another
way of saying atheism. Now some of these associations Pasteur made with evolution and so forth may
not be clear to you, so let me spell them out a bit. Pasteur's celebrated rejection of spontaneous
generation was in fact serving a larger agenda in 19th century France. I mentioned that spontaneous
generation had been urged earlier in the century by Le Marc. That's where the association between
spontaneous generation and evolution in France came from. And Le Marc's evolution had been
discredited, as we saw, by the authoritative voice of Georges Cuvier. Spontaneous generation
had also been urged by some of the followers of Friedrich Schelling and those German romantic
nature philosophers. One of them, in particular, a man named Gotthilf Schubert, had developed an
elaborate vision of the past in which life emerged naturalistically as the result of a
divine spark of lightning. Listen to his vivid poetic description of how the moment had occurred
sometime deep in the past. There was a flash of lightning from the visibly opened heights of
an eternal spirit world. Its light penetrated the entire dwelling of earthly forms, deflected
down into its depths. Thousands of lamps and candles were ignited, but the flash that had
filled every cranny with equal brilliance was gone. Now only some of the individual candles
shined forth. And where there was to be a new flame, it had to be ignited from one of those
already burning. But had there been no lightning from above, the wick of the lamps would never
have given birth to fire by themselves. Well, these nature philosophers were regarded in France
and even in Germany itself as pantheists. And pantheists in Catholic France were tantamount
to atheists. So spontaneous generation in France raised a red flag. It was one of those dangerous
radical ideas. And this was not a good time for radical ideas in France. After the failed
revolutions of 1848, I mentioned them last time we were talking about the troubles that
Darwin's theory encountered. After 1848 in France, we enter the period of the Second Empire. This
marked an era of conservatism. The new emperor, Louis Napoleon, had the support of the Catholic
Church. Rome generally didn't approve of revolution. So for the Pope, it was a no-brainer to support
Louis Napoleon. The Pope preferred an empire over a republic. An empire would restore stability to
France. One more thing. Rome saw atheism as a political issue, as well as a religious one.
The Pope at this time was pious the ninth. He issued a papal bull in 1864, which is called
the syllabus of errors. And it explicitly condemned pantheism, naturalism, and an over
dependence on human reason. So we know where Rome stood on this question of spontaneous generation.
It stood with Pasteur and his condemnation of it as atheism. Then, when commissions of the
Academy of Sciences backed Pasteur's position over Pouche's spontaneous generation, we find
that spontaneous generation was definitely the minority view in France. Members of the
scientific elite even built arguments against Darwinian evolution based on Pasteur's critical
treatment of spontaneous generation. Pasteur seemed to be speaking for France itself.
His public fame was on the rise, but he was just getting going. Later in his career,
Pasteur would earn even greater fame, and he accomplished this from a somewhat technical
corner of the world of natural science from the study of vaccines. Now, this didn't just come
out of the blue. It was, in fact, linked, at least in Pasteur's mind, to his earlier work with
fermentation. You see, Pasteur regarded disease as analogous to fermentation. Both involved the
presence of microbes, so he was predisposed to believe that disease and immunity could be understood
as the activity of microbes. Let me explain how he thought of this. Pasteur knew that vaccines
had been introduced in the 18th century that made individuals immune to smallpox, so with his
greater knowledge of the world of microbes than had been available in the 18th century,
he tried to figure out what was going on there. Here's what he came up with.
Start with a healthy organism. A microbe invades it. Now, if this microbe is able to spread,
disease can result, but for the microbe to do that, it would have to have access to nutrients
that it would require. Pasteur's idea was that host organisms, like humans, for example,
possessed trace amounts of these nutrients, so the trick was to get rid of these trace amounts
of nutrients before the microbe could spread very far. Pasteur concluded this was the way to fight
disease that was due to microbes. If you could get rid of the nutrients the microbe needed,
you could generate immunity to the disease. But how, how could you get rid of these trace
amounts of nutrients? Here's where the lesson from vaccines came in. If you introduced weakened
microbes, then they would use up the nutrients without substantially harming or killing the host.
This was how he explained what happened with smallpox vaccines. Smallpox must be
due to the presence of microbes, but in the vaccines that were used, the microbes existed
in a weakened form. The weakened microbes gave the host a mild case of the disease,
but in the process they consumed the very nutrients that more virulent microbes would
require if they ever invaded the host. So, when these stronger microbes did show up,
there would be nothing there for them to live off and they would perish, immunity would be achieved.
Using these assumptions, Pasteur developed a vaccine against chicken cholera in 1880. He had
learned various ways to weaken the microbes he believed were causing the cholera, and he was
able successfully to inoculate chickens against the disease. He wasn't alone in these endeavors,
others were also trying to learn how to develop vaccines. In fact, Pasteur soon became
involved in a race to create a vaccine for anthrax. Now, we've become much more familiar
in our own day with this deadly disease, but it's been around for a long time and it's mainly
been a problem for farm animals. So, it would be an important victory to find a vaccine for anthrax
and not just for the agricultural industry. It would be important for Pasteur personally.
He was already well known for being the gifted experimentalist he truly was.
This would just enhance his reputation. But alas, it apparently was not to be. In 1880,
a young veterinarian named Toussaint announced that he had created an anthrax vaccine. He'd used
anthrax bacilli that were dead, not merely weakened. This was doubly bad for Pasteur. First,
he'd lost the race. And just as bad if this young rival was right, then Pasteur's understanding
of how immunity was achieved had to be wrong. Dead microbes wouldn't consume the trace nutrients
in the host that Pasteur was trying to get rid of. So, the nutrients would still be there.
By his theory, that meant that new virulent microbes would have nutrients on which to
live and multiply and produce disease. It seemed that he'd lost on two counts.
But then the tide turned. Toussaint soon found that dead bacilli did not work. So, he changed his
view to accommodate the need for living microbes. Pasteur's theory of how to produce immunity
gained new life. In fact, early in 1881, Pasteur himself announced that he had created his own
anthrax vaccine. It wasn't that different from a revised vaccine his rival had already come up with,
but that didn't stop Pasteur. He emphasized the difference between his vaccine and the earlier
one Toussaint had announced. And he did so in dramatic fashion. He conducted a public test
of his vaccine. With flourish, Pasteur inoculated 25 sheep on a farm southeast of Paris with his
vaccine. He left another 25 sheep untreated. Then somewhat later, he injected all the sheep
with a virulent culture of anthrax. The world would see if his vaccine worked or not. Of course,
he predicted that his vaccinated sheep would survive. He announced that the outcome would
be known in two days. Well, you can imagine the scene two days later. Pasteur went to the farm
with great fanfare in the company of a group of dignitaries. And lo and behold, his prediction
had been correct. The vaccinated sheep had survived where the others clearly would not.
Pasteur's fame shot up. And what about his rival? Toussaint had created a second vaccine
using live weakened microbes, and it was similar to the one Pasteur later announced.
Didn't matter. The rival's claims dropped from sight. Pasteur showed that being a good publicist
was as important as being a gifted scientist. But we still haven't reached the peak of Pasteur's
fame. What really elevated Pasteur to mythical status in the history of science was his creation
and use of a vaccine for rabies in 1885. This is a fascinating story because it touches
so many different issues. I think you'll see what I mean. Pasteur and rabies went back a long way.
As an eight year old boy, he'd watched in horror as victims of a bite from a rabid wolf came to a
blacksmith to have the wound cauterized with a red hot iron. The fact that he remembered this
incident tells us that it had been a significant event in his early life. So we can't be surprised
that he decided to work on a vaccine for this disease. Wouldn't it be wonderful if he could
succeed? Near the end of 1880, Pasteur visited a young victim of rabies as he lay dying in the
hospital. He took samples of mucus from the boy and injected them into rabbits. No surprise here,
the rabbits soon died too. So Pasteur is set to work. Over the next few years, he found ways to
increase and decrease the virulence of the rabies for certain animals. He did this by passing the
rabies microbes successively through a series of appropriately chosen animals. That is, he'd
introduce rabies to, say, a rabbit. When it got sick, he would take a sample from the diseased
animal and use that in another rabbit. Then he would repeat the process over and over. Obviously,
he was looking for a way to weaken the rabies for mammals. By 1884, he found that he could attenuate,
that is, weaken the rabies in dogs by passing it successively through monkeys. He was well on his
way. Then in May of 1885, he received a telegram about a 61-year-old man who'd been admitted to a
Paris hospital. He'd been bitten by a wandering dog two months earlier, and he'd been okay until
just recently. Pasteur provided the attending doctor with a series of his attenuated rabies virus.
The doctor gave one injection to the patient, but then the other doctors learned about the
planned injections and ordered them to be stopped. Over the next weeks, the condition of the man
vacillated, but eventually he recovered and was dismissed. Naturally, you can see that things
here are inconclusive. There was disagreement about whether the man had had the rabies in the first
place, and also, of course, about whether Pasteur's vaccine had done any good. Then a month later,
Pasteur assisted in a similar treatment of a young girl who'd been bitten by her puppy
several weeks earlier. The girl died, however, and it was clearly of rabies. In July of the same year,
we're in 1885, a young boy was bitten numerous times by a clearly rabid dog. Two days later,
he began treatment with Pasteur's vaccine. He was given 13 injections over 11 days,
and he survived the rabies. Everyone had thought, of course, that he was doomed.
One more case. That same fall, a shepherd boy from near Pasteur's hometown was bitten by a
rabid dog while protecting younger boys. If anything triggered memories of his childhood
encounter with rabies, this case from his hometown must have. The problem was that by the time the
boy arrived in Paris, six days had passed. Was it too late? Pasteur kept the boy in his own home.
There he received injections using a new technique. Pasteur had found highly successful in dogs.
Pasteur reported his treatment of the human subjects to the academy in the middle of this
series of injections. He also made public his earlier successful treatment of the young boy.
Well, the boy from his hometown recovered, and his story has been the central pillar
of the incredible reputation Pasteur enjoys as a hero of natural science. I've even recently seen
a children's book based on this story. Now, I don't want to detract from Pasteur's obvious
greatness as an experimental scientist. We can't lose sight of the fact that he deserves the reputation
he has acquired. But his use of vaccines on human subjects did involve him in debates over the
intersection of scientific and human interests. That's also part of the story, and his actions
precipitated criticisms at the time and have also raised discussions among historians since.
The use of a vaccine in the first case on the man who may or may not have had rabies,
that might be the most problematical case. I raised the issue because Pasteur was
particularly susceptible to these dangers that are involved here. Why? Because he understood
the need to enlist the public on the side of natural science. And of course, in so doing,
he also raised his own stature in the process. But I can assure you that the criticisms that
have been raised about his actions in these cases have done very little to soil Pasteur's general
reputation as a researcher. We're standing here then at the interface between natural science
and moral decisions. That interface is still very much with us. We continue to have to wrestle
with the implications of our actions. Another arena in which natural science intersects with
specifically human concerns has to do with social and political organizations. And it did so in
the 19th century as well. There it came up with the question whether new scientific claims,
specifically about humankind's past, had implications about how we should organize ourselves
socially and politically. There were many controversies surrounding these questions
and we'll consider some of them in our next lecture.
