Welcome back. This is lecture 23. In this lecture, we want to look beyond the strictly scientific considerations of Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection to the wider social, political, and cultural issues that it generated.
In particular, I want to examine two different conclusions that were drawn from the increasing acceptance of evolution in the late 19th century.
Let's be clear about something right from the start. These were not conclusions that came from an acceptance of natural selection.
We noted in lecture 21 that we have to distinguish between the general idea of evolution, which had been around for a long time, and the notion of evolution by natural selection, which Darwin presented to the world in his book of 1859.
Evolution had been implied by several speculative works of the 18th century, and it had been promoted by German and French natural philosophers at the beginning of the 19th century.
And of course, you really have to count Chambers' support of the notion in his book, The Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation, in 1844.
That was a different kind of work from the detailed considerations of Keelmeyer, Schelling, Lamarck, and others from earlier in the century.
It made no claim to be based on original research, but it certainly brought the idea of evolution into the British public sphere in a manner that couldn't be ignored.
So the notion that we had evolved from some kind of primitive beginnings to what we see all around us was not something new when Darwin was published.
Yet that was still the issue where the public was concerned, not the idea of natural selection.
Natural selection was a more technical matter that gave rise to arguments among natural scientists. We saw some of those last time.
What the general public picked up from these squabbles was that there was disagreement about Darwin's book.
They knew there was something different about the origin of species, but exactly what that was, they weren't sure.
Whatever it was, it was responsible for raising the issue of evolution all over again.
If folks in Britain had come to accept the idea that some people apparently believed that animal life had evolved, even that humans had evolved, that didn't mean that they approved of it.
I can hear it just, just hear it now, that general condemnation of how bad things have become.
It seems to be present in every generation in one form or another, you know, when people say things like, I don't know what this world's coming to.
So the issue that confronted the average person as a result of the appearance of the origin was evolution.
To restate something I mentioned back in lecture 21, one very significant effect of Darwin's work was to give a great visibility to the idea of evolution
and to promote a wider acceptance of evolution's reality, even though natural selection was widely criticized.
Now the conception of evolution normally envisioned was a progressive evolution.
Recall how explicit that had been in Chambers' book.
He was trying to associate the progress he was so committed to as a wig reformer with natural law,
as if progress was inevitable and the sooner you realized it and got on the wig bandwagon, the better off for everyone.
But progressive evolution was not guaranteed by Darwin's natural selection.
Evolution in Darwin's scheme had no blueprint.
It could go one way for a while and then, depending on what happened in nature, it could go in another direction.
There was no goal toward which it was striving as there had been in all previous evolutionary systems.
The only thing it guaranteed was an optimal adaptation to whatever circumstances happened to be present.
What those circumstances were or what brought them about was not a major concern in the way the theory worked.
Of course, this meant that Darwin had fundamentally questioned the idea of providence.
If there was no need for a blueprint, then clearly a divine blueprint was not needed either.
And without that, how could one assume that things were under God's care, that all things worked together for good?
You couldn't.
And that was just too much for most people to get their minds around.
So even if you were the kind of person who wanted to be up on the latest science,
that just meant that you were willing to consider the possibility that life had actually evolved.
And if you were impressed that maybe life had evolved, that meant merely that you might have to adjust some things about your religious beliefs.
You probably believed the question was whether you were going to have to stretch your inherited religious beliefs and opt for some kind of deism.
That was bad enough, but at least you would still have a God who was in control of history.
History was going where God determined it would go, where God wanted it to go.
So when people got involved with discussions of evolution in the aftermath of Darwin,
the most commonly understood version of evolution was Neolomarchian, in which evolution was moving toward a goal.
This is one reason why a lot of the talk about evolution involved political issues.
They invariably involve a goal of one sort or another,
and the goal in political ideas is often vague, just like it can be in religion.
In politics it's the ideal society we're supposedly working toward.
Now the application of evolutionary concepts to social and political questions in the post-Darwinian period is often known as social Darwinism.
From everything I've just said, I hope you can see why this label is technically a misnomer.
I've always maintained that we should use the term social Lamarchism instead of social Darwinism,
but the phrase that has prevailed is social Darwinism.
It refers to the general extension of evolution into social and political phenomena.
I think I can explain why the phrase social Darwinism prevailed.
That's because it's in fact extremely hard to resist the temptation to associate progress with evolution.
Even if, technically, you're talking about evolution by natural selection.
Natural selection doesn't guarantee progress, correct.
But what if I told you that even Darwin himself believed in some degree of evolutionary progress?
I've told you that Darwin denied there was any necessary tendency to advance, and that's true.
But Darwin was also human, and that means that there were aspects of his outlook that from our point of view anyway might not seem entirely consistent.
But Darwin was a man of his time.
He was not a 20th century existentialist who believed that the cosmos wasn't going anywhere at all.
Where humans were concerned, Darwin seemed to feel not only that there had been progress,
but that it could continue, and would continue, even if it did so at what he confessed to Hooker, was a humiliatingly slow pace.
And he didn't see this inevitable progress as a contradiction.
Even if we might want to say to him, wait a minute, you just said there's no necessary tendency to advance in nature,
and we're part of nature, all I can tell you is that in Darwin's mind there wasn't a contradiction here.
Now I sometimes tell my students, when they're having problems understanding a historical figure who's not making sense to them,
that the problem is theirs, not the historical figures.
If we can't understand why people from the past say or act as they do, it's our problem, not theirs.
We need to go back to the drawing board and see if we can figure out why they put things together as they did.
So this belief of Darwin's in human progress did not conflict with natural selection in his mind.
Perhaps the phrase social Darwinism is okay after all.
I said at the outset of the lecture that I wanted to talk about two different forms of social Darwinism
that made their appearance in the years after the origin of species.
Evolutionary ideas inspired two different applications of evolution to social and political questions in the 19th century, at least two.
The first and most well-known was the view of Herbert Spencer in Great Britain.
The other occurred in Germany with the work of Ludwig Büchner.
Spencer and Büchner came to very different conclusions about what evolution meant for society and politics, and that's interesting in itself.
I've sometimes said that natural science is like the Bible. You can prove almost anything using it.
The fact that these two men, starting with the same basic idea, came to very different conclusions,
shows that attempts to apply natural science to society depend on who's doing it.
So let's take a look at these two men and what they said.
First, Herbert Spencer. His conclusions very much reflect his particular English upbringing,
so we need to know something about Spencer's background.
He was not the sort of upper middle class figure we've gotten used to when talking about somebody like Darwin or Lyle.
At least his origins were different.
He would later in his life rub shoulders with many of Britain's intellectual luminaries,
and his family origins were quite modest.
As a child, he was raised among dissenting Methodists in the 1820s.
In fact, it was not only from matters of religion that his father and his uncle dissented.
They were an unconventional lot from the word go, and Spencer was strongly influenced by the individualism they cultivated.
They themselves in strongly anti-establishment and anti-clerical views.
Needless to say, Spencer was homeschooled.
His father educated him until he was 13 when he was sent to the home of an uncle who was a clergyman.
The uncle was no less radical in his views than Spencer's father had been.
He was a social reformer who approved of those petitions for change,
and were presented to Parliament in the late 1830s and throughout the 1840s.
And of course, Spencer's uncle taught him the code of dissenting Protestantism.
Later, young Herbert did receive some formal training as a civil engineer.
That was for the railways.
But in the 1840s, while in his early 20s, he turned to journalism and political writing.
In his early writings, Spencer took up where his father and uncle left off.
He defended radical causes like land nationalization and laissez-faire economic policies.
Not surprisingly, Spencer at 24 was one of those who really liked Chambers' vestiges when it came out in 1844.
This kind of extreme stuff was right down his alley.
But it wasn't the only thing that convinced him about evolution.
He also read Charles Lyle's treatment of Lamarck.
Recall, Lyle had discussed Lamarck's system thoroughly in order to set it up for dismantling.
Lyle let you know what was in Lamarck so he could show you why it made no sense.
And he'd succeeded with most of his readers.
It was just that Spencer was not most of his readers.
So when Darwin's theory appeared, Spencer latched onto it.
He could find certain Lamarckian notions in it.
For example, Darwin did acknowledge a minor role for use and disuse.
Spencer, of course, valued use and disuse far more than Darwin did.
So Spencer didn't bother himself all that much to distinguish Darwin from Lamarck.
He proceeded as if Darwin's achievement had been just to endorse the idea of evolution as something that was real,
something that had actually happened in history.
He didn't worry much about this natural selection business.
As I noted in lecture 21, Spencer used Darwin's confirmation of evolution in the organic world
to support and promote a general belief in cosmic evolution.
His book First Principles appeared just after the origin came out.
It depicted a grand cosmological evolution from a state of chaos to a state of order.
In the process, of course, underscoring the progressive advance that ruled everywhere in nature.
Then in the mid-1860s, he did focus in on Darwin's idea of natural selection.
It came in a book called Principles of Biology.
Spencer wasn't shy about passing himself off as an expert in lots of fields.
He proposed what he thought was a better phrase than natural selection.
As a replacement for natural selection, he suggested Survival of the Fittest.
Survival of the Fittest was Spencer's interpretation of Darwin's natural selection.
On its surface, it seemed real.
In fact, Alfred Russel Wallace urged Darwin to accept the replacement.
It didn't convey Wallace said the idea that nature was selecting the way breeders do.
It was just saying that the Fitts survive.
Wallace wasn't the only one who pointed out to Darwin that his phrase, natural selection,
had appeared to personify nature, to make it sound as if nature was not a blind machinery,
but something that was not a blind machine.
Nature was not a blind machinery, but something that exercised the human capacity for choice among alternatives.
Darwin was reluctant to abandon the phrase, but in the fifth edition of his book,
he decided that Spencer's replacement did avoid the problem Wallace and others had pointed out.
But in adopting Spencer's suggestion, the lines between Spencer and Darwin were just blurred all the more.
When Darwin used the phrase, Survival of the Fittest,
it sounded like he was saying implicitly, implicitly at least, that he and Spencer agreed on things.
Now, the fact that Survival of the Fittest smacked of a tautology
meant that Spencer's phrase really didn't help that much, after all,
to say that the Fitts survive was a bit like saying that a bachelor is an unmarried man.
Yes, that's true, but it doesn't tell us very much.
And yet, when you go beyond the world of nature to the world of human society,
the idea that the Fitts survive carries many more social implications
than Darwin was willing to endorse.
He clearly didn't realize this when he first accepted Spencer's phrase.
And of course, Spencer did go way beyond what Darwin was willing to say.
Spencer used biological evolution to support a laissez-faire philosophy he'd already held.
He had long been convinced that the freedom of individuals was the essential ingredient
that permitted groups to progress.
And he wasn't alone in thinking that the time had come to get government out of the way.
For decades, many middle-class reformers had been arguing
that governmental regulations protecting the landed classes
stood in the way of real economic development.
Don't shore up these weak links in our system, they said.
So Spencer was happy to enlist the state of nature
in support of a hands-off policy in the political state.
Look at the way nature does it. The Fitts survive, the weak perish.
And out of this comes the strongest possible species,
not one in which weak links are carried along.
As in nature, individuals should survive on their own.
The state should not try to regulate the lives of individuals.
Rather, it should permit them to regulate their own activities.
This is the way to guarantee the strongest economy
and also, in fact, the strongest population in the strongest state.
Well, what did this mean exactly?
Spencer said, for example, that the state should not license physicians or teachers.
Such individuals should prosper or fail,
depending on whether they provided services successfully.
Likewise, there should be no sympathy for those who failed.
As in nature, alleviating suffering only permitted weakness to grow.
The state should not provide relief for the poor.
That only prolonged their presence in society,
and therefore prolonged the way they dragged society down.
The only function of government is the policing and protection of individual rights.
Now, these sentiments were pretty strong.
Still, Spencer's views resonated in certain quarters of American society,
just as they also did among some British liberals.
For example, Andrew Carnegie in this country appreciated much of Spencer's thought,
while the phrase survival of the fittest was used by John D. Rockefeller
to justify unrestrained competition.
And Spencer conducted a successful tour of America in 1882.
But most of those who saw in evolution a lesson
for how we should organize ourselves politically and socially,
preferred more moderate ideas to Spencer's radical notions.
A good example of what I mean comes in the second case I want to discuss today
of how evolution was understood to be instructive for human society.
And that comes from across the English Channel in Germany.
On the continent, a very different inference from evolution to society was made.
The author of this second brand of social Darwinism was a German physician named Ludwig Büchner.
As in Spencer's case, Büchner's family's background helps us to understand
how he viewed evolution and the lesson that it contained.
Büchner came from a politically liberal German family,
three of whose children were destined to become relatively well-known in the 19th century.
Ludwig's sister Louisa became very active in the German women's movement,
and his brother Georg was one of the earliest communists to emerge in Germany,
even before Karl Marx. Georg was also a gifted playwright.
In fact, his plays, Danton's Death and Wojtsek, are still performed today.
Had he not contracted typhus and died at the age of 23,
we likely would have heard much more from him.
Ludwig, however, was the most famous one of the family during the 19th century itself.
He came to the attention of his age because of a book he wrote in 1855.
It was called Force and Matter, and it became known as the Bible of Scientific Materialism.
We're going to learn about this movement called Scientific Materialism in Lecture 31,
but I want to take the opportunity now to discuss Büchner's ideas on evolution and society.
Some primarily in his later writings, one from 1870, called Man and His Place in Nature,
and the second one from 1894, entitled Darwinism and Socialism.
The first thing to notice is that Büchner's understanding of evolution's significance for human society
was very different from Spencer's. You can tell that right away,
because he had little use for the philosophy of laissez-faire that Spencer was so fond of.
Büchner, in fact, criticized those who advocated laissez-faire because he said
they simply denounced revolutionaries while ignoring the social conditions that lead to revolution.
So you can see that Büchner wasn't going to say that everything was up to the individual,
that it didn't matter what the circumstances were in which one lived,
that all you had to do was pull yourself up by your own bootstraps,
and that if you couldn't hack it well, then probably you weren't going to make it anyway.
Clearly, if that's the way it was in nature, as Spencer said,
then nature wasn't going to be Büchner's guide in the same way it had been for Spencer.
This is not to say that nature wasn't going to contain a lesson,
it just wasn't going to be the same lesson that Spencer got out of nature.
In fact, Büchner acknowledged that humans were tied to animals.
Humans originated, like did all higher animals, from primitive beginnings.
The triumph of evolution had made that clear,
but he rejected the notion that what reigned in the animal world was automatically good for humans.
And that's one of the main things that differentiated him from Spencer.
Büchner believed that while humans were products of evolution, they were unique products,
because in them, nature had produced a species that was aware of its own past.
That wasn't true of the rest of the animal world,
so we can't look at humans as if they're just animals, they're more than that.
Now, like most people in the 19th century, Büchner also believed in progress,
and it's right at this point where he's insisting that humans are more than mere animals that it shows.
There had obviously been progress in human civilization,
even though evolution taught that human origins had occurred among animals.
Clearly, the human animal had made substantial progress since then,
enough to distinguish itself from all other animals.
Humans had developed consciousness, and that enabled them to rise above the rest of the animal world.
And that also meant that as members of the only species who understood where they had come from,
humans were now responsible to take charge of their own future.
It was almost as if humans were now exempt from evolution,
that they had to protect their own interests over those that nature imposed on all species that were animals and nothing more.
So where the future was concerned, Büchner urged that humans had to take the reins and direct all future progress.
And in doing so, humans would continue, not only to distinguish themselves from animals, but also from nature itself.
Listen to his words.
The farther man removes himself from the point of his animal origin and relationship,
and allows himself to assume the place of power, of the power of nature,
which power has been ruling him unconditionally,
the more he becomes human in the genuine sense of the word,
and the more he nears the goal which we must view as the future of man and of the human race.
So humans, the children of nature, had outgrown their parent.
Yes, nature would continue to affect them as animals,
but that was the only way nature should be allowed to affect them.
It was up to humans to make sure that human interests were served and that human goals were achieved.
The lesson of evolution was that as the capstone of the evolutionary process,
we must now take charge of our own future.
Well, how did this work out in practice?
What did this mean in concrete terms?
Exactly what were the implications for society of this different attitude from the one we saw emerge over in England?
In fact, Büchner did draw some general and specific conclusions from his understanding of evolution and its lesson.
In general, he believed that the human species had to equalize as much as possible
the means by which humans began nature's struggle for existence.
So he granted that an important aspect of human life was the struggle for existence.
We were, after all, animals too, so we couldn't escape nature's struggle for existence.
But to engage in it as humans, we couldn't just go at it in a war of all against all.
We had to do it as humans, and that meant for him that we should begin with an acknowledgement that we were all in it together.
That is, we should all begin this unavoidable struggle as much as possible on an equal basis.
Well, how would he propose to accomplish this?
He had a couple of specific ideas on that.
Basically, it came out in the form of his fundamental social and political stance.
The social and political implication of our unique evolutionary past was, for Büchner, a modified form of capitalism.
This is how it worked.
All humans should begin the struggle for existence on as equal a basis as possible.
This meant, for example, that rights of inheritance should be limited.
In a later work, he said, eliminated.
Why?
Because if one person were to inherit a good deal from his parents while another received little or nothing,
then they were hardly beginning the struggle for existence on an equal footing.
So if we eliminate rights of inheritance, we take care of that inequality.
In fact, it does more than just that.
It also protects the rights of the individual.
You see, although everyone had to begin the struggle for existence on an equal footing, Büchner was under no illusion
that everyone would perform the same way in the struggle itself.
He acknowledged that there were natural inequalities among humans.
Some would do well in the struggle, while others would not do as well.
If you did well and amassed a good deal of wealth and property, that was yours.
It wasn't going to be taken away from you.
Büchner had no use for the Marxist-Communist movement, which by the end of the century had shown itself,
nor did he endorse the agenda of the Socialist Party that was beginning to become a force within German politics.
No, you were free to become as rich as you could, provided, of course, you respected the law and the rights of others along the way.
The only thing you had to do was to give it all back to the state when you died.
You couldn't pass it along to your children and give them an unfair advantage as they began their own struggle for existence.
Now, of course, there were practical implications of doing this that Büchner didn't address.
Let's say that you were among the more successful folks of society.
How exactly could you raise your children without giving them some kind of advantage?
Unless you were to farm your children out somehow, they would naturally enjoy the advantages of your prosperity.
And who would enforce this requirement anyway?
Who would make sure you didn't pass some of your wealth along to your offspring?
OK, so there were some problems here.
But you can see the very different understanding of the meaning of evolution for society that Büchner had in comparison to Spencer.
And he didn't confine himself only to wealth and inheritance.
He also said that the lesson of evolution, that we are unique products who now must assume control of the future,
was that the basic rights of humans as they continued the struggle for existence included the right to health.
So the state should become an insurance organization against sickness, accident, and old age.
Finally, Büchner didn't like the exploitation of the poor by landlords that he saw around him.
It came about because he said, we have the idea that we can own land.
But the land is not something we can really own.
It was here before us, it will be here after us.
If you say we can own land, then it makes as much sense to say that we can own the air and the sunshine.
To claim to own any of these things and then to charge others for their use didn't make sense to him.
Now people at the time were not claiming that they owned the air or sunshine, but they did claim to own land,
and they did charge rent.
So Büchner proposed the elimination of ground rents.
Now you can see from the radical nature of Büchner's proposals that they didn't have much chance of being realized.
Still, this was the lesson he got from a consideration of evolution and the human past.
In fact, neither Spencer's nor Büchner's recommendations carried the day where actual practice was concerned.
But in their own way, the issues Spencer and Büchner raised brought public attention to evolutionary ideas.
They were pointing out that what scientists were saying about the way nature is has a larger meaning.
Science wasn't limited to just technical information that scientists argued about.
There were deeper questions buried in these investigations that were important to all members of society.
One of the areas where this was obvious, of course, was religion.
That had been clear for some time now, and as the public found itself confronted more and more with natural science in general,
and as evolution became more and more a public issue in particular,
the question of the relationship between evolution and religion became increasingly important.
We'll examine the issue of evolution's impact on religious ideas in the late 19th century in our next lecture.
