Welcome to Lecture 35.
Well, today we're back on Earth.
Last time we were concerned with the question of extraterrestrial life,
and we ended our investigation with sensational claims about life on Mars
that came out of the late 19th century.
By the end of the century, telescopes had improved to the point
where distinct features on Mars could in fact be detected.
Telescopes could focus light from distant objects better than ever before.
So a host of new problems emerged for scientists in the latter half of the 19th century.
Today, we want to take a look at the understanding of light.
I haven't said a great deal about it yet in this series, so we need to catch up with it.
So far, there have been just a few brief illusions to light.
For example, I mentioned it was one of the imponderable substances
that William Herschel and Johann Ritter experimented with in the 18th century
and early 19th as they explored the two ends of the visible spectrum of colored light.
But we haven't really focused on light yet, and it's such a fundamental subject of natural science.
We rely so much on the senses, and the sense of sight is surely the most privileged sense in natural science.
Now, I've postponed our consideration of light until this point for a reason,
and that's because of how important the investigation of light turned out to be late in the 19th century.
As we'll see, scientists then were engaged in a very real way in catching up with light in their own sense.
I certainly don't mean to imply that light hadn't been central to the concerns of natural philosophers earlier than that,
but of course not. In fact, let me follow the procedure we've used so often in these lectures
and review some background to the main subject of our considerations today.
Like most of the issues we've taken up, this question of what light itself was
and how it moved had been the subject of inquiry since antiquity.
Think about it for a moment. How would you describe what light is to a child?
Not an easy task. We know it moves extremely fast. Turn on a switch and the dark room is immediately filled with light.
In fact, that question, how fast light moves, was particularly intriguing to natural philosophers.
Some thought that it moved, light moved, infinitely fast.
But then in the 17th century, a Danish astronomer named Olaus Römer
demonstrated that light from Jupiter took a finite time to reach the Earth.
I'm not going to go into how he reasoned it, but his conclusion showed that the speed of light was not infinite, as some had assumed.
But what was light? That was a harder question.
Our old friend Rene Descartes, he keeps coming up, explained light as pulses or waves in a medium that existed between an object and the eye.
Naturally, this great mechanical philosopher understood the pulses to be propagated by mechanical means.
When Newton came to the subject, he felt that Descartes' pulse theory of light couldn't account for a newly discovered property, polarization.
Here's why. You know what polarized light is.
When you use your sunglasses, if you turn them 90 degrees, the light is blocked, so only certain rays of light are allowed through when you wear them.
Newton's question was, why was polarized light completely blocked by merely rotating the polarizing substance through which pulses passed?
Why would rotating the substance prevent the pulses from propagating?
But if, on the other hand, light consisted of rectangular particles, then you could give a better account of polarization.
You could, for example, associate different properties of light exhibited with the different sides of the particles.
And to explain polarization, Newton said it was a matter of aligning the particles.
That made it understandable why rotating the polarizing substance wouldn't let the light through anymore.
The particles weren't lined up right.
But there were other circumstances in which seeing light as pulses still had advantages.
So it wasn't something about which natural philosophers were in full agreement.
Even by the beginning of the 19th century, there wasn't yet a consensus about the best explanation of what light was.
That changed with the establishment of a new wave theory.
And that's our agenda today, the establishment of the wave theory of light.
To do that, we'll start first with the work of the English physician Thomas Young in 1801 and learn how he confirmed that light was a wave.
Then we'll follow some groundbreaking work at mid-century that was done by James Maxwell that linked light, electricity, and magnetism.
Finally, we'll close by seeing how Maxwell's achievement raised a number of problems that were portents of revolutionary changes to come.
So let's turn to the early years of the 19th century when the wave theory of light received new backing.
It came about as I indicated because of the work of Thomas Young.
Young was a remarkable man. He had interests and abilities that carried him well beyond the medicine he studied for his degree.
For example, Young was well educated in languages, including some ancient languages of the Near East.
He became involved in the story of the Rosetta Stone, an assault slab that was found in July of 1799 in a small Egyptian village by Napoleon's soldiers during his Egyptian campaign.
Young played a key role in the eventual deciphering of the ancient Egyptian writing known as hieroglyphics.
As a physician, Young was curious about the connection between the body and sensation, in particular between the eye and its parts and the perception of light and color.
Young proposed an idea which was elaborated on later in this century by Hermann Helmholtz that there are three fundamental sensations of color, red, green, and blue,
and that there are three different receptors in the eye, each sensitive to one of these three colors.
When these receptors are stimulated in various combinations, we see all the different colors that make up our vision.
So you can see that Young was a man of considerable curiosity and talent, and it paid off too.
As a result of his work, he became associated with a couple of British institutions where he could continue experimenting.
Young didn't hurt that his father, Quaker Banker, left him a tidy sum of money around the turn of the century.
So when his London medical practice was about two years old, that was in 1801, he received an appointment as a professor of natural philosophy and set out to conduct his own experiments on light.
Young set up an experiment from which he concluded that light was made of waves, but they were not the kind of pulses Descartes had envisioned.
Let me explain. What Young did was to pass a beam of light through two holes to see what emerged.
He placed a screen on the other side of the holes so that he could study what happened to the emerging light.
What he saw was a pattern of bright and dark regions.
Now that didn't make a lot of sense if Newton's idea of light being made of particles was correct.
In that case, wouldn't you expect to see two bright spots corresponding to the two streams of particles that made it through the two holes?
So how to explain the pattern of dark and light that he saw?
Well, Young proposed that light consisted of waves, but he said they weren't the kind of mechanical pulses of compression that Descartes had referred to.
In Descartes' model, the pulses that transmitted light moved in the same direction as the light.
You can think of Descartes' idea by imagining how a blind person or how blind people feel their way forward.
They use a stick to feel for themselves.
In that case, when the stick encounters an object, it sets up vibrations that are passed along through the stick to the person.
So in this case, the pulses set up in the stick travel through the stick in the same direction as the signal itself goes.
Now Young imagined something different from that.
He envisioned that there was an imponderable ethereal medium.
Wherever we met that idea before, we've met it in our investigations of heat, electricity, chemistry, all from around this time.
And I must tell you, we'll hear of it again after Young, later in the middle of the 19th century.
Anyway, Young envisioned that there was an imponderable ethereal medium and that light moved as waves through this ethereal medium that existed between an object and the eye.
But here was the difference from Descartes' idea.
Young's waves moved through the ether somewhat like waves move through water.
You've watched waves of water.
The waves move horizontally across the surface of the water, but the water itself only moves up and down.
If you had an object floating on the surface of the water, it will rise and fall as the wave passes, but it doesn't travel with the direction of the wave.
So Young concluded that light consisted of waves that moved the ether perpendicular to the direction of the light.
And this gave him a way to explain the patterns of light and dark that he observed after light passed through two holes.
In his experiment, the bright regions of the pattern, he said, were the places where the crests of the waves emerging from the two splits coincided.
They reinforced one another, and the dark regions were the places where the crest of one wave coincided with the trough of the other.
In that case, the waves cancelled each other.
And Young also figured out a way to use his waves to explain polarization as well.
Well, these were interesting results indeed, but was Young's idea only good for explaining the case of light coming through two slits?
In fact, during the second decade of the century, his theory received new support.
A French savant named Augustine Fresnel did what the French were noted for.
He provided a mathematical treatment of Young's waves that was very suggestive.
Light, as you know, bends around corners.
You've seen that when light from one room comes through a door into another one, bends around the edge a little.
Well, Fresnel's mathematical analysis of this phenomenon predicted that if you put a small disc in the path of a beam of light,
the light would bend around the edges of the disc and converge toward the center to produce a bright spot in the middle of the shadowed region.
And when the experiment was done in 1818, that's exactly what was observed.
So Young's understanding of light as a wave continued to gain ground.
In fact, light would be regarded as waves in the ether for the remainder of the century.
But it was in the middle of the century when something unexpected happened concerning light.
And it involved one of those Scotsman we met in lecture 22 when we were discussing the kinetic theory of gases.
I'm talking about James Clark Maxwell.
Maxwell discovered something new about light when he wasn't even trying to.
He wasn't working on light, but an unexpected result popped up.
What was he working on?
He was trying to decipher why electricity and magnetism were related, as Ersted, Ampere, and Faraday had found them to be.
They had all uncovered different aspects of the way electricity and magnetism interacted,
even to the extent that people had started to build electric generators and motors.
But the British scientists were not yet willing to buy into Ampere's explanation of electrodynamics
as the last word on why electricity and magnetism behaved as they did.
We met the basics of electromagnetism back in lecture 26.
Recall what Ersted discovered that a current carrying wire deflected a magnetic compass in its vicinity
with a force that seemed to act in a circle around the wire.
Ampere, who described the forces involved mathematically, came to the conclusion that just a static electrical charge
exerted force moving electricity could exert force too, so in his view magnetism was just electricity in motion.
But the non-mathematical Faraday took a simpler, more intuitive approach to the subject.
He visualized curved lines of magnetic force acting around a wire.
He then found a way to produce electrical current by cutting magnetic lines of force.
Scientists like Faraday figured out how to manipulate the intimate relationship between electrical and magnetic force
to get one from the other.
So there existed these competing approaches to the understanding of electromagnetism,
and we should also mention as well Ersted's own grand philosophical explanation of it
based on the unity of nature's forces.
At mid-century there was no consensus yet that scientists had come to agreement
about why the relationship between electricity and magnetism existed.
Then in 1860 Maxwell approached the question by trying to conceive of a mechanical model that related electrical and magnetic force.
He visualized the relationship between electrical and magnetic force in a current carrying wire
as a mechanical interaction between parts of an ethereal substance.
I told you we'd come back to the ether again.
Here's what he did.
He postulated that the ether penetrated into the wire and that there were rotating vortices or eddies in this ether.
And then he imagined that these vortices were separated by tiny spheres rotating in the opposite direction
to act as ball bearings between the vortices.
He hated this kind of thinking.
It reminded them of an English factory with wheels and pulleys and ball bearings.
To them it was too dependent on imagined entities.
But it was the way the intuitive British mind worked, in this case, Maxwell's.
Now, Maxwell let these circular acting magnetic forces be represented by the rotating vortices of ether
while the electrical charges were represented by the little ball bearings.
And now came the payoff.
Since the system was interlocked, if you rotated motion in the ball bearings, it made the vortices turn.
Likewise, if you turned the vortices, the little ball bearings had to turn.
Electricity and magnetism had to occur together.
So in this way he was able to come up with a visualization of how electrical force in a wire produced magnetic force and vice versa.
But Maxwell wasn't through.
He now generalized his result.
How?
By suggesting that the ether was everywhere.
It was present in the wire, yes, but it was not confined only to the wire.
And wherever the ether was, it had vortices and ball bearings, not just when it penetrated the wire.
This implied that just as rotating magnetic vortices produced electrical force in the ball bearings of the ether in the wire,
they could also do so in regions of space where no wire was present.
In space these changes produced electromagnetic waves that traveled through space
and appeared as a real current if a wire or a conducting substance of some sort was encountered.
Well, Maxwell may have appreciated the intuitive approach of the British,
but he also happened to be a superb mathematician.
So he proceeded to depict his mechanical model in a series of mathematical equations.
And when he did, his model and the equations that came out of it contained several revealing implications.
First of all, the equations depicting the model were of a particular kind.
They were what we call sinusoidal equations.
What are sinusoidal equations?
They're equations that describe waves.
Maxwell's equations were wave equations.
And further, his theory predicted that these waves shared properties of light waves.
For example, the waves that came out of his model for electricity and magnetism
could be reflected and refracted by appropriate substances.
But there was one implication that was truly startling,
and that was what his theory predicted about how what we can call electromagnetic waves would travel.
The implication was that they would have a speed of about 3 times 10 to the 8th meters per second.
Fast, to be sure, but more than merely fast.
This was the speed that a French physicist had recently calculated light to travel.
On realizing this, Maxwell wrote,
we can scarcely avoid the inference that light consists in the transverse undulations of the same medium,
which is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena.
In other words, electricity, magnetism, and light all resulted from waves in the ether,
the kind that Thomas Jung had suggested back at the beginning of the century.
This was remarkable.
Well, did all this stand up? You bet.
Developments after Maxwell confirmed that his theory represented a fundamental insight,
although it took some time for confirmation to come.
There were practical problems involved.
For example, one thing you might want to try right away is to produce electromagnetic waves in a wire
at a frequency equal to, say, colored light.
Then you could see if that color of light was produced.
But in Maxwell's day, there was only a means to produce low frequencies,
far below the frequencies of visible light.
There was, however, another way of confirming Maxwell's work.
In 1888, the German physicist Heinrich Hertz produced a frequency of what was becoming known as electromagnetic radiation
that was less than that of visible light, but it was still helpful.
Why? Because it could be detected, not as visible light.
It was picked up in a receiving wire many yards away.
Hertz had produced electromagnetic waves that he then propagated through space to a receiver.
They were of a lower frequency than visible light.
They're called radio waves.
They were invisible, but Hertz's waves confirmed that Maxwell was right about his idea of a current that traveled through space.
So now physicists could begin to explore the properties of this current at all kinds of different frequencies.
And from this, the idea of the electromagnetic spectrum was born.
Radio waves were low frequencies.
Colored visible light had higher frequencies.
The colors of light occupied a special region of increasing frequencies that ran from red to violet on the spectrum.
Just below the frequency of red light was that of infrared, just above that of violet was ultraviolet.
And who knew what other frequencies of radiation there might be on either end of the spectrum known at the time?
But as exciting as all of this was, Maxwell's theory, while incredibly successful, also introduced problems.
The first occurred when two physicists, Albert, Michelson, and E.W. Morley, started unpacking the idea of the ether a little more.
If this ether were out there, all pervasive as Maxwell had indicated, then the earth was moving through it.
Now the speed the earth is moving around the sun is pretty substantial.
So Michelson and Morley attempted to confirm the relative velocity of the earth through the ether in the 1880s.
They assumed that the earth created a wind as it traveled through the ether.
That seemed reasonable enough.
If you're in a convertible traveling down the road, you feel a wind, even when the air itself is calm.
So to measure the speed of this ether wind, the earth's speed relative to the ether, they came up with an ingenious experiment.
Now I'm not going to describe this experiment in detail here.
If you want a terrific discussion of it, I highly recommend the one that Professor Richard Wolfson of Middlebury College gives in lecture six of his wonderful course on modern physics for non-scientists here at the teaching company.
And believe me, there's no one better at explaining the concepts of physics than Professor Wolfson.
All I want to say about this experiment are the very basics, that to detect the motion of the ether relative, the earth relative to the ether,
these two American scientists sent out two beams of light in perpendicular directions from the same source point,
both of which were reflected back to them by mirrors after traveling equal distances.
Now when these beams of light recombined, they produced a pattern of interference.
We saw interference happen in Young's double split experiment at the beginning of this lecture.
So they got this interference pattern when two perpendicular beams of light came back together.
Now comes the ingenious part.
They allowed this apparatus with the two perpendicular beams to rotate.
Clearly they expected the interference pattern to change as it rotated.
Why?
Well the reason was that sometimes one of the beams would be going parallel to the ether wind,
which meant that the other would be perpendicular to it.
When the beam was parallel to the ether wind, it meant that the earth's motion, which caused the wind,
was moving in a parallel direction to the beam of light.
And even though the earth's speed as it goes around the sun was small compared to the speed of light,
the apparatus was more than sensitive enough to pick up the effect the earth's motion would have.
When the beam was parallel to the ether wind, it was like a swimmer who moved with the current downstream and against it back.
That means to carry the analogy further that another swimmer, the other perpendicular beam of light,
went the same distance across the current.
Now I can show you, though I won't take the time here to do it,
that it takes less time to swim equal distances across the current and back than it does upstream and back.
But when Michelson and Morley put the apparatus in this orientation so that one beam of light moved parallel to the ether wind
and the other perpendicular to it, they got the same interference pattern they had before.
In fact, the interference pattern never changed at all as the apparatus rotated.
It was the same for all orientations.
They had quite naturally assumed that the beams of light would behave like the swimmers in our analogy.
The times the swimmers took were definitely affected by the current of moving water.
If they swim with and against the current, it took longer than if they swim across it and back.
So they clearly expected to see the interference pattern change, but it didn't matter.
The pattern didn't change at all, which meant that the times were the same regardless whether you went with and against the wind or across it,
or at any angle with respect to it.
The original interference pattern always stayed the same.
What was going on here?
How could this be?
There was nothing wrong with the logic of the experiment.
Aha, maybe the earth is not moving through the ether.
That would explain it.
But how could that be?
Well, it could be if the ether were being dragged along with the earth.
So as far as the ether was concerned, the earth was at rest in it.
In this case, there would be no wind effect, and we shouldn't expect a change in the interference pattern in the experiment.
But that was not a very likely thing, that the earth dragged ether with it on its journey around the sun.
In fact, there were other technical arguments that dismissed this suggestion of ether drag as inconsistent.
So, scientists were left with a real paradox.
The ether was neither stable nor moving with respect to the earth.
How could that be?
There were other suggestions offered.
Maybe objects contracted in the direction of their motion through the ether.
What?
You mean actually shrink?
Yes, that would also shrink the distance, the light that was going parallel to the ether wind traveled,
so that it would take the same time as the beam going across the wind.
It would work, but really, do we have to go to such extremes?
The bottom line was, physicists were bewildered by the result of the Michelson-Morley experiment.
They just didn't understand what was going on.
And this wasn't the only problem with the ether.
In spite of Maxwell's amazing achievement, the ether itself was full of mysteries.
It had properties that were hard to believe.
For example, we know that light waves in the ether can be blocked by matter.
You can keep light out of your room by getting the right kind of window shades.
But electricity and magnetism also waves in the ether, penetrated wire as another conducting matter.
If light was electromagnetic radiation, why couldn't it pass through conductors like electricity did?
And further, when you worked out the properties the ether had to possess to be capable of doing everything it was observed to do,
it turned out that the elasticity of the ether had to be greater than that of steel.
How could we understand this imponderable substance to have an elasticity greater than that of steel?
This thing called the ether had brought a lot of things together.
It produced the electromagnetic spectrum of radiation, and that would soon result in practical applications of things like radio waves.
But it seemed to create as many mysteries as it did solutions.
Remember, we're right smack dab in the middle of a period that was becoming known as the age of realism.
The decades after the failure of the revolutions of 1848 had produced a reaction against idealistic visions and romanticism.
I mentioned back in lecture 31 when we were talking about scientific materialism,
how the spirit of realism had been evident in various aspects of the culture,
our politics of Bismarck and others, and the new tactics Marx adopted in the nation communist movement and in the literature and art of the era.
In all of these contexts, the focus was on what was thought to be hard-nosed reality.
So for the physicists of this period who were sympathetic to a mentality of realism,
the overarching question created by the successes and paradox we've been describing was,
is there really an ether with vortices and wheel bearings as Maxwell originally envisioned?
Some stepped back from embracing the actual existence of an ether with all these strange properties.
They argued that it was only a heuristic model whose intent was to organize as much data as possible into a coherent explanation,
even if the entity on which the explanation was based was merely hypothetical and not real.
This stance was hardly new in natural science. It had been around for a long time.
A similar position had been taken by someone, Copernicus, introduced the notion that the earth moved around the sun.
It was an idea that carried certain advantages, but Copernicus shouldn't be read to say that the earth was really moving.
Of course, the problem with this approach in, say, the case of the ether was,
if it was only a heuristic model, then why did Maxwell's description of such very particular aspects of it
work so well in explaining electricity and magnetism?
It had, after all, uncovered the relationship of electricity and magnetism to light and other kinds of radiation.
It's an old problem. How realistically should the scientist take the model?
Well, I think you can see that the late 19th century was filled with conflicting tendencies.
On the one hand, there was great pride in these tremendous successes.
On the other hand, there were puzzles galore that came about because of the techniques that had been used in making these impressive successes.
But I must say that as the century concluded, the problems that had been mounting up were overlooked in favor of the incredible advances that had been made.
I think the attitude was, we'll figure this out. We must be doing something right.
Look at what we've accomplished. Don't get too concerned about these paradoxes.
Well, next time in our final lecture, we'll review these problems and assess the state of physical science at the dawn of the 20th century.
