Hello everyone, I'm Norman Wabaker, we're talking about box arithmetic, and a big thank
you to all my Patreon supporters and members of the Wild Egg Mathematics channel.
Today we're going to be extending our algebra that we're developing in a quite novel direction,
almost a missing chapter of say high school algebra.
What we get when we enlarge our view of polynomials to include the sort of Laurent type polynomials
with negative exponents.
This is going to allow us to analyze more carefully this notion of symmetry and an
anti-symmetry or alternating aspect of poly numbers that I introduced last time.
So at the end of the video I'm actually going to connect the main objects that we're going
to be creating today, which are going to be called central poly numbers, with actually
a whole range of different mathematical topics.
Some of them are quite important, in fact sort of really central importance in 20th century
mathematics and physics.
So I'll just touch base very quickly with those things, but I want you to appreciate
that even though what we're doing very elementary things here, okay, we are arriving at objects
which are really very, very fundamental for mathematics and physics.
Okay, so before we get onto that though, let's just enlarge our arithmetic a little bit,
and introduce subtraction to our operations that we're doing with these m sets.
So it's simple enough, because we have a minus one now, so we can define if a and b are m
sets or anti-m sets, or maybe if we want to include both of them at the same time, I might
say a slash m sets, okay, to include the families of m sets and anti-m sets and combinations
of them.
So then we'll define a minus b to be simply a plus one bar b, or in other words, a plus
minus one times b.
So here's an example, here's an m set, perhaps a, and here's another m set, perhaps b, and
we're taking the difference a minus b.
So this thing here, okay, minus this thing here, the definition is that we should take
the same thing here, and instead we should add minus one, there's minus one times this
second one.
Now in terms of a more standard notation, this thing here, you see it has a two inside,
it has an empty m set, that represents zero, and this thing here is an anti-one, okay,
so that's what this thing is, and this thing here, well there's a two, there's another
two, so two-two, there's a one bar, okay, it's the negation of one, and here is just
an anti-zero.
Okay, so when we multiply the second one with the minus one, what do we get, okay?
Well multiplying by minus one, what it does is it takes all of the entries, and it takes
their anties.
So that means that all the bounding boxes have to change color from black to red, or
from red to black.
So this one here is going to change into a red box with two black ones, same with this,
this one here is going to change into a red box with a red box inside, this one here is
just going to change into from an anti-zero to a zero, okay, and once we have this then
the addition is of course just the usual combining them, so we just put everything in an m box,
but when we do that, this thing here, this two, and this anti-two are going to annihilate
each other, because these things are anties.
They're anties because they're the bounding box, the containers are of different colors,
one's black and one's red, and otherwise inside they're identical, so they're identical except
that one's the anti of the other, so they're going to annihilate, we'll still have one more
of them left over, we'll have two empty boxes, and we'll have one of these, and one of these.
But then when we list what we have, we have a one-bar anti, so that's that thing there,
okay, and if it was black on the outside that would be a one-bar, but it's red on the outside,
so it's a one-bar anti.
There's two zeros, there's our anti-two, and this is an anti-one, okay.
So that's how we do subtraction in this M-set world, okay, so when we went from poly numbers
to integral poly numbers, the big step was that we went from M-sets of natural numbers
to M-sets of integers, and that means we have an interpretation now of polynomials with
also negative integer exponents, not just natural number exponents, these are integral
poly numbers, and in this world there's this fundamental symmetry, the sigma sort of reflection,
that takes alpha to the n to alpha to the minus n, and then with respect to that we
defined an i-poly to be symmetric if sigma of p equals p and anti-symmetric or alternating
if sigma of p equals minus p or p-bar, and I claim that the study of symmetric and alternating
integral poly numbers is really something of a missing chapter, a very elementary algebra,
something that you could have been taught back in early high school, but because the
emphasis there is strictly towards the positive exponent side of things, polynomials, this
is not visible, okay, so we want to remedy that today, and we're going to do that by
starting with the two important families of integral poly numbers, the a-n's, which
are going to be alternating, and the b-n's, which are going to be symmetric, and we're
going to define them for arbitrary natural numbers n, so for arbitrary integers n, so
a sub n for any integer n, and also b-n for any integer n, we could also restrict this
to natural numbers, but I think it's more convenient if we do this in this sort of more
natural generality, okay, so let's start with the symmetric ones, we might call them
symmetric binomials, b sub n, n is an integer, here's the definition, b sub n is the m set
consisting of n and n-bar, so that's an integer, and that's its negation, so the n corresponds
to alpha to the n, and the n-bar corresponds to what we might call alpha to the minus n,
so we're taking this obviously symmetric integral poly number, okay, what do they look
like? Well, here's sort of a list near zero, when n is zero, then both of these things
are zero, so we're getting zero zero in the m set, that's the number two, it's important
to make a note of that, okay, b sub zero is two, not one as you might otherwise think,
and then b sub one is going to be alpha to the minus one plus alpha, b sub two is alpha
to the minus two plus alpha squared, etc., and b to the minus one is alpha to the minus
one, plus alpha to the minus minus one, so it's alpha to the minus one plus alpha, it's
the same as b sub one, and b sub minus two, I should put minus two there, b sub minus
two is alpha to the minus two plus alpha squared, that's again the same as b sub two, okay,
so these are something of a basis for the symmetric integral poly numbers, and what's
particularly interesting is what happens when you multiply two of them, so let's look at
b three times b five, there's b three alpha to the minus three plus alpha cubed, b five
alpha to the minus five plus alpha to the five, and when we multiply them we get alpha
to the minus eight, this combination here is alpha to the minus two, this combination
here is alpha to the two and this combination is alpha to the eight, and we see that what
we're picking up is a b two and a b eight, okay, and note that the sum of three plus
five is eight, and the difference here is two. Okay, if we squared ones, let's say
take b sub four and we square it, there it is there, we square it, well we get the
square of the first term, which is alpha to the minus eight, square of the second
term, which is alpha to the eight, and twice the product we get two, so that is
then b zero, there's b zero, and alpha to the eight plus alpha to the minus eight is
b eight, and again this, this zero is like the difference between the four and
the four, and this eight is like the sum of the four and the four. So as we've
already noted, b sub n is the m-sit n bar n, clearly b sub n bar is equal to b
sub n, because these two things just interchange places, and the formula that
we've just looked at a special case of is that b sub m times b sub n equals b sub
m minus n plus b sub m plus n, and there's no restriction here on the
indices, they can be arbitrary integers. A little bit more sophisticated is what
happens when you multiply three of them together, say b sub m, b sub n, b sub p,
then it's an exercise for you to check that you're going to get four terms, you
can get a b m minus n minus p, b m plus n minus p, b m minus n plus p, and b m plus
n plus p, and remember that any one of these things is unchanged if we negate
the index. So for example, b nine times b four times b three, nine minus four minus
three is two, nine plus four minus three is ten, nine minus four plus three is eight,
and nine plus four plus three is sixteen. And also works when zero is involved, so
b seven, b four, b three, seven minus four minus three is zero, b seven plus
four, seven plus four minus three is the eight, seven minus four plus three is six,
and seven plus four plus three is fourteen. And do note that this b zero
being two is, you know, consistent, is sort of essential for these formulas to
work. A little exercise for you, try to figure out what the binomial expansion
looks like in this case, just a variant of the usual one, but it's worthwhile
clarifying. So if we take b sub m for an arbitrary integer m, and we raise it to
the k, where k is a natural number, like zero, one, two, three, etc., what do we get
when we expand all that out? So the b n polynumbers were pretty well the
simplest symmetric integral polynumbers. Here are pretty well the simplest
alternating integral polynumbers, the a sub n's. So they're going to be defined
also for n an integer, and they're defined in a very similar way. A sub n is the
m set consisting of n with anti n bar. Okay, and the anti has the effect of
introducing a coefficient of minus one. So we'll write minus alpha to the minus
n plus alpha to the n. And then we see that now if we negate the index n, a
sub n bar, we get the negation of a sub n. And here are some examples. So a sub
zero is importantly zero, because when n is zero, there's a zero here, and a zero
anti in the zero and the zero anti annihilate, and we just get an empty set,
or we just get zero. A sub one is minus alpha to the minus one plus alpha. A sub
two is minus alpha to the minus two plus alpha squared. And a sub minus one is the
negative of this one. So alpha to the minus one minus alpha. A sub minus two is
the negative of this one. So it's alpha to the minus two minus alpha squared and
so on. So let's do a general multiplication. Let's multiply a sub m times a sub n. So
there's a sub m. There's a sub n. When we multiply, we get four terms. So the
product of these two is alpha to the minus m plus n. The product of this one and
this one, or maybe this one and this one is minus alpha to the m minus n. The
product of these two is minus alpha to the n minus m, and the product of these
two is alpha to the m plus n. And from that, we can see that the product is
actually, well, this thing here, these two terms, okay, are getting minus b sub m
minus n. So if we take these two out, then we get two plus signs, and we're
getting b sub m minus n, which is the same as b sub n minus m. And these outside
terms, both also with positive one coefficients, giving us b sub m plus n,
because here's alpha to the m plus n and alpha to the minus m plus n. So the
product of these two a's is a sum of two b's. And you might like to write down
what's the corresponding formula for the product of three of these a sub n's and
also how do you take the corresponding binomial power of a given a sub m, again
k being a natural number. So it's not too hard to see that if you have two
symmetric integral polynumbers and you multiply them, you're going to get
another symmetric one. If you have two alternating ones and you multiply them,
you're going to get a symmetric one. However, if you have alternating one
times a symmetric one, in that case, you're going to get an alternating one.
So that's the formula that we're going to look at now. What happens when we
multiply an alternating binomial with a symmetric binomial? A sub m, there it is
there, times b sub n, there it is there. Well, just four terms, just as before, we
get a minus alpha to the minus m plus n. We get an alpha m, alpha to the minus
n, alpha to the m minus n. And these terms alpha to the n minus m with a minus
sign and a plus sign with alpha to the m plus n. And then these two terms here,
these ones, alpha to the m minus n minus alpha to the n minus m, that's a sub m
minus n. And these outside ones are a sub m plus n. Now, the a's, remember, are
alternating. So if we negate the index there, which we also could, then we'd
have to put a minus sign. So we could also write it as minus a sub n minus m
plus a sub n plus m. So this is a nice formula and a very interesting and
important special case is when m is just one, m is just one. In that case, you get
a one times b n equals minus a n minus one plus a n plus one. And that then has
the consequence, which is a little formula here, which we might call a lemma,
okay, that if you have a chain of b's, b sub k, b sub k plus two, b sub k plus four,
so going up by two each step, up to some b sub l. So these are separated by an
even number of steps. Then the result of multiplying by a one is minus a sub k
minus one, sort of one less than that index, plus a sub l plus one, one bigger
than that index. And the reason is, I'm sort of immediate from this, because when
you multiply the a one times the b k, you're getting a minus a sub k minus one,
that's that term there, plus a plus a sub k plus one. But that plus a sub k plus one
that you've just got is going to be canceled with the term that you're
going to get by multiplying the a one times the b k plus two, the left term.
It's going to actually exactly cancel that, because you're going to get a sub k plus
one and a sub k plus three, okay. So in the intermediate spaces between these
things, the two a's that you're getting from the left and from the right always
have opposite signs. And so they're going to cancel. And all what's going to be left
is the one to the left of the left one, and the one to the right of the right one,
namely this formula here. Now there's sort of two sort of special cases of this
also. When k equals one in this formula, if we start with one and then go out by
two, so one, three, five up to some l, then the first term is going to be minus a
sub zero, because one minus one is zero. And that's zero. So there'll only be one
term that's a sub l plus one. On the other hand, if k equals two, and we look at
sort of even ones, if we start just with b two, b four, b six, all the way up to b
m, then the formula is going to tell us what we should get is minus a sub one
plus a sub m plus one. But a sub one, okay, is, so there'll be that on this side here,
is the same that's over here. So we can bring it to the left hand side by putting
a one there. Okay, so if we rewrite the formula that you get by starting with this one with b sub
two, we rewrite and bring the a sub one that we get over here, then the result is just a
single a sub m plus one on the right hand side. So in both cases, if we have a string of b's
that are going up by two each time, and we multiply by a one, we are getting a single a.
In fact, the a is just has an index one bigger than the biggest b that appears in each of these cases.
That's quite an important kind of formula, which motivates us to the definition of the objects
that actually we're really interested in, which are the central poly numbers denoted by c sub n.
Okay, so the central poly numbers c sub n, and now we'll stick with natural number indices
n equals zero, one, two, etc. So c sub zero is just going to be one, c sub one is going to be alpha
to the minus one plus alpha. So it's symmetric. That's the same as b one. So there's a picture
of c zero, in terms of a mass distribution or density, single mass of unit size sitting above
zero. Here's a picture of c one unit masses above one and minus one on our integral number line.
C two is going to be alpha to the minus two plus one plus alpha squared. That's one plus b two
has three equal masses equally separated on the number line symmetric about zero at minus two
at zero at two. c three similarly alpha to the minus three plus alpha to the minus one plus alpha
plus alpha cubed. That's b one plus b three represented by four equally spaced unit masses
symmetric around zero at minus three minus one one and three. And then we carry on like this
c four is one plus b two plus b four sort of corresponding to the even powers of b except
that's not b zero. That's only half of b zero. That's why I write it separately. So one plus b
two plus b four. Well the odd ones b one plus b three plus b four are like that. So we just sort of
follow that pattern for even and for odd. So c four is alpha to the minus four going up by
steps of two all the way up to alpha to the four c five going from alpha to the minus five
to alpha five including all the the intermediate powers which are separated from the bottom by
a multiple of two as we go up minus five minus three minus one one three five.
So these are the central polynomials. They're all symmetric. Okay. So you should think about
them as being perhaps a somewhat more sophisticated or a little bit more complicated variant to the
b's. They also form a basis of the symmetric poly numbers. So if we have an arbitrary symmetric
poly number we can write it uniquely in terms of the b's but it's not too hard to see. We can also
write it uniquely in terms of the c's and the c's are a little bit more sophisticated but they're
also a little bit sort of more uniform and and it turns out that they're connected with a huge
amount of significant mathematics. Okay so very briefly now I just want to indicate very roughly
all the remarkable at least some of the remarkable aspects to these central poly numbers c zero c one
c two c three c four etc that we've defined going on in this direction. Okay they're connected with
so many important aspects of 20th century mathematics and physics. Let's start here okay
they're intimately connected with Chebyshev polynomials which you will have run into actually
Chebyshev polynomials of the second kind which you will have run into if you are a member of my
wild egg mathematics courses youtube channel where I have a whole series on
interesting families of orthogonal polynomials and how to look at them in a somewhat novel linear
algebra slash number theory point of view. They're related to Gaussian binomial coefficients and q
series okay there's also in fact over at wild egg there's also a series of videos that I'm doing on
q series and the Gaussian binomial coefficients figure very prominently there so these are some
sense variants of the Gaussian binomial coefficients which are in some cases more natural or maybe more
useful than the Gaussian binomial coefficients but not in all cases there's a good reason for
studying both of them and in fact that that other point of view is closely related to quantum
groups also in physics these things are coming up very naturally in angular momentum quantum mechanics
they figure prominently in representation theory of league groups okay so in the world of league
groups there are things called compact simple league groups and the simplest one is su2 the
simplest non-abilian one is su2 okay and what's something called representation theory and it
turns out that these things here are essentially the characters the irreducible characters of su2
when you view them in the right way and as such they're also intimately connected with harmonic
analysis on the three-dimensional sphere not the two-dimensional sphere that we find in our space
but the three-dimensional sphere which is another manifestation of su2 but you can do sort of spherical
harmonics on that thing and it turns out that these things are intimately connected with spherical
harmonics on s3 they're very close to the vial character formula and arguably i've already
shown you the vial character formula today in the simplest of all cases okay i actually i also have
to put in i have to put in another ade graphs okay ade graphs and so the vial character formula
applies to all of these graphs but in the an case sort of a special case this is actually the simplest
a case it's the a1 case so this is like the the simplest version of some huge story and there's
also a series in my wild egg mask course channel all about ade graphs and dynamics on graphs and
you know and these things will figure there hypergroups well on this channel i have a series
called diffusion symmetry where i'm introducing you to the world of hypergroups these are very
close to being really central objects in in hypergroup theory okay so i'm going to be meeting them
in in that series of videos the closely connected with that they're intimately connected with random
walks and going back to physics they're sort of intimately connected with modern theory the
electro weak force in physics so there's a lot to the story but in fact i have this sort of
aspiration to explain a lot of this stuff maybe maybe all of it at some point but in any case
since this series is only dealing with elementary algebra i want to alert you that this very naive
point of view we're just playing around with m sets and you know and now we have these integral
poly numbers etc and what's arising sort of like naturally as we're just sort of following our
nose doing the simplest possible thing are our objects whose algebraic structure is actually
completely key in a lot of really important areas and i want to talk more about what that's
the nature of that algebraic structure is it has to do with the multiplicative structure of these
central poly numbers and you might like to play around with with that and ask yourself what happens
if i multiply say c3 times c7 okay symmetric poly numbers what's the product going to be
that's an interesting question we'll talk about that in our next video hope you'll join me for
that i'm nomad wallberger thanks for listening
