Good day. I'm Norman Wabaker. We're on our way towards investigating the difficulties
with real numbers as infinite decimals. Today we're going to have some more practice thinking
about issues relating to repeating decimals. But there's going to be an interesting twist
from last time. We're going to introduce a rather novel approach to something that's
called peatic numbers in mathematics. It's an interesting chapter of algebra. We're
going to be looking at it from a very naive but perhaps novel point of view. And for those
of you with an interest in number theory, you're going to find some really magical, remarkable
phenomena happening here that you can investigate further on your own. So this video will introduce
you to a lovely new arena of investigation having to do with an interesting twist on
repeating decimals. So let me review first of all the repeating decimals story that we
outlined last time. Fraction like one seventh or one third can be expressed in terms of
a repeating decimal. The bar over it means that this 142857 is being repeated. So we
can think of it if we like as something that's going on and on and on for a long time, this
pattern repeating over and over again. Or if we like we can think of just this expression
finishing there with a bar over it. Now last time we talked about addition and multiplication
and here's how you multiply one seventh by one third using decimal arithmetic. The first
step would be to multiply say one seventh by a simply a point three. And because this
goes on towards the right, we can't start on the right hand edge like we would ordinarily
do for finite decimals. It's a big difference. So we have to start on the left and we have
to keep going in this direction but modify as we go because of the carries that are introduced
at various stages. So for example, point three times one would be three. Why is this not
a three? Well because the three times four is twelve, two carry one makes that a four.
And then three times two is six. But the next one is three times eight which is twenty-four
so there's a four there and carry the two that makes the six and eight. So we proceed
in that way probably best with a pencil and an eraser writing down values and then rubbing
them off and adjusting them as we need to depending on future carries that are going
to come over and spill over onto the number we've just written down. So once we've done
that a little ways we get to see that there's a pattern here. There's a four two eight five
seven one then it repeats four two eight five seven one. Now that's just the first line
of the multiplication table then there's a second line which is just the whole thing
shifted over because we're just multiplying by another three and then we have each of
these rows identical but all shifted over. And this pattern goes on just keeps on going.
We have to add up all these rows to get the final answer. Well we can't do that all at
once so we adopt the strategy that will sort of chop off at a certain point and calculate up
to that point and then see what happens see if there's a pattern. So have a look here so there's
four there we have to add the two and the four that makes six. Why is this not a six? Well
because at the next row it's eight plus two plus four is 14 so there'd be a four there and then
we'd have to change the six into a seven. And then the four that we've just put there has to be
modified because then the next column we get five plus eight plus two that's 15 plus four is 19 so
there has to be a nine there and then a one carrying. That makes that a five not a six. Why is it a
six? Well because the 19 that's there actually gets affected by this one. This one here is 12,
20, 26 so there's a six here and the two goes over here to make that a 20 or 21 that makes the 19
or 21 and then it gives you an extra one there. Okay so as we keep on going the sums in each of
these columns gets bigger and bigger of course and so those totals that we write down are going to
spill more and more over to the adjacent left digits that we've just written. So in practice we
have to do a lot of rubbing out and rewriting especially as we go on further and further in
this infinite sort of table. Well in fact what happens is that in this case there's a pattern
that's established reasonably early so there's 0.047619 and then 0.04 and then it turns out to repeat.
It's not visible here because this is not really the total. There's these further rows here that I
haven't written down which would also contribute to these ones here. So this is the necessary
awkwardness that we get when we're doing arithmetic with repeated decimals. It's large unavoidable.
It makes the subject hard to define. It makes it hard for us to say precisely what the operations
are. It makes it hard to actually perform the operations and theoretically it makes it hard
to demonstrate that the usual laws of arithmetic are valid for the operations that we've defined in
this way or that we could define in this way. In any case the answer that we should get is of
course 1 over 21 and here is its repeated decimal and that is what we would eventually get if we did
this a lot more. We would eventually see this group of six being repeated. But still that's the point
I made last time. There's not really a surprise that this topic is not treated more extensively
either at the high school or the undergraduate level because it's a bit messy and it's hard to
get your hands really on it firmly. Not impossible but not too easy either. So in this video we're
going to have some fun and do something which may seem completely wild and crazy. We're going to look
at something which I'm going to call reversibles and these are like decimals except that they're
going to go off to the left and they're going to carry on to the left and keep on going and going
for as long as we have patience to write down and the ones that we're going to be looking at are
repeating. So these are repeating reversibles. Here's the one that starts 7, 5, 8, 2, 4, 1 and then
repeats that and this bar over it means that you can think of it as being repeated over and over
again in that direction to the left there. Well this is not a usual kind of number so we're not
doing ordinary arithmetic at all here. This is 7, this is 857, 142,857 and there's another
857 million and then 142 billion and then 857 trillion. We keep on adding more and more and
more as a number this just blows up. So it's not a number it's something else is some new kind of
object but let's put our doubts aside for the moment just to have a little bit of fun with
these objects. So here is the one that we get by having the one seventh sequence repeated over
and over again to the left and here's our 0.3333 now written going off to the left and let's just
for fun try to multiply these things. So for example our first row of the multiplication would
be this three times this big number. Now this is a very different situation from the last one
because we are now starting on the right hand side which is where we like to start when we're
doing Hindu-Arabic arithmetic. So this multiplication is relatively simple. 3 times 7 is 21 so we write
down the 1 and we carry a 2 and then 3 times 5 is 15 with the 2 is 17 so we write down the 7 and
carry a 1. 3 times 8 is 24 with the 1 makes 25. There's a 5 and 2 is up there. 3 times 2 is 6 plus 2
is 8. 3 times 4 is 12 and then we'll carry the 1. 3 times 1 is 1 plus 1 is 4 and then after that
it's just going to be repeat because we're back to a 7 again. So we get this 1, 7, 5, 8, 2, 4 and
then that's repeated, that's repeated and we can repeat it as many times as we like. The second
row will be exactly the same thing but shifted over by 10 so that's exactly the same row there
and then the next one repeated again and repeated there. Each one staggered one over to the right
and we have one of these rows for each one of these numbers that we're multiplying by. So you
can think of this very, very, very big table, lots of rows and going very far distance in this
direction. Now we have to add these things up but again adding up is relatively a snap because
we're starting on the right hand side which is the one we're used to. 1 plus all these zeros makes
1. 7 plus 1 is 8. 5 plus 7 plus 1 is 13. So there's a 3 and we carry the 1. Now we have well 1 plus
5 plus 7 we just had that 13 and now we add 8 which is 21 and 1 is 22. So there's a 2 and we
carry the 2 and then at the next step well we have again 13 plus 8 is 21 and now we have to add
2 and another 2 that's 25. There's the 5 and 2 and we carry on. We got 1, 8, 3, 2, 5, 9, 0, 8, 3 and at
this stage here we've run out of rows. So to carry on further in a accurate way I would need to
extend this table and put in some more rows so that I could start adding up the further columns.
And if I did that I would see that the answer that I'm going to get is this one right here.
1 and then 8, 3, 2, 5, 9, 0 and then it repeats. So this is not arithmetic with repeating decimals.
It's not arithmetic with ordinary numbers. It's some kind of strange arithmetic or actually the
arithmetic is not so strange but the objects that we're doing arithmetic with we've probably never
seen them before. There are some strange things that seem very bizarre. Nevertheless this answer
that we got has a remarkable connection with the answer on the previous slide when we multiplied
1 seventh times 1 third using ordinary repeating decimals. So have a look at these two expressions
and see if you can see what is the relationship between these two. To get some appreciation
for what's going on here let's go back to a famous perhaps notorious formula of Euler.
Euler wrote down this equation and it's an equation involving some variable x and here are powers of
x increasing so 1 plus x plus x squared plus x cubed and so on keep on going and here are
powers of the reciprocal 1 over x 1 over x squared 1 over x cubed also keeping on going
in that direction. And Euler claims that this is equal to 0. Now it's not so easy to give
a meaning to this in contemporary mathematics but it's still a very interesting and ultimately
insightful identity that teaches us something. So I'm going to give it a name I'm going to call
it the doubly infinite identity DII. So it's not at all clear what this formula actually means
but a justification is easy enough. So Euler would have said well let's express this thing call it
A. So A is this sum a doubly infinite sum. What happens when we multiply A by x? Well this one
goes to that this one goes to that this one goes to that while this one goes to that one this one
goes to that one this one goes to that one and so on. So when we multiply by x all of the terms
just shift over one to the left. Since this is doubly infinite here it means we're getting
exactly the same sum that we started with. So A times x equals A. So if we think of A as a number
bringing everything to the same side we get A times x minus 1 equals 0. So if x is not equal to 1
then A must be equal to 0. This is a very strange argument I wouldn't say at all that this is a
rigorous argument. This is Euler's intuitive trying to get at something that's out there but he
doesn't quite know what it is. Beautiful formula actually. Let's have a look at how it applies to
our situation. So adopting this adventurous spirit of Euler and in the spirit of the formula that
we just wrote down I claim that this doubly infinite repeating decimal has to equal 0. It's the
decimal that goes 373737 and so on in that direction and 373737 and so on in that direction. Why is
it 0? Well we can think of it as being 37 times this somewhat simpler decimal 1.01010101 and so
on and in this direction 0101. If you multiply this by 37 then you get all these 37s repeating on
either side. And this thing here in the Hindu Arabic realization is well that 1 represents 1. This
1 represents 100. The next one represents well 10,000 which is 100 squared. The next one represents 100
cubed and so on. This one represents 1 over 100. This is 1 over 100 squared, 1 over 100 cubed. So we
get this doubly infinite expression which Euler's formula tells us is 0. So 37 times 0 that's got to
be 0. Alright so this is very dubious arithmetic but let's draw some consequences. If this made some
sense then it would mean that the part of the expression to the right of the decimal point which
is 373737 repeating should be negative of the part to the left which is 737373 repeating in that
direction with a minus sign. Alright because this plus this equals 0 so that means this equals minus
this. Or we could draw some other conclusions. We could chop this off in different ways. We could
say split it there and say this is 7.3737 repeated plus this thing here which is 037373
repeated. So this has got to be minus that. Or we could chop it off say right here and say that this
decimal to the right there which is 0.0073 repeated has got to be minus what we get when we cover that
up which is 37 repeated on the left and 373 there. These are all rather strange formulas but they
suggest that there's some kind of link between the repeating decimals that we've been talking about,
the ones that go off to the right in the usual normal way and these strange new objects that
go off to the left and repeat as we go off to the left. So perhaps there's some kind of arithmetic
for these things which parallels and corresponds to the arithmetic for these ones. So still keeping
this attitude of fun and not being too serious let's try to investigate experimentally this
arithmetic with repeating reversibles and see does this actually perhaps make some sense after all.
Is there some structure here which is actually consistent and perhaps even helps us to compute
something. Let's have a look. So first we'll attach some names to things. Let's say that we're going
to be talking about a repeating reversible. So what's that? It's an expression of this form.
This is like a Hindu Arabic number with a decimal point, some digits, a finite number to the right of
the decimal point, a certain number of digits to the left and then another number of digits which
have a bar over them. So this object that's the kind of object we'll be calling a a reversible but
it's actually a repeating reversible because the the aspect of it in this direction is repeating
with that business there. Now in conventional mathematics these kind of things are studied and
they have an official name so they are officially called ten attic numbers although in fact the ten
attic business doesn't happen too often usually mathematicians that study in this area don't
work over base 10 they much prefer to work over a prime base might see the reason for that a little
bit later but ten attic number is a little bit of a mouthful. Reversible sounds a little bit
cooler. Now just as for repeating decimals we have to establish some conventions for equality. So
we'll agree that if you have point three seven bar like this then we can add another three seven
like that and put a bar over that that's the same expression. It really means three seven three
seven three seven repeating and we can get at that also by writing it first as point seven and
then three seven bar over it. It's exactly parallel to the kinds of conventions that we have for
repeating decimals and then we have to have a convention about point nine repeated that plays
a special role in the base ten story. Well what should that be? Well according to Euler's
DII formula that should be minus point nine repeated as an ordinary repeating decimal which
is minus one. So point nine bar repeating to the left that's going to be minus one. If we multiply
it by ten then point zero nine repeated like that is the same as minus ten and so on. So something
like this so if we read to the left point seven three nine nine nine nine nine nine nine nine nine
nine what is that? Well we can interpret the nine nine nine nine nine nine nine nine and so on as
minus a hundred exactly parallel to these and then we still have thirty seven so minus a hundred plus
thirty seven is minus sixty three. So this is going to be some new and crazy way of writing down
the number minus sixty three. Arithmetic with reversibles looks curious. So here are some
examples of how we're going to do addition with these repeating reversibles. First example we
have two four eight repeated. That's just an ordinary two that's an ordinary forty that's an
ordinary eight hundred then add plus eight thousand plus eighty thousand plus eight hundred thousand
etc. But we're just thinking of it as an expression and here's the expression two four eight eight we
can put as many of these eights as we want and we'll put a bar over the last one. Plus say two seven
bar which represents two seven seven seven seven seven seven so a lot of sevens going in that
direction. So the addition takes place just like four regular numbers. We start on the right hand
side and we carry just as usual. This is still the ones this is still the tens this is still the
hundreds the thousands and so on. Just that now there are well as many of them as we can write down.
Two plus two is four four plus seven is eleven eight plus seven is fifteen plus the one is sixteen.
So carry eight plus seven is plus the one is sixteen so there's a six and carry a one and then
another six and carry one and then another six and carry one so it's clear that these sixes are
going to repeat and we're getting four one six repeated. Here's another example like that we
have something of period three and something of period two so seven three four seven three four seven
three four and so on and nine two nine two nine two nine two and so on. Let's see what happens here
Seven plus nine is sixteen there's a six and carry one three plus two is five plus one is six four
plus nine is thirteen. Carry the one seven plus two plus one is ten carry the one three plus nine
plus one is thirteen. Carry the one four plus two six carry the one and seven and then seven plus nine
9 is 16. We're exactly back to where we started. And the pattern of repetition repeats because
we've gone through a cycle of 6, which is the most common multiple of 3 and 2. So it's
going to be obvious that at this stage, this whole pattern of 6 here repeats. So the answer
is 7, 3, 0, 3, 6, 6, repeated. Okay, here's another example. 8, 3, 9, bar plus 7, 6, bar.
There's 8, 3, 9, 8, 3, 9, 8, 3, 9, 8, 3, 9, 7, 6, 7, 6, 7, 6, 7, 6, 7, 6, repeated. Notice
that I'm going to put the plus sign on this side. That seems more in the spirit of this
kind of reversible arithmetic. Alright, so you can check my computation. I'm just adding
as if this was a big ordinary sum. Forgetting about the fact that it keeps on repeating,
I just add exactly in the ordinary way until I start seeing a pattern. And in this case,
again, period of 6, and then I have something repeated almost. But it's a little bit different
from the previous one because in this group of 6 here, the 8 and the 7 give 15 plus 1
is 16. So there's a 6 and then one more carry, which means that this next one is not a 5
as it was there, but it's going to be a 6. And in the next group, that's going to happen
again. There's going to be a 1 carry. So the next one will also be just like this one and
not like this one. So it's this one that's going to be repeated. And then we look at it
and see, well, where's the first repetition? It's actually 157066. That string is then
being repeated. So we can rewrite the result more efficiently this way. And I'm going to
leave you to check my arithmetic here. I'm just pointing out that we can also have numbers
that have some decimals extending to the right of the decimal point. So 257 repeated, 257,
257, 257 to the left of the decimal, and a 0.3. And 748 repeated, 748, 48, 48, 48, with
a 0.1 at the end. 0.3 plus 0.1 is 0.4. And you can check my arithmetic. This is supposedly
what we get. So the big thing here is that this is an easier kind of addition of repeated
things than it is with repeated decimals. And the reason is because we're starting from
the right, which is where we want to naturally start. So as we go move to the right, we have
to carry as usual, but we never have a situation where we write something down and then later
on go back and have to rub it out and write something over it. Once we've got a number,
it stays there. So it's much more like our usual arithmetic, actually, than is the arithmetic
with repeating decimals. This is a more familiar arithmetic, actually, even though the objects
are these wild and crazy things. It's getting more interesting. In the same way, multiplication
with these repeating reversibles is a lot easier than multiplication with repeating decimals.
For the same reason that we get to start on the right hand side and move to the left,
which is what we naturally want to do. So for example, 4, 7, repeated times 3, which
is 4, 7, 4, 7, 4, 7, 4, 7, and so on, times 3. Well, 3 times 7 is 21, there's the 1, there's
the carry of 2. 3 times 4 is 12, plus 2 is 14. Write down the 4, carry the 1. 3 times
7 is 21, plus 1 is 22. Write down the 2, carry the 2. 3 times 4 is 12, plus 2 is 14. There's
the 4, carry the 1. And it's pretty clear now that the pattern will be established. We're
just going to get 1, 4, 2 with the 4, 2 repeated. Here, a more sophisticated example, we're
multiplying 4, 7 repeated with 3 repeated. So here are 4, 7s and so on. I should probably
put a repeating over here. And the first line is just the one we've already computed. So
it's 1, 4, 2, 4, 2, 4, 2, 4, 2, and so on. And then all the subsequent lines are just
exactly those ones shifted over 1 each time. And then when we add them all up, well, 1
is 1, 4 plus 1 is 5, 2 plus 4 plus 1 is 7, 4 plus 2 plus 4 plus 1 is 11, there's the
1, carry a 1, and then 7 plus 7 is 14, there's the 4, carry a 1, and so on. By the time we've
gotten over here, I think we can see the pattern, 5, 7, 1, 4, 8, 0, there's 5, 7, 1, 4, 8. So
it's 1, 5, 7, 1, 4, 8, 0. It looks like it's repeated. If you have a look at those computations
that we've just made, and you make some yourselves, which I strongly recommend that you do, try
to add some repeating reversibles and multiply them, then you're going to get 1, 4, 4, 8,
1. One of the things that you will, I think, appreciate is that the associative, commutative,
and distributive laws are almost obvious for reversibles. They're not at all obvious for
the decimals going in this direction. But when we go this direction, it's really just
ordinary arithmetic, except that it happens to go further than it usually does. But if
we look at any particular string of it, any initial string, that's really just like an
ordinary addition or multiplication. And so it's almost obvious that reversible arithmetic
is going to satisfy the usual laws of arithmetic, at least when we're talking about addition
and multiplication. So theoretically, there's a big difference between these two. Here's
another example of a big difference between arithmetic with reversibles and decimals. In
reversible arithmetic, negatives are not needed. What do I mean by that? Well, I mean, suppose
for example that we have the reversible 1, 2, 7 bar, which is 1, 2, 7, 1, 2, 7, 1, 2,
7, and carrying on like this. Maybe I should have put a bar over it. Suppose we want to
find its negative. What does that mean? Well, it means another number so that when we add
it to it, we get zero. Now, usually we would just write this number and put a minus sign
in front of it. But the point is that there's another expression in the reversible world
that acts as negative 1, 2, 7 repeated. And I'm going to find it for you right now. So
watch carefully. We're going to find a number that has the property that when we add it
to this one, we get zero. The first digit that we want there is 3 because 7 plus 3
is zero. Well, actually it's 10, but zero with carrying a 1. The crucial thing is I've
obtained a zero. And now I'm going to put a number here so that this total also gives
me a zero there. What number should this be? Well, remember that we have to include a
carry of 1. So I'm going to put a 7 here. That way, the 7 plus 2 plus 1 will be 10.
So I'll get a zero here and then I'll put a 1 here. What am I going to put here? Well,
I want these two to add up to 9 because I have this one there already. So I'm going
to make this an 8. That'll make that zero add 1. And then I'm back to the 7 and this
is going to be 3. And then the next one is 7. And then 8, 3, 8, 7, repeated. So what I
see is that minus 127 bar is really the same thing as 873 bar. That means we can in fact
dispense with having to introduce negative reversibles. For those of you who have never
liked negative numbers, you might be feeling better now. There are no negative numbers
in this world. Or to put it another way, the positive reversibles, the ordinary reversibles
include the negative numbers inside them. Just like we saw that minus 63 or 64 that
we had earlier, that had an alternate form as an ordinary reversible without a negative
sign in front of it. What about a more complicated one like this? So 5486, repeated, and then
1, 2.8. So there's the 1, 2.8, 5486, 5486. What's its negative? So we're looking for
a number and when we add it to this one, we get 0. It's going to start with 0.2. So that
0.8, 0.2 is 0, carry the 1. And then we better put a 7 here, making 0. And then we better
put an 8 here. And then we better put a 3 here. And then a 1 here. And then a 5. And
then a 4. And then a 3. And then a 1. And then a 5. And then a 4. And so on. Can we see the
pattern? 4513, 4513. So the answer is 451387.2 with a 4513, repeated. That's what negative
this reversible is. Very strange world of arithmetic, this reversible or ten attic arithmetic.
Now the beauty of reversible arithmetic is that it's an alternative form of arithmetic
with fractions. Just as is the arithmetic with repeating decimals. So if we have a fraction,
we can also convert it into a repeating reversible. And the most naive way of doing that is this
way. Let's say we have 1 seventh and we want to write it as a repeating reversible. Well
the first thing we could do is to write it as a repeating decimal. Because that's completely
clear. We know how to do that. Here is 1 seventh as a repeating decimal. Now this repeating
decimal, we can convert it into a repeating reversible by using the doubly infinite identity
of Euler. It's going to be minus the same thing with the repetition on the left hand
side of the decimal. So this thing repeating on the right of the decimal point is negative
the same thing repeating to the left of the decimal point. That's what Euler's identity
tells us. So now we're in the position of having to negate this thing. Well we know
how to negate this thing. I show you just how to do it. So there it is there or more
efficiently 3 4 1 7 5 8 2. That's just the negation of this thing as a reversible. On
the other hand if we want to convert a reversible to a fraction what we can do is this. So let's
say we have 493 repeated 8.1. Okay let's call it x. So here it is a little bit more expanded.
8.1 then 493 493. So we want to do the same kind of thing that we do to convert a decimal
to a fraction. We look at this thing and say alright let's multiply it by a suitable power
of 10. Actually let's start with this one. Let's just multiply it by 10. If we multiply
it by 10 then that decimal moves to the right of all the digits and then we have just something
with zeros to the right of the decimal point. Okay that's good. And now what we're going
to do is we're going to multiply by 10,000. Multiplying by 10,000 of x moves the decimal
point over 4 because there's 4 zeros in 10,000. So instead of being here it gets moved over
once, twice, three times, four times. Or from here it goes one, two, three, four. It's over
there now. And at this stage the repeating parts are lined up. The 394 repeated, the
394 repeated they're all lined up above each other. So if we take the difference between
these things we would get 9,990x equals this minus this which would be 91613. So altogether
x is 31,619 divided by 9,909. So it's very similar to the way we go from a decimal, repeating
decimal to a fraction. Here is a more direct way of going from a fraction to a repeating
reversible which does not go through the repeating decimal. So we're going to multiply by 9,990.
So we're going to multiply by 9,990. So we're going to multiply by 9,990. So we're going
to multiply by 9,990. Let's have another look at one seventh. Now seven is a little bit
special, well not that special, but it has the property that it's relatively prime to
10. That makes this analysis a little bit easier than if seven was a number like eight or a
number that had a factor two or five in it. So one of the properties of seven because
it's relatively prime to 10 is that if you look at the numbers from zero to nine and
you multiply them all by seven and then look at the ones digits, then you get the numbers
from zero to nine again in some new order. So what I'm talking about here is seven times
zero is zero, seven times one is seven, seven times two is 14. So we just ignore everything
except for the one, we'd get four. Seven times three is 21, so there's a one. Seven times
four is 28 and so on. So in number theory this is called mod 10 arithmetic. But all what
we're going to need here is that this is a pairing between the numbers from zero to nine
to the numbers from zero to nine with some permutation. Okay, so what do we want to do?
We want to find one divided by seven. That means we want to find a number that has the
property that when you multiply it by seven you get one. So here's the mystery number
that I'm going to find. This is going to be one seventh along here and I've just started
finding it. I've started with the three because from this list I can see that if I want to
get a one I have to multiply seven by three. So three times seven is 21 and I've written
down the one and I've carried a two. Okay, the next thing that I'm supposed to get is
zero because I want this product to be one and all the rest zeroes. So how am I going
to arrange this to be zero? There's already a two here, so that means the rest of the
number has to be eight, so that two plus eight is zero. Carry one. So how am I going to get
an eight? I'm going to get an eight by multiplying by four. So four times seven is 28. Carry
the two is 30. So this is zero and I have to carry a three. And now I have to get a
seven here to add up with this three to get zero. So how am I going to get a seven? I
look here and I'm going to have to have a one. So seven times one is seven plus three
is ten. There's a zero. Carry a one. Okay, now I'm going to need a nine to get that zero
and I need to multiply by seven. So I'll put a seven there. Seven times seven is 49 plus
one is 50. There's a zero. Carry the five. Five plus five is ten. How am I going to get
a five by multiplying by five? Seven times five is 35 plus five is 40. Carry a four. Now
I want a six. How am I going to get a six by multiplying by eight? Eight times seven
is 56 plus four is 60. There's a zero. Carry a six. Six, I'm going to have to add up with
a four. What am I going to have to put there? I'm going to have to put a two. Two times
seven is 14 plus six is 20. There's a zero. Carry a two. Oh, now we're at the same stage
that we already were. So it's going to be then a four and then a one and then a seven
and so on. And so the answer is that one seventh equals reading here three, four, one, seven
five, eight, two, four, one, seven repeated. So it's two, eight, five, seven, one, four,
three. All of that repeated. And that's the same number that we got on the previous
slide. Alright, so very good. That's a kind of light, not very rigorous introduction to
the arithmetic with reversibles. How about some exercises so you can play around with
these things? So the first exercise is just to explain why the usual laws of arithmetic
hold for addition and multiplication for reversibles. And now it's important to check that this
arithmetic be something that's consistent. And the best way of doing that is to compute
some things in different ways to make sure that we get the same thing so we can check
that things are actually consistent. So this is only one of many possible examples that
you can try out. Use reversible arithmetic to check that say two thirds times one seventh
plus one quarter is the same as two thirds times one seventh plus two thirds times one
quarter. In other words, convert each of these to a repeating reversible and then calculate
the left hand side using reversible arithmetic, calculate the right hand side using the same
and hopefully they should agree. And then you can do the same variant, try different numbers,
try different laws, just play around with arithmetic in various ways, check out the laws that they
actually work so that this is consistent. And our last exercise is to make a careful comparison
between two calculations. One in the repeating decibel framework, one in the repeating reversible
framework. And they're pretty close to being the same computations. We're going to go
back to that one ninth times one ninth where the expressions involved are pretty simple.
Point one one one one repeated times point one one one one repeated or on the reversible
side the negatives minus one ninth minus one ninth are point one one one one repeated
that direction times point one one one one repeated in that direction. Now we've already
seen that when you do this well it's very very simple to set it up and when we add the
various rows that appear in this big expression we're going to get zero as a total in the
first column then one as a total in the second column and then two and then three and then
four five six seven eight nine and then the tenth column or maybe it's the eleventh column
will have a total of ten. That's before we do any carrying and then total of eleven total
of twelve and so on. So let me remind you that what you have to do at that point to
convert it into a decimal is you have to do the carries. So this ten well you have to
leave the zero there and move the ten to make it add one to this one. Then this eleven
you leave the one there and you add one to that total. You have to do that all the way
through and often once you added something to some of the box well then you have to modify
the the one following it as well. So there's this continual cascading effect that further
ones to the right are going to start affecting the ones that you've already done. And we've
had a look at this calculation and this is the decimal that you get. And now over on
this side everything is much simpler. This is like a mirror but this mirror is asymmetric.
Everything looks ten years younger with no wrinkles on this side. So here the addition
is very straightforward. One two three four five six seven eight nine ten eleven and so
on just as before. But now the carries are to the right crucial difference. And so it's
immediate or almost immediate to write down what the repeating expression is once you've
gone a certain ways. But even in both cases it's still not at all clear why perhaps you
get a repeating object out of this. In fact you could think about it this way. This is
a game you could play which is completely independent of reversibles or decimals. If
you just gave someone a whole bunch of boxes with the numbers zero one two three four five
six and so on in it carrying on let's say to a billion. And then you said okay the game
is going to be you're going to have to convert this into a Hindu Arabic number by whenever
you have more than nine in a box you've got to convert ten of them into the next unit
and move the ten replace the ten with one of the next unit over to the left. That's
effectively doing the carrying. Why should it be that what you get is, why should it
be that what you get is repeating? And why is it exactly this one? And then you can
ask exactly the same question in this form where the question is now different because
again the numbers are going in this direction but the carries are still going to the left.
So again the question is why does this game that just starts out with these long row of
boxes with numbers in them, why does it end up giving you something that's repeating?
And what is it that you end up getting after you make the calculation? Of course these
numbers are the same because we're getting one over eighty one in both cases. This is
the repeating decimal version of one over eighty one. This is the repeating reversible
of one over eighty one. But this calculation was a lot simpler than this one. So although
this whole thing may seem like some crazy game yet there's this magical outcome, this
magical payoff, that if you actually had to do a lot of calculations with repeating
decimals using repeating decimal arithmetic you would very much value knowing that you
could change things from here to here. To go through the mirror to this strange Alice
in Wonderland kind of situation where the calculations are so much simpler and then
go back. So purely as a computational tool this is a very interesting and powerful device.
Especially if you're working with patterns that are big, lots of repetition, lots of
carries and so on. This becomes dramatically simpler. This is a remarkable thing and I
think it deserves a lot more press. So I think the people who are studying pietic arithmetic
perhaps don't advertise this aspect of their subject perhaps as well as they might. I think
it deserves some press. And here is a major project for those of you who are interested
in this and who have a number of theoretical background or an interest. So when I say major
project this is like a year long project for a retired person or perhaps a master's
student or an advanced undergraduate. So the challenge is to go over this lecture that
I've just done and to lay out careful definitions of arithmetic with these repeating reversibles.
So write down carefully what exactly is the repeating reversible, what exactly are the
definitions of arithmetic and prove that this actually is a consistent business and
that it actually recovers the irrational number arithmetic. That we get something that's
isomorphic to the rational number arithmetic in this repeating reversible sense. So we
might introduce a new type there. We've already seen that this is the same as the repeating
decimals. But now this is another connection between rational numbers and decimals in a
rather interesting and different direction. So this whole discussion is hopefully getting
you a little bit more familiar with actually doing arithmetic with decimals that are not
necessarily finite. And next time we're going to take the step to so called infinite decimals.
So it's time now that I set out what are the difficulties when you try to develop the
theory of real numbers using infinite decimals. I claim that that doesn't really work. And
next time I'm going to spell out why it doesn't work. And you'll see that the reasons are
not particularly sophisticated ones. The argument is not particularly elaborate. It's just a
consequence of laying out the definitions carefully and having a good look at them. And I think
you'll all agree, you'll all be able to see that there are serious difficulties. It's
hard to not acknowledge it once it's been laid out very clearly so that we know exactly
what we're talking about. That's what we're going to do or try to do next time. I hope
you'll join me for that. I'm Norman Wallberger. Thanks for listening.
