Music
Science has changed the world, physically and socially.
That's indubitable and I don't think that anyone would give much of an argument against that.
Science, especially since 1800, has become a relentless driver of almost continual social change,
physically affecting the world, but from our perspective more significantly affecting how we live,
where we live, what we do, what we eat, what we wear, the lifespan of humanity.
In every way that we feel directly, that we experience directly,
science, especially since 1800, is identified with the relentless and even accelerating pace
of social change that has been characteristic initially of western societies
and has now become a global phenomenon.
I want to emphasize that this is a phenomenon that we can, whose onset we can recognize in the early 19th century,
and we'll set that aside for the moment and I'll come back to it.
One might think, one is tempted to speak of scientific discoveries as being the source of science's power
to be a driver of social change, that scientists have been discovering continually and relentlessly
in discovering new truths about nature and that the change follows from that.
But I want to argue and to emphasize, as I will repeatedly throughout this course,
that it is scientific ideas that are responsible for this change, not discoveries.
That is a matter of fact, discoveries are ideas incarnate, that it is the ideas that are the source,
that are the source of science's power, not discoveries.
Copernicus did not discover that the earth moved around the sun.
It was an idea of Copernicus, that the earth moved around the sun rather than that the sun moved around the earth.
Einstein did not discover the special or general theories of relativity.
Einstein had an idea that led to the special theory of relativity.
A different but related idea, as we will discuss in a later lecture, led to the general theory of relativity.
It was when these ideas panned out, so to speak, when these ideas were accepted because of their explanatory power
or confirmed by subsequent experimentation that scientists said that they had discovered new truths about nature,
that they had discovered new facts about the universe.
Darwin did not discover the theory of evolution, nor did Alfred Russel Wallace.
Both of them had a certain idea and then showed that facts that were known to everyone could be put in a more powerfully ordered
and explanatory form if you accepted the idea of evolution by natural selection.
And of course, we can continue along these lines, but I think you get the...
Even when you think that you have a case of a discovery, even when a scientist looks at the results of an experiment
or looks through an instrument and discovers, for example, the cell theory of life, which we will take up in a subsequent lecture,
what we're really seeing is that an idea has shaped the experiment to begin with.
The idea that led to the generalization based on a few observations that cells were the fundamental form of all living things.
So I will be recurring throughout this course to scientific ideas and the power of those ideas.
There will occasionally be references to discoveries, but I will try to show you that those discoveries, in fact,
are always associated with ideas that underlie them.
It's always, from a persuasive point of view, it's more powerful to talk about discoveries,
because they seem totally neutral than to emphasize that I had an idea that I'd like to convince you of the truth of.
It has a certain rhetorical force to argue that, as a matter of fact, I have nothing to do with this personally.
I just happened to be the one that was fortunate enough to discover the following truth about nature.
So what we have in the case of science is that since the early 19th century,
science has become a driver of change through the power of its ideas, but we need to be more precise still,
because, as a matter of fact, science overwhelmingly affects us through technology.
Yes, some scientific ideas, the idea that the Earth is just a tiny speck in a vast universe,
doubtless has some effect on our self-conception and our image of the world.
Darwin's theory of evolution is an idea that has so far essentially no practical consequences,
although perhaps some are looming in the area of genetic engineering and biotechnology,
but as an idea it has had a profound effect on our society, on our self-image, on what it means to be human.
So there is a sense in which scientific ideas affect us directly, but in a kind of abstract way.
Practically speaking, science is associated with changing the world, with changing how we live our lives through technology,
and in particular through technological innovation.
So the fact that beginning in the 19th century, science can be identified as a driver of social change
is also a fact about technology in the 19th century, and we will, in fact, be using throughout this course
a term, technoscience, which refers to coupling science in a systematic way to technological innovation,
transforming the process of innovation in ways that we will be discussing in a later lecture,
so that it is science acting in conjunction with technology that has generated the dominant driver of social change globally,
physically, and socially over the last approximately 200 years.
So the emergence of this technoscience, of this coupling of science and technology is another phenomenon,
is an idea that we're going to need to take a look at.
When I talk about science, I will always be referring to modern science.
I will be using the term to refer to modern science, which emerged in the 17th century
in what is often described as a scientific revolution, although I hope by the time we get to the 17th century
you'll see that it's really an evolution out of earlier ideas that were integrated in a creative and distinctive new way.
So that science in the 19th century is modern science beginning to come to the maturity that gave it the power to affect change,
to transform the world, to transform the human condition existentially through technology.
This 17th century modern science was uniquely a western phenomenon.
Although there are powerful inputs, especially from ancient Greece and Rome and from Islam and secondarily from China and India,
modern science only emerged in western culture.
I will refer as appropriate to other cultures, to borrowings from, to influences from,
and make some comparisons to China and India and Islam and the ancient world.
But as a matter of a historical fact, what we mean by science, the evolved product of the 17th century scientific revolution so-called
is a uniquely western cultural phenomenon.
And that's another piece that we need to take into account, to understand where did science come from, where did modern science come from,
and how does it have the power, what enables it to become, to be a driver of social change.
Neither of these should be taken for granted.
So let's for the moment see where we've, where we've gotten to.
Science is referred, the word science, which generically means knowledge in Latin,
but for us it means a very particular way of approaching the study of nature,
a very particular approach to the study of nature, and what that particular approach is,
is the key to science's power, to what it means to be modern science,
is a uniquely western cultural phenomenon.
Scientific ideas act on society primarily through technology,
but secondarily they affect our consciousness, they change our sense of who we are,
of what the world is, and they also, through technology,
give us some idea of what the scope of our possible action on the world is,
that it gives us a sense of what we are capable of doing.
Unfortunately it doesn't give us any guidance in what we should do,
but it certainly gives us a sense of we can now do this, or we can now do that,
once you've got steam power, once you've got electrical power,
once you've got the chemical science behind you
and you can invent synthetic materials, for example.
And this whole process of becoming a driver of change is something that emerged in the 19th century,
even though the idea of science is older than technology is much older,
it is in the 19th century that all these pieces, so to speak, came together in a way
that caused, for the first time in human history,
science and technology together to become the force that has dominated the human condition, I think,
over the last two centuries, the single most important factor driving change in the human world
and in the physical world since the early 1800s.
In the lectures that follow, I will be discussing a selection of scientific ideas,
those that seem to me to have most profoundly affected us,
either by changing the world in which we live,
changing the circumstances of our daily lives,
or by significantly affecting our self-understanding.
With respect to each of these ideas,
I want us to explore the questions, where did these ideas come from?
How did they develop and how have they affected us?
I want to begin with the greatest scientific idea of all, in my opinion,
and that is the idea itself of science.
The idea of science is not natural, it was not a discovery,
it was a deliberate intellectual invention.
That it was invented, the form that that idea took,
and the fact that that idea has been so influential over the past 400 years,
are very revealing facts about Western culture that we will repeatedly refer to and attempt to understand.
My methodology in the first third of the course is a kind of reverse engineering of the idea of science.
We want to take the idea of science apart, identify its critical features,
and about each of these features say, where did this piece come from,
and where did this piece come from, that it happened to be available
in order for the idea of science to achieve concreteness.
We will begin, therefore, with the invention of writing,
which is the incarnation of a very powerful idea,
and we can easily recognize that without writing, without text,
the science of practice, as we understand science, is inconceivable.
So we will trace the evolution of the invention of writing
and the idea contained within it from its origins in Sumerian civilization
to its adoption by the ancient Greeks, approximately the 9th century BCE,
and the way that writing and texts flourished in ancient Greece,
especially at the hands of a group of Greek philosophers who invented a family of related ideas.
The idea of knowledge, which we will see is also not at all natural,
that it was defined by them in a very specific way that became central to modern science.
The idea of knowledge, the idea of knowledge of nature,
the idea that knowledge of nature should be based on mathematics,
together with experiment and observation,
and even more startling, at the time, in that context of antiquity,
the initial formulation of the idea of techno-science,
that technology would be even more powerful if it were based on knowledge
than if it were based on know-how.
Lectures 7 through 12 will discuss the transmission of these seminal ideas,
of these foundational ideas that make the idea of science real and possible for modernity to build on.
The transmission of these ideas to the founders of modern science in the 17th century
by way of the medieval university, the invention of the university,
because, again, common-sensically, we see how important the university was then to the transmission
of the ideas of Greek and Roman antiquity to the founders of modern science,
but also because the university as a place, as an institution,
is central to the practice of science as we understand it.
The university itself is embedded within a social context
in which secular and natural values emerge within the prevailing religious tradition,
and as we will see as we move from the invention of the university into the Renaissance,
that we will be talking about how the idea of progress became coupled to technological innovation
and to the idea of science through looking at the idea of progress itself
and the application of mathematics to practical purposes in the Renaissance period,
and the impact of printing on Western society, the response of Western society to print technology.
The climactic lecture of this first third of the course will be Copernicus's sort of reinvention
of what the universe is, and the acceptance of Copernicus's theory in the 17th century
brings us across the threshold to the origins of modern science.
Lectures 13 to 26 will explore the great ideas of modern science
in the period 1600 to 1900 approximately, and I've organized these into two clusters.
One's centered on what I will call an atomistic style of thinking,
the atomic theory of matter, the theories of the cell, germs and genes,
and a process style of reasoning associated with the ideas of energy, fields, relationships,
evolution and statistical laws of nature and of society.
Lectures 27 to 36 begin with the emergence of a mature techno-science
as a driver of social change as it continues to be to this very day,
and then we will look at the great ideas of 20th century science,
the quantum theory, the relativity theory, the concept of the expanding universe,
the computer, the idea of information, molecular biology,
and what is sometimes called chaos theory, but really systems theory
and the idea of self-organization of natural phenomena,
which is in a certain sense the completion of the idea of evolution
first foreshadowed by Darwin and Wallace.
In the final lecture, I want to look at several ideas
that are likely to be perceived as great in the 21st century.
I will be highlighting nanotechnology as an instance of techno-science,
neuroscience and the scientific theory of consciousness and string theory,
the attempt to unify all of the forces in nature into a single theory in physics.
Broadly speaking, the lectures will be chronological.
Let us say I am going to start with the invention of writing,
which in a certain sense defines the onset of history,
although archaeology has become so sophisticated
that what used to be called prehistoric is really part of history as well,
and we know quite a bit about the preliterate societies and cultures,
and we are learning more and more all the time.
It is going to be broadly chronological,
but it will not be a history of these ideas in any systematic sense of the term history.
My goal is to identify key ideas and to discuss them
in a way that I hope will be thought-provoking in terms of raising questions
of where they came from, how they came to be formulated,
how they came to be adopted, how many of them were opposed.
Ideas that we take for granted that they are obviously true,
but yet were at the time opposed by prominent scientists,
not by religious figures,
but by the most eminent scientists often opposed new ideas in science.
I see each lecture as self-contained,
but together forming a mosaic image.
If we look at the invention of writing,
we look at the invention of the Greek,
the Greek invention of the idea of deductive inference,
the whole concept of logic as a science of reasoning,
regardless of what you happen to be reasoning about.
So each lecture will have a certain self-contained character,
but as the pieces fit together, as the lectures unfold,
I think they form a mosaic image that there are relationships among these ideas.
They fit together in a very distinctive way
that I hope will give a metaphorical image at the end of,
ah, that's why science is powerful.
That's where these ideas come from.
This is the context in which they are embedded
that enables them to be drivers of scientific, of social change.
Now, in particular, the idea of, I want to focus now on the,
not on writing, we're going to take that up first
because it came first in the chronological order,
but I want to call attention to the idea of knowledge
and what it was not, which is a little backwards,
but let me see if I can clarify what I mean here.
One problem that we have in dealing with the past,
not the stories that historians tell us
because they already reflect this problem,
but in attempting to discuss the past,
we necessarily have to talk about it or write about it in a serial way.
Better say, in a linear way.
We can only say one thing at a time
and we can only write one string of words at a time,
but things in the past happened, many of them happened contemporaneously
and in a complex order of mutual influence.
So it's really difficult to say,
let's talk only about writing first
because it came before the Greek definition of knowledge
that science subsequently adopted,
but we need to recognize that before writing was invented,
there was lots of knowledge.
There was lots of what people other than the Greek philosophers,
especially Plato and Aristotle,
whose idea of knowledge subsequently triumphed
and why that happened is a really powerful question,
but they had a very, to common sense,
a very bizarre idea of knowledge
that you would have thought would not have caught on.
Knowledge in the way that common sense suggested should be defined,
practical knowledge, know-how,
had accumulated for millennia
before the philosophical idea of knowledge,
which is the one that science picked up,
was formulated from somewhere around 10,000 BCE, 9,000 BCE,
until the invention of writing in the fourth millennium
in Sumer, in the southeastern sector of the fertile crescent.
Today, I guess that would be in southeastern Iraq and southern Iran,
in that region, somewhere around 3,500 BCE,
so about 5,500 years ago.
So for at least 4,000 to 5,000 years before writing was invented,
human beings acquired, accumulated,
and I want to specifically use that term,
they accumulated very sophisticated and very powerful know-how,
agricultural technologies, ceramics technologies,
textile technologies, metalworking technologies,
construction technologies, social organization technologies,
government, religion, trade, commerce.
We have a really growing but already quite powerful picture
from surviving artifacts of how sophisticated know-how was
between about 10,000 BCE and the onset of the historical record.
Without writing know-how accumulated,
that means it was disseminated, it was transmitted,
it was not each generation having to reinvent the wheel, so to speak.
On the contrary, we now know that when we talk casually about,
well, human beings cultivated grains and domesticated animals,
well, in the case of grains somewhere around 10,000 to 9,000 BCE in the Middle East,
there is record of cultivated grains
and in the Americas, 4,000 to 5,000 BCE of the cultivation of maize.
It takes, according to paleobotanists,
people who study these things and contemporary geneticists and biologists,
it would take centuries at least and more likely over a thousand years
to transform the wild ancestors of maize, what we Americans call corn,
of maize and wheat and rice into the varieties that were domesticated.
It wasn't automatically, oh, well, let's grow rice.
Wild rice, wild grain and wild cereals, the grains fall off naturally
because from a Darwinian point of view, from an evolutionary point of view,
it's an advantage for reproduction for the grains to blow off
and be distributed and so they form the next year's crop.
But from our point of view, as human farmers,
we want the grains to stay on the stalks and to be relatively easy to take off by us
but difficult to get blown off by nature.
So transforming wild cereals and wild fruits
into the kind of grains and fruits that we want, so to speak, took centuries at least.
That means it was done systematically,
that that kind of know-how, which some people might want to call knowledge,
that that kind of know-how was handed down from generation to generation.
Very interesting fact about know-how.
Know-how is embodied in processes, in things and in processes.
It can be embodied in, if you're making copper out of copper ores,
you're making a copper object out of copper ores,
then the knowledge of doing that is embodied in the process
and it's embodied in the thing that you wind up with.
So you can see whether somebody knows how to make a bronze pot or not,
or a bronze weapon or not, and you can see if they know how to do it well or not,
and you can even see that some people do this quite creatively.
They invent new processes and new kinds of applications,
so that know-how is really quite sophisticated
and has many of the same characteristics that knowledge itself has,
the kind of knowledge, and now we have to sort of jump ahead
and you know what I mean by scientific knowledge, it's theoretical.
It's abstract.
One of the reasons why you need writing is because scientific knowledge is abstracted,
it can't be embodied in things and processes.
It is captured in texts which are themselves vessels for ideas,
but we'll get on to that in the next lecture.
So when we think about the, we should be awestruck
by the accumulated know-how of the prehistoric world,
the preliterate world.
Let me, I think that's more accurate.
I referred to a couple of cases of agricultural technology
in the way of the cultivation of cereals, of maize, wild corn bears,
the ancestor of wild corn bears, of corn bears,
no resemblance to the grain that was cultivated in the Andes.
It was actually beginning in Mexico and then was descended down along the Andes to the Incas.
But fruits as well.
For example, recently archaeologists discovered the remains of figs that were cultivated
and that, that too, that particular variety of figs,
these were found in the Jordan River Valley, were very different and required centuries,
many, many generations to selectively breed that particular kind of fig
from the wild figs that grew in the area.
Textile technology is even older than 10,000 BCE.
Domestication of animals is not as simple as it sounds either.
Wild sheep have hairy coats.
The emergence of sheep with woolly coats that you can make sweaters from
is something that required centuries of breeding and emerged somewhere around 4,000 BCE.
So hundreds of years before there was writing, people had successfully domesticated goats and sheep
and horses and cows and transformed them in the process.
They didn't just say, OK, build a fence around these animals
and they actually transformed those animals in a systematic way.
So there is experimentation going on here.
There is a kind of, there is learning going on here.
There is a transmission of learning going on here.
I've only barely touched on metalworking technology.
7,000 BCE, at least, copper was being worked.
And within several thousand years, bronze was being made,
meaning that they had some understanding of mixing tin and copper.
Deep mines for copper were already extant in the 4th millennium BCE.
Again, before the invention of writing, digging a deep mine is not such an easy thing, obviously.
Miners understand how complex that process is.
So you've got monumental constructions by 4,000 to 5,000 BCE.
We're finding the remains of monumental buildings and fortresses and gates
where there is trade going on as early at least as 6,000 BCE.
Not in the fertile crescent, which seems to have emerged a little more slowly than that,
but north of the fertile crescent in northern Syria, in northern Iraq and in eastern Turkey,
large-scale settlements with substantial trade over long distance.
Because we find, for example, obsidian blades that came from Turkey
in the remains of these cities in northern Syria,
so that people were living in ways that suggested that they needed to have a government,
that there was organized social life.
That's a kind of know-how as well that needs not to be taken for granted,
that thousands of people can live in a relatively small area and live well together.
How well did they live?
Well, let me close by referring to the observations of Cortez and his party
when they came to Aztec, Mexico, when they saw Tenochtitlan for the first time.
A city with 200,000 inhabitants that they said was more prosperous, more beautiful,
more orderly than any city in Spain.
It was certainly many times larger than the largest city in Spain at the time.
They pointed out and described that the central market in Tenochtitlan
was daily visited by about 60,000 people who bought and sold in the great market.
This was a city of outstanding accomplishment from a technological point of view.
A modern person seeing Tenochtitlan in its prime would be amazed at how beautiful
and sophisticated it was without writing and without the Greek idea of knowledge.
This notion of know-how, being a form of knowledge that has power and sophistication
and many of the features we associate with scientific knowledge,
and yet being set aside, as we will see in the third lecture when we talk about the idea of knowledge
that became part of science, is a very interesting phenomenon.
And it lives on in the distinction that we make between science and engineering,
between understanding and doing.
Thank you.
