Now, we're ready for the idea of science, which probably almost anybody you stopped
and asked, what is science, or what does science mean, would say, oh, it's knowledge of nature.
But now, I hope, we begin to appreciate that when we say that science for us means knowledge
of nature, that it means knowledge of nature where knowledge is defined in a very particular
way.
As we saw in the last lecture, knowledge is defined to be universal, necessary, and certain,
that it is a timeless truth, that the goal of science is to discover timeless truths
about reality, and for the purpose of doing that, you have to have the right ideas, including
you have to have the right idea of what knowledge is, because if you're working with an idea
of knowledge that is key to know how, then you cannot have what we will respect as knowledge
of nature, because it will be merely probable, it will be particular, it will be context-dependent,
and it will change over time.
So the idea of science now begins to emerge as the idea that it is possible to have knowledge
of natural phenomena, that is an additional idea to the idea of knowledge.
Clearly the Greeks had a case that there was such a thing as mathematical knowledge, because
the body of geometric and mathematical knowledge that the Greeks had accumulated between roughly
speaking 500 and 300 BCE was evidence that you could have a body of universal, necessary,
and certain truths that were, on the face of it, timeless, and that does raise the question
of what is the status of these mathematical objects?
Where do they exist?
Do they exist independently of the mind, or do they exist only in the mind?
And that raises a further question, which the Greeks, and then later the medieval philosophers
in the West and modern science will have to confront, if mathematical objects exist independently
of the human mind, and if they are universal, necessary, and certain, and therefore cannot
be learned from experience, how do we know mathematical truth?
If on the other hand, mathematical objects exist only in the human mind, and they are
kind of a complicated intellectual game, like chess, analogous to chess.
No, no, every move in chess is a deductive consequence of the rules of chess, but we
do not believe that there is any correspondence between the game of chess and the external
world.
There may be some obsessive chess enthusiasts who do believe that, but we recognize that
it's a game.
Is mathematics merely a game where we make up definitions like in Euclid's geometry
of a point, a line, a plane, and a solid, and we make up certain definitions about parallelism,
and we make certain postulates about parallelism, and then we deduce things from them.
It's a kind of a game.
But then why does mathematics work?
If chess doesn't work, nobody guides their life on the basis of chess moves by inferring
moves in chess and saying, well, now I know who I should marry, what job I should accept,
where I should move, so mathematics works, what Eugene Wigner called the unreasonable
effectiveness of mathematics is certainly puzzling.
So that becomes an issue that we're going to explore a little bit in this lecture and
much more in the next lecture when the mathematical basis for knowledge of nature becomes the
subject.
But for now, we see how the idea of knowledge that we discussed in the last lecture can become
the basis for claiming that knowledge of nature is possible.
This claim was specifically defended and developed and transmitted subsequently into Western
culture by Aristotle.
I think no one would deny that into the Renaissance, Aristotle was the dominant philosophical voice
in the Western cultural and intellectual tradition, also by the way in the Islamic intellectual
tradition.
Aristotle was the master of them that know.
His medieval commentator simply called him the philosopher.
I mentioned that Aristotle had codified in his logic books, which became textbooks through
the medieval university subsequently right into the 19th century until symbolic logic
was invented.
Aristotle's logic works were the standard text that everybody had to study.
It was required for graduation.
You could not evade them by taking electives around them.
Aristotle, in addition to being the codifier of Greek theorizing about reasoning, Aristotle
was also himself a very accomplished scientist, so to speak, although the term scientist was
only invented in the 19th century.
He would have called himself a philosopher of nature.
In pursuit of knowledge of nature, Aristotle wrote on a very wide range of natural subjects.
For example, on physics, on biology, on psychology, on the weather, on astronomy.
Aristotle's works were, so to speak, the baseline for what constituted knowledge of
nature and the pursuit of knowledge of nature right into the Renaissance.
It was Aristotle the scientist against whom the founders of modern science reacted.
Modern science, to a considerable degree, constitutes a reaction against Aristotelian
science, against Aristotelian knowledge of nature.
Aristotle's knowledge of nature, Aristotle's claims to knowledge of nature were based on
a metaphysics and a theory of how the mind can have knowledge.
From what we now understand knowledge to mean, the question has to be raised.
How can a human being have knowledge of nature?
How can they know the truth of universal premises that cannot be induced, that cannot be inductively
inferred reliably from experience?
Because those inductive inferences only are probable, and for my deductive arguments,
I need certainty.
I need to know that the premises are true.
Aristotle's metaphysics, insofar as it's relevant to us here, is that nature is all
that there is, that the only reality is nature.
This is a very important step, and it's an important step away from his teacher Plato,
because Plato seemed to teach, or Plato wrote as if he believed that form and matter were
the two ingredients, so to speak, of reality, that everything in nature was composed of form
and matter, but that the form could exist separately from the material object, and in fact did
in some utopia, in some no place, some place that was not in physical space, that these
forms existed before nature existed, and would continue to exist if nature ceased to exist.
So what gave nature its actuality was that matter, which for Plato was intrinsically amorphous,
was shaped, so to speak, from the outside by ideal forms.
There's an ideal form of the horse, of the rose, that the creator, so to speak, imposes
on a recalcitrant amorphous matter, and so we get individual horses and dogs and so on,
which do not have a totally rational character, and are not examples of the universal, because
the universal is pure, whereas the matter prevents the form from ever achieving the purity that
the form has.
Notice that for Plato, this means that knowledge is always, that reality is accessible only
to the mind.
Our eyes, our ears, our other senses respond to material objects, which are imperfect realizations
of ideal forms.
It is only the mind that is capable of responding, of perceiving, in quotation marks, of perceiving
the ideal forms in their ideality, which was why Plato required mathematical education
for people who wanted to study philosophy with him, not because he thought mathematics
was by itself all that important for achieving wisdom, but because if you could not handle
the abstraction of mathematical knowledge, the abstract, if you could not grasp the mathematical
objects and their properties and reason about them, then there's no way that you're going
to be able to deal with the world of forms which is beyond those of mathematics.
So there is this legend that above the door of his academies is no one who is ignorant
of mathematics enter here, but the point is that mathematical reasoning, as we saw in
the last lecture, is the key.
If you can't handle that kind of formal and abstract reasoning, then you can't do philosophy.
Form and matter are separate for Plato, just as the soul and the body are separable, as
Socrates tells us over and over again, and it's because the soul and the body are separable
that the soul is capable of grasping these ideal forms.
Aristotle's decisive break with this is nonsense.
There is only one reality, and it is nature.
Nature is a closed and self-contained system.
All natural phenomena are to be explained within the framework of nature, a principle
that will become a founding principle of modern science and articulated in the 12th century.
Nature is a closed system.
Form and matter are indeed the ultimate constituents of reality, but form and matter cannot exist
separately from one another.
This is the fundamental principle of Aristotle's metaphysics.
We're not going to go into it in any further detail here, but you can grasp this that for
Aristotle, every thing in nature is a combination of form and matter, but the form and the matter
cannot be separated really.
Matter could not exist without being formed.
Unformed matter does not exist and cannot exist.
Forms that are separated from matter cannot exist.
This business that forms are too pure and too beautiful to exist within matter, which
is something which maybe is parody a bit of what Plato believed, but it's pretty down
close.
Form and matter only come together.
And in order to understand nature, we need to understand the relationship between form
and matter in the particular case of each individual object and what the relationship
between the form and the matter is in those two particular cases.
So this is sort of the metaphysical background of Aristotle's notion of why we can have
knowledge of nature.
Notice based on what I've said, according to Plato, you cannot have knowledge of nature.
You may want to make of Plato a very bold and radical intellectual, and he was, but
he did not believe that knowledge of nature was possible.
Knowledge of nature was not possible because for Plato, nature was constantly changing
because of the material dimension of reality, of actuality, of nature.
The matter made it the case that nature was continually changing, and knowledge is changeless.
So you cannot have knowledge of the changing.
The only knowledge that is possible is knowledge whose object is the ideal forms.
Aristotle says, no, you can have knowledge of nature, but how can that be if, in fact,
nature is always changing?
Aristotle agrees with that, yes, nature is always changing, however, Aristotle says,
the mind is capable of abstracting universal forms from particular experience.
Aristotle attributed, we can say he discovered, and we can't say he identified because we
believe he was wrong, but for thousands of years it was accepted that Aristotle had,
Aristotle postulate that there is a faculty in the mind, which he called the active intellect,
sometimes called the agent intellect, whose specific task, just as there's a faculty of
the mind that's called memory, for example.
So there is a faculty of the mind that responds to the universal in particulars.
Some people are better at this than others.
So you see a dog, one dog, you've never seen a dog before, and a sufficiently acute thinker
will recognize that this creature is an exemplar, or is an example of a type.
And they'll see another creature and say, that's another dog, no, that's not a dog,
that one is though, and that one is, and that one is.
Not only is the universal dog, which is kind of a low level universal, perceptible by the
active intellect in a particular experience, but even higher level universals, such as
mammal, such as vertebrate, that when we use such terms, we are not inventing categories
according to Aristotle, we are actually perceiving in the mind's eye, or with the mind's eye,
which is the active intellect, we are perceiving universals in natural objects.
Now, if we can abstract universals from particular experience, then we have bridged induction
and deduction.
If we can abstract, now those universals don't exist, as Plato said they did.
For Aristotle, they do not exist separate from the particular object, they only exist
in the particular object, but the mind is capable of abstracting them from, forming
inferences about natural phenomena based on the universals that has abstracted, forming
deductive arguments, which is the only basis of knowledge, so knowledge of nature proceeds
in this way.
Aristotle's view on this matter is actually very good illustration of another phenomenon
that is relevant to what we are doing, but not directly in line specifically with the
idea of science, and that is that intellectual history generally is often presented in a
very logical and reasonable way, whereas as a matter of fact, it's always inaffirmant.
There are all kinds of missteps that people take, there are backtracking, there are various
kinds of influences that flow and then stop and people selectively adopt ideas from predecessors.
So for example, I said that Plato argued that form and matter could exist separately, or
at least this is the mainstream interpretation of Plato that he had a theory that forms existed
separately from matter, forms were the object of knowledge, we could not have knowledge of
anything that was material.
Plato had studied and was a master of Pythagorean teaching, and Pythagoras' teaching, as we'll
see in the next lecture in some detail, was that mathematical form was within natural
objects, that every material object was what it was because there was a specific mathematical
form that was indwelling in that object, like a dog had a specific mathematical form, a
maple tree had a specific form, an acorn, a frog, each everything in nature is what
it is because the matter is organized in accordance with a particular mathematical form.
Now we may, this actually should, this is very prescient from our point of view, sounds
a lot like modern mathematical physics in a curious way and we'll be pursuing that connection
too in the future, but the important thing is that for Pythagoras, who was responsible
and his subsequent school responsible for the development of mathematics as a form of
knowledge that we've been describing, with the idea of knowledge embedded in this notion
of mathematical reasoning, Pythagoras believed that mathematical forms existed within the
natural objects.
Plato absorbed certain things from the Pythagorean tradition, but dismissed the idea that forms
of any kind, including mathematical forms, could actually be in material objects, they
only had to be from the outside, they shaped it, but they could not really be in that because
the material world was not worthy, could not be a place where the perfect forms existed.
Aristotle, who of course, who spent 20 years studying with Plato, Aristotle followed,
one could say, adopted the Pythagorean teaching that the universals were in material objects
but he rejected the mathematics part because Aristotle believed that mathematics was not
an essential component of explanation of natural phenomena.
He made exceptions for three types of phenomena where abstract mathematics did describe and
explain concrete physical phenomena, these were optics, music and astronomy.
We will talk more about these in the next lecture as well, but in optics he thoroughly
accepted that the Greeks had the law of angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection
from a plain mirror, that that was a mathematically precise law, he accepted in music the Pythagorean
school's analysis of musical tonalities in terms of precise mathematical relationships
and of course that accepted again the Pythagorean tradition that the planets moved around the
sun in circular orbits with uniform motion, so they had a mathematically precise, the
motion of the planets had a mathematically precise character to it, so in those areas
Aristotle agreed that mathematics is directly relevant to physics, to nature, but in all
other areas it's only incidental, yes you can count, you can weigh, those may be useful
facts but they don't touch on the explanation of natural phenomena, mathematics does not
touch on the explanation, so the relationship among the Pythagoreans, Plato and Aristotle
is kind of confusing and it doesn't look as though any one of them is being particularly
consistent, well if mathematics is not part of the essence of natural phenomena what is
the basis for Aristotle's science for his knowledge of nature, so Aristotle developed
a theory of four causes, in the posterior analytics for example, these four causes are
better developed in the texts called the physics and in Greek philosophy the word physics
means nature because the word physics means nature, so not what we mean by physics, when
Aristotle wrote about physics he felt quite comfortable including in that book anything
that had to do with nature, it was not just what we call physics as opposed to chemistry,
biology, geology etc, so for Aristotle physics requires for its explanation an account of
natural phenomena that fits into a certain pattern, the four causes as they came to be
called although that's a Latin version of the Greek term that Aristotle used, ita, and
the posterior analytics, Aristotle says that we can claim to have scientific knowledge,
again it's an anachronistic term, he would have said knowledge of nature, we can have
to philosophical knowledge of nature as he and Plato define knowledge, when we can say
that x is the cause of y, x is the cause of y, y is that it must be the cause of y,
that it is the cause, that it must be the cause and that it explains why the phenomenon
you're trying to explain exists, so that is the framework of what constitutes scientific
knowledge, those are the criteria of scientific knowledge for Aristotle and then he then unfolds
so he clicks on the word cause and down drops a window and that window has four causes that
need to be included in any account of a natural phenomenon that can be considered explanatory,
notice there was not the same emphasis that we have in modern science on prediction and
control for Aristotle as for Plato, knowledge is a completely abstract and theoretical thing,
the idea that knowledge is validated by using it is completely foreign to this way of thinking,
and on the contrary Aristotle says in numerous texts especially in the Nicomachean Ethics
book 6 and 7 but also in the rhetoric that the ideal for a philosopher is theoretical
wisdom which does not translate into practical wisdom, practical wisdom is a separate faculty,
it is possible for someone to be theoretically wise and practically foolish, it is possible
for someone to be practically wise and theoretically to be an ignoramus, there are two separate
things, theoretical wisdom does not translate into action, as a result he says in the rhetoric
quite explicitly, action is really, action in the world, behaving in the real world
daily, making all the decisions and choices that we do in the course of the day that this
behavior is not rational because it cannot be deduced, anyway let's take a look at the
four causes because this is a very famous theory of Aristotle and it becomes the background
for modern science and you can see how in the 17th century this was replaced by a whole
new conception of what constitutes a scientific explanation but for approximately 1800 years
this was it, first there is you must account for the material aspect of the thing, you
must talk about the matter of which something is made, the matter of the tadpole, the matter
of the acorn, the matter of the dog, the puppy, if we are trying to understand for example
embryological development, Aristotle did a wonderful series of experiments on chick
embryos, studying them as every day of their gestation and if we want to understand how
from the fertilized egg we get a chicken, so you have got to account for the transformations
of the matter of which the embryo is constructed.
The second is you have to identify the form, you have to identify the form that causes the
chick embryo to become a chick embryo and not a sheep embryo, so we today would respond
to this in terms of DNA let's say and the way that the DNA molecule guides cell metabolic
processes but for Aristotle there is a form that is resident within every material object
and we must account for that form and how that form operates that's the third cause,
the efficient cause, what is the actual process by which, what are the stages of the process
by which the fertilized egg becomes an embryo and becomes a neonate and the fourth cause
the one that actually turned out to be the longest live and the most controversial in
elimination is the final cause, you have not really explained any natural phenomenon until
you can identify that for the sake of which that phenomenon took place, if you want to
understand why human beings have incisors so one of the reasons is what the final cause
is so they can chew meat, so in order for them to be able to chew meat they have incisors
now you may recognize already that Darwin's theory of evolution is a total rejection of
the usability of final causes in a scientific account of nature, the theory of evolution
would say that we eat meat because we developed incisors so these four causes from Aristotle
in the late 4th century BCE until the Renaissance right into the Renaissance and the dawn of
modern science, an analysis of the natural phenomenon in terms of these four causes
clearly qualitative, there's no focus here on mathematics whatsoever, certainly a focus
on experimentation, this is what constitutes a scientific explanation and as I said before
there is no focus on prediction and control and it is quite theoretical, it is quite
aimed at giving what you might call a theoretical, a theory based explanation, it doesn't have
to be practical in order to be validated in order for someone to say so what can you
do with it, now that I know it what has happened, well from Aristotle's point of view as he
says at the end of the 10th book of the Nicomachean Ethics, now you are a better person, now you
are using the most excellent part of the human being, namely that part of the mind that is
capable of engaging in deductive reasoning in order to achieve knowledge, in this case
knowledge of nature which complements philosophical knowledge, now Aristotle in spite of, am I
saying before that he was the dominant authority and influence for the next 1800 years on western
philosophy and western philosophy of nature, the challenged Aristotle came in the Renaissance
when Plato's writings which were not available in Latin until the Renaissance, when Plato's
writings and Pythagorean mathematics began to be studied again as we will see in a subsequent
lecture, the challenge came in part from those thinkers in the Renaissance that wanted to
mathematicalize natural phenomena, so in spite of saying that Aristotle was such a powerful
influence and he was, he was only one of a startling spectrum of Greek thinkers, creative
Greek thinkers about nature whose formulated ideas that were transmitted through the Middle
Ages to the Renaissance to the founders of modern science and that influenced their thinking,
in the case of Aristotle unquestionably one of the most powerful influences was simply
his defense of the view that nature is all the reality that there was and that nature
was a closed system, but the Greek thinkers before him formulated the idea that the universe
was a cosmos that means a well ordered whole, it wasn't just a jumble of things thrown
together that the universe had an order to it and then from a philosophical and what
we would call a scientific point of view, the goal is what is the order, what are the
principles of order, what are the laws that make the universe orderly rather than a hodgepodge
of phenomena, so the concept of the universe as an ordered whole crying out for explanation,
two themes that we are going to see especially pronounced in the 19th and 20th centuries,
it turns out again only through reverse engineering I think would we become sensitized to this
that in antiquity, a hundred and some years I mentioned Parmenides, a founding figure
who was an old, very old man when Socrates was a very young man and Socrates was executed
in 399 BCE, so Parmenides argued for what I am going to be calling in later lectures
a substance metaphysics view of reality, that is to say interpreting that the ultimate
reality is a thing or things, in the case of Parmenides it seems to be a thing that
there is a single timeless eternal thing that is the ultimate reality and that everything
that we experience is really secondary to the characteristics of this thing, any attempt
to explain natural phenomena in terms of things and their properties I am going to be calling
Parmenidean, it is a substance view of reality, Parmenides was criticized, an alternative
was offered by the Greek philosopher Heraclitus who argued that no, no, no, no, no, the ultimate
reality is change, change cannot be reduced to timeless things with fixed properties,
we are familiar with those things as atoms, instead there are laws of change that are
timeless, so this is what I will call a process metaphysics and it was an active sort of
intellectual battle in ancient Greece in the 5th and 4th centuries BCE over these two different
approaches to knowledge of nature, the Parmenidean approach based on substances, eternal substances
with fixed properties when Newton in 1687, I am sorry, when Newton in his optics published
just at the dawn of the 18th century says that in the beginning God created atoms as
hard spheres that cannot be destroyed or changed in any way by anybody except God, he is reverting
back to this Parmenidean idea that the ultimate reality is timeless and has fixed properties
and the contrasting view of Heraclitus is that we don't have to be afraid of change,
we should accept change as fundamental and recognize that it is the laws of change, that
is what science should be looking for, not ultimate things but ultimate patterns, laws
of change and we will see how this gets echoed in the 19th and 20th century right up to string
theory strangely enough, there was a very strong tradition of materialistic nature
philosophy in the century before Plato and Aristotle out of which atomism emerged and
we will be talking some more about that when we talk about 19th century atomism but in
particular there are two more final points, one is Plato claimed and Aristotle agreed
that the true philosopher using their mind is able to carve nature at its joints that
is to identify real universal principles that exist out there that we don't just make up
and the second point I want to close with is Pythagoras' view that mathematics is the
ultimate basis of physics, we are going to be exploring that in the next lecture and
its consequences for modern science.
