The subject of this lecture is the reconceptualization of the universe that took place in the 16th
and 17th centuries with Copernicus' theory of a moving earth and its verification, if
we can use that term by Isaac Newton in 1687 in his Mathematical Principles of Natural
Philosophy which contained his universal theory of gravity from which it is a logical consequence
that the planets move in elliptical orbits around the sun.
Now this is in a sense finally a solidly scientific idea and begins, in a certain sense, it begins
to bring us within the framework of modern science, although Copernicus' theory, as
it stood in 1543 when he published it in a full book length version well developed, really
is not a very modern scientific theory and I hope that we'll get to see that as well.
But let's understand what the universe was that the Renaissance inherited, what conception
of the universe there was at the time that Copernicus did his astronomical theorizing.
There were really two notions of the universe that were extant.
There was a kind of religious metaphysical view of the universe which is beautifully described
by Dante in his Divine Comedy.
The Divine Comedy is composed of three books, Dante's Descent into Hell, guided by the Roman
poet and then his Ascent from the very depths of Hell to Purgatory first at which the Roman
poet drops off and then his Ascent to Heaven which is guided by the woman that he adored
platonically, Beatrice, who and as he ascends to Heaven he ascends through the concentric
spheres of the planets and the fixed stars that were giving us a brilliant and quite
accurate poetic account of this sort of religious metaphysical conception of the Earth as at
the center of the universe with God's Heaven on the periphery, God beyond that Heaven and
as we ascend we go to the moon, to the sun, to Mercury, to Venus, to Mars, to Jupiter,
Saturn, the only planets known at that time, to the sphere of the fixed stars and then
to the Empyrean, to sort of the inner surface of God's presence where Dante has this vision
of the mystical rose of all of the saved souls that are singing praises to God, God's presence
being signified at the very end of the poem by an incredibly bright spark of light, a
minute opening through which this incredible effulgence of light takes place and then Dante
wakes up back in the world. This is, I believe, a brilliant poetically and also astronomically,
Dante knew his astronomy, depiction of the world as the center of the Earth as the center
of the universe created by God and in which the Earth is the location of a cosmic drama.
It is the drama of human beings living out their existence as souls contained within
bodies and having to identify their real being with their souls, in which case they ascend
to heaven or identifying with materiality with their bodies, in which case they get dragged
down into hell. And in the first book, the Inferno, the descent into hell is the mirror
image of the ascent into heaven, the concentric spheres of hell through which Dante descends
in which the sinners become increasingly sinful until at the very center of the Earth, which
is also the center of hell. You have the absolute frozen waste in which the worst sinners and
the devil are contained. So this is one view of the universe that was extant in the Renaissance
and it captured a kind of a, let's call it a simplistic cosmology that existed from the
Pythagoreans on, which was simply that the Earth is the center of the universe and the
planets and the stars move around the Earth in concentric spheres. Now, there was also
a conception of the universe, which was astronomical, namely Ptolemy's theory, which was a mathematical
theory that described how, that allowed you to say that behind the appearance of the Earth
being the center of the universe and the planets and the stars moving around the Earth at the
Sun, the planets and the stars moving around the Earth at uniform speeds in circular orbits,
what, how you can possibly have that appearance of what we see given what the, let's call
it the mathematical reality behind the appearances, because the appearances when looked at closely
don't support the idea of uniform motion in circular orbits. So we need to understand
how can that happen and give the appearances, even though really what's happening is that
the planets and the stars move at a uniform speed in circular orbits. This is the mantra
of astronomy for 2,000 years. Uniform speeds, circular orbits, doesn't look that way, how
can we account for it? Meanwhile, religiously, metaphysically, we think that all that matters
is the Earth at the center, and that's because we're special. We are the products of the
Creator God, and for some reason or other, God has created us in order to live out this
drama of choosing spirit over flesh. From a mathematical, from an astronomical point
of view, what's important is giving, trying to understand how those appearances can be
generated given that the ultimate reality is this mathematically inspired one that I
attribute it to the Pythagoreans of the circular orbits at uniform speeds. Ptolemy did that,
but as he himself points out, his model is mathematical. It is not physical. His model,
which is incredibly complicated and which uses epicycles in various complicated patterns
in order to generate the actual appearances of the planets moving across the night sky,
epicycles is a little circle whose center moves on the circumference of a larger circle,
and if you play around with the number of epicycles and the relative sizes of the epicycle
as a small circle and the big circle, then you can actually get a pretty accurate, empirically
accurate model of how the planets move across the sky, including how the planet continues
to move in one direction, but some planets look like they're moving backwards at certain
times, so-called retrograde motion of the outer planets, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
So Ptolemy's model was a mathematical model. Ptolemy never claimed that it was physically
real, and in fact, it's not possible for it to be physically real. It's mathematical.
It's ideal. The mind can appreciate it, but it has nothing to do with matter. So in the
16th century, when Copernicus was doing his astronomizing, then this was the inherited
universe, relatively compact, centered on the Earth. The orderliness of the universe is
a mathematical order. Physically, it doesn't look as orderly as it is. The order is mathematical,
and it is keyed to human being on Earth. Along comes Copernicus. Copernicus is a Polish
priest, definitely not a radical, an Orthodox person, not a Greek Orthodox, he's a Catholic
priest, but Orthodox in the sense he's very traditional. He has a university degree studying
at Krakow, and he goes to Italy where he spends years studying, called back to Poland by an
uncle who's a higher church official, goes back to Italy again because he really loves
it in Italy, and studies medicine, and studies literature, becomes adept at Greek, translates
some Greek poetry into Latin, and becomes involved in Ptolemaic astronomy. And in the
course of his studies in mathematics and astronomy, discovers in Archimedes' book, The Sand Reckoner,
that Aristarchus of Samos, approximately 1700 years before, had speculated that maybe the
Earth is just another planet, and the Sun is the center of what we call the solar system,
and that the Earth circles the Sun, and the Sun does not circle the Earth. That idea is
referred to and dismissed by Archimedes in that particular work, but Copernicus said
that that's where he first heard of this idea. It's fascinating that we have no really solid
basis for saying that anyone else in the 2000 years between Pythagoras and Copernicus had
thought of this, or offered it as a hypothesis. There are some suggestive passages in some
late medieval writers, especially Nicola Rehm at the University of Paris, and some Islamic
writers, but no real proposal. Copernicus himself became known as being an expert astronomer,
as being a knowledgeable in astronomy, I should say, knowledgeable in astronomy, and was even
approached to be a member of the commission that the papacy formed in the 16th century
to reform the calendar. Very important to the church because Easter has to come out
at a particular time. It has to come out in the springtime, it has to actually come out
after the first full moon, after the onset of spring, what we would consider March 21st.
And because the Julian calendar, the calendar that Julius Caesar was responsible for having
implemented in Rome, and which was still being used in the 16th century in Europe, defines
the year as 365 and a quarter days, by the 16th century there had been an accumulated
error of 10 days, because the day is actually long, that's not an accurate figure, and so
what's happened was that Easter was coming out earlier and earlier, and if they don't
do anything about it pretty soon, Easter's not going to be in the springtime at all,
which is clearly contrary to the biblical story, because Easter has to come out after
the onset of Passover, which is required to be in the springtime. So the pope forms a
commission and eventually in 1582, the pope pronounces that the day after October 4th
in 1582 will be October 15th, not October 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th,
13th, 14th, and if you paid rent for the month of October, tough on you, because the next
day after the 4th is going to be the 15th, and that became the Gregorian calendar reform,
which is key to the idea that the day is not 365 and a quarter days, the year is not 365
and a quarter days long, but 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes and 20 seconds. That was the definition
that the astronomers of the day recommended to the pope based on the latest observations
and measurements that they were able to make in the mid 16th century. This calendar adjustment,
by the way, was adopted in all the Catholic countries almost immediately because the pope
said so. The Protestant countries did not adopt this mostly until the 18th century.
In Germany, for example, it was not fully adopted by the Protestant communities in Germany until
1775, Russia being under the sway of the Russian Orthodox Church, the Orthodox Church has never
accepted this and still doesn't accept the Gregorian calendar reform, but in Russia, the reform
was only implemented when the Communists took power in 1917, and at that time the discrepancy
was about 13 or 14 days, so what they called the October Revolution was November, everywhere
else in the world. So Copernicus was immersed in this and sort of was recognized as an astronomer
of note in the 16th century, but he was sort of a theoretical astronomer. He was not noted
for being an observational astronomer, and in 1512 he circulated very to a limited degree
only among a very closed circle, an initial version of here's an idea worth considering
that the earth moves around the sun. And what would follow from that? Now, over the next
30 years approximately, Copernicus had lots of things to do as a church official in eastern
Poland, and he was approached, however, late in his life by a young astronomer named Reticus
who really urged Copernicus to complete his detailed account of his new theory, and in
1543, the very year in which Copernicus died, we have no idea whether he saw the book before
he died, but with the assistance of Reticus, mainly as a goad, Copernicus published a book
which worked out in tremendous detail an astronomical, a mathematical model of the heavens in which
the sun is stationary, so it's a heliostatic theory, and in which the earth and all the
other planets move around the sun in circular orbits at uniform speeds. Now, we don't need
to say that this was a big deal. It is, however, important to step back and realize that first
of all, Copernicus did not have any evidence for this theory. He did not have any observations
that had not been available 1,000 years before, had not been available to Ptolemy 1,300 years
before. It's not that, oh, new evidence suggests that we need a new theory. This is a reinterpretation
of existing evidence. Secondly, Copernicus is quite wrong. The theory is quite wrong
that in the sense that the planets do not move in circular orbits, and they do not move
in uniform speeds. Furthermore, there is no supporting evidence. Once you hear this hypothesis,
you say, oh, let's go test it. Any attempt to test Copernicus's theory in the 16th century
was doomed to failure and, in fact, failed because the earth does not seem to be rotating
at its axis 1,000 miles an hour. It's easy to make fun of this, right? Birds don't get
blown backwards when they fly up into the air, but if he's right and the earth rotates
on its axis once every 24 hours approximately, and the earth is approximately 25,000 miles
in circumference, then at the equator the earth is moving 1,000 miles an hour. That's
a heck of a wind. Not there. If the earth is really moving around the sun, and while
they didn't know exactly how far the earth from the sun, or the worth was from the sun,
it's a substantial distance. If then in December and in June, there is a very wide, let's call
it a baseline, between the earth's position relative to the sun in December and six months
later, and so if you looked at stars in the night sky, two stars that seem to be in a
straight line in June should not be in a straight line in December. That's called parallactic
displacement. They should no longer be in a straight line, because the angle at which
you're viewing them has changed dramatically, and yet we don't see such a displacement.
So in fact, the obvious experimental tests of Copernicus' theory are wrong, and further
more, Copernicus made no attempt to say, well, what forces are responsible for the motions
of the planets? Why are the planets in the positions that they are in, and why are they
moving at the speeds at which they're moving? This is a completely kinematic description.
It's just, it's merely a description. It is a model, and furthermore, since he was wrong
about circular orbits and uniform motion, then his detailed version of the theory had
to be dramatically complicated in order to do the same thing that Ptolemy had had to
do. How do these things, how do the planets actually move in order to generate the appearances,
the appearances that we see, which are not uniform, not circular, so they've got to
have, he's got to use epicycles also. So the first book makes it sound like we can finally
get out from under Ptolemy's model, and here we have a theory that has almost as many
epicycles, but it has fewer, but it still has a lot of epicycles, and calculations are
complicated, and in fact they are not significantly, and according to some, they are no more accurate
predictively than Ptolemy's. They're accurate within several minutes of art, but not any
better accuracy, some easier calculation. But, but, and here's where you might say again,
well history is illogical, human beings are illogical, Copernicus's theory in some sense
precipitated a re-conceptualization of the universe. For one thing, in spite of a preface
that was added to the book, apparently by a Protestant sympathizer of Copernicus's who
didn't want him to get into trouble, at the printing press, putting a preface saying this
is merely a mathematical model, Copernicus himself clearly believed and said that this
was, he believed that this was the physical model of what we will call the heavens, the
solar, what we call the solar system. That the earth really does move around the sun,
and that all of the planets move around the sun, and the sun is slightly off-center, but
the center of the universe is the center of the earth's orbit. This was substantially
metaphysically and somewhat religiously motivated, but it was not in the end, from what we would
recognize as a scientifically proposed theory, and if you take it as such a theory, then
it's easy to say that no person who considered themselves to be scientifically sophisticated
in the 16th century should have paid any attention to this theory, because every attempt
to confirm it, to test it experimentally, failed. But the cultural response over the
next century or so was that indeed Copernicus had opened the door to a new conception of
what the universe was, because very quickly after Copernicus, the people who considered
themselves Copernicans dramatically transformed Copernicus' theory. Some of the Copernicans,
for example, including most notably Giordano Bruno, who was executed in 1600 as a heretic,
Giordano Bruno argued that the universe was infinite. Copernicus didn't think that. Copernicus
thought that the universe was larger in terms of miles in diameter than it was thought to
be by the Greeks in order to explain why you don't see this parallactic displacement, but
he thought that all of the fixed stars were in a kind of a thin band, a couple of miles
in diameter, a couple of Polish miles in diameter. That was a measure of the day. So they were
all about the same distance from the earth, and far enough away so that the radius of
the earth's orbit was like a point. The whole radius of the earth's orbit was like a geometric
point compared to the size of the universe. These Copernicans, among them Bruno, argued
that the universe was in fact infinite, and that there were an infinite number of stars,
and that there may be an infinite number of planets. Many of them inhabited. Who knows?
Now that changes the orderliness of the universe completely. Copernicus' universe is still
strictly ordered. Okay, the order is not the obvious one, because the obvious one is that
the earth is stationary. Now the order is much more abstract, but it's an orderly, highly
structured universe, but the earth has been snatched out of its central role. The centrality
of the earth is now metaphysical and conceptual. The center of the earth's orbit is the center
of the universe. The sun is a little bit off to the side to account for the noncircularity
of the planetary orbits. Nevertheless, it's reasonably close to the Ptolemaic, although
I believe that conceptually this is a major shift, because now the earth's centrality
in the cosmic drama of the Judeo-Christian tradition is no longer obvious. You can believe
in it, but it is not manifested by the visible structure of the universe as conceived in the
Renaissance cosmology before Copernicus. The Copernicans, however, by making the universe
infinite, by making the number of stars and planets infinite, totally change the concept
of the orderliness of the universe. That was one response to Copernicus. The professional
astronomers read the book, taught the theory sometimes. Johannes Kepler was taught Copernicus'
theory at the university by his teacher of astronomy, Michael Maslin. Maslin, to the
end of his life, did not agree that the Copernican theory was true, even though Kepler kept him
up to date on everything that Kepler was doing. Other professional astronomers used the Copernican
system without claiming that it was true in order to produce more accurate tables of planetary
and star positions in the night sky to be used in almond acts, also very useful for navigational
purposes by sailors. So the so-called prutinic tables generated by an astronomer named Erasmus
Reinhold were openly and explicitly used Copernicus. The book was originally approved
by the Pope at the time, and so there was no conception at the time that this was heretical
or threatening. Kepler transformed the theory. Kepler considered himself to be a loyal Copernican.
He always depicted himself as a Copernican. In fact, one of his late books is called Epitome
of the Copernican Astronomy, but what you find in that book is Keplerian astronomy, because
what Kepler, over a period of decades, what Kepler worked out using data that had been
made to him by the great Danish observational astronomer, Tico Brey, Kepler worked out that
the planets move in elliptical orbits at non-uniform speeds, and furthermore, Kepler
developed a conception of the solar system, namely as a system of forces centered in the
sun that caused the planets to occupy the orbital positions that they did and to move
with the speeds that they did. Now, using some of the new scientific discoveries of the time,
for example, that the sun rotates on its axis based on the observation of sunspots and
how they move, it was decided that the sun rotates on its axis. He thought that somehow
that the sun had a gravitational force that kept each planet in its orbital distance and
that as the sun rotated, then it radiated a gravitational force that whipped the planets
around in their orbits, and the reason why the planets move faster the closer they were
to the sun, slower the further away is because this gravitational force, these whips were
weaker and weaker as you got away from the sun in inverse proportion to the distance.
Now, this is incorrect, but it reflected the latest thinking of the time, which was that
magnetic spherical bodies like the Earth automatically rotated, any spherical magnet would rotate
on its axis. It was decided by William Gilbert, who published a book on the subject in 1600,
and so Kepler thought that if you put Gilbert together with the sunspots, the sun rotates
on its axis, radiates magnetic lines of force, as we would say in the 19th century, came
to say in the 19th century, and they somehow pushed the planets around. Isaac Newton later
in that century, then based on his idea of a universal law of gravity, or a law of universal
gravity, showed that as a matter of fact, that law of gravitation implies as a deductive
logical consequence that planets have to move in elliptical orbits at the non-uniform speeds
that Kepler had already identified. So in a certain sense, Newton validated Kepler's
transformation of Copernicus' theory. Where's Galileo in this story? Galileo was a truly
orthodox Copernican, that is to say, in spite of some correspondence with Kepler, being
quite familiar with what Kepler was doing, we look back at Kepler and say Kepler proved
that the planets moved in elliptical orbits at non-uniform speeds. Nonsense. Galileo,
in his great work, the dialogue concerning the two great world systems, the one that got
him into so much trouble, is an orthodox Copernican. There is no evidence whatsoever that he ever
accepted elliptical orbits or the non-uniform speeds. Galileo was a strictly orthodox Copernican
and was only interested in the conceptual shift to a moving Earth. An Earth that now
is just one of the planets. And if there's anything special about the Earth, then that's
something that you believe with regard to religious teachings, but that specialness is not manifested
in to an observer flying by who takes a look at the solar system, would not see anything
particularly special about the Earth. We say, oh yes, today it's blue and green, and none
of the other planets are. But it's not sacred. It does not occupy a sacred spot. And what
about Tico Brahe? What happened to him? I've referred to him several times now as perhaps
the greatest observational astronomer of all time. Well, we don't have time to go into
Tico's personal life, and it was extraordinarily fascinating, combining some noble features
and many, many ignoble ones. But Brahe was quite familiar with Copernicus' theory and
rejected it and was a careful enough observer, generating the most accurate observations of
the planetary positions as a function of time in the night sky, that anyone to see that
the Copernican predictions are just as bad as the Ptolemaic ones. So why should he accept
the theory? In a certain sense, Brahe was the scientist. He said, where's the meat?
Where are the facts that support the theory? And the facts are not there. So he offered
an alternative theory, which almost never is referred to in popular books about science,
like when you get a paragraph in the history of science in the high school science or college
science. But Brahe's theory for until Newton was the one that was considered most probable
by people knowledgeable about astronomy. Brahe's theory was that the Earth is indeed
the center of the solar system and is motionless at the center of the solar system. The Sun
does indeed rotate around the Earth. Mercury and Venus orbit around the Sun as it orbits
around the Earth. The way, for example, our Moon orbits around from a Copernican perspective,
the Moon orbits the Earth as the Earth orbits the Sun. So Mercury and Venus orbit the Sun
as the Sun orbits the Earth. And that explains the peculiar phenomenon that Mercury and Venus
always seem to be close to the Sun in rising and setting. And then Mars, Jupiter and Saturn
rotate both around the Sun as they orbit around the Earth. Their orbits enclose the Sun even
as they are really orbiting around the Earth. And what Brahe argued, and he's quite correct,
is that this is observationally indistinguishable from Copernicus's theory and doesn't suffer
from the flaws that Copernicus's theory had. And at the end of his life, Kepler, who was
desperate for data because he wanted to prove Copernicus is right, joined Brahe's entourage
in order to get access to Brahe's data. Brahe wanted Kepler, saw that Kepler was brilliant
enough to pull off proving the truth of the Brahe's theory. And when Brahe died before
any of this happened, Kepler snatched the data, ran for it, and eventually, by analyzing
that data, excruciatingly, an excruciatingly tedious process in those days without calculators
and without even slide rules, which were being invented at the time, but Kepler didn't have
one, no calculator, although he got one later in his life, he was sent one later in his
life, having to work out thousands and thousands of trigonometric calculations came to the
conclusion that the planetary orbits are not circular, they're ellipses. And now we
have, especially when we come to Newton's validation of Kepler's transformation of Copernicus's
theory, now we have a conception of the universe that lasted until the Einstein general theory
of relativity, and Edwin Hubble's announcement that the universe is much greater than the
Milky Way and it's expanding. A conception of the universe as infinite in space, finite
in matter, and one in which the orderliness of the universe is strictly abstract and mathematical,
only a person trained in mathematics can appreciate it, and in which the Earth really does, as
John Dunn had said prematurely, it really is lost and it's nowhere special, and the
fact that the Earth is nowhere special suggests neither are we.
