In the last lecture, I emphasized the genius of the calculus is that it gives us the power
to capture change in an unchanging equation, so you have the equation and the equation
somehow contains within it the facts about the changes that a physical system undergoes,
a physical system described by that equation, instead of, so to speak, running the experiment
and watching the system change, if you've got the equation, then you can analyze the
equation and you can deduce from the equation changes that you have never observed, changes
that would be observed if you ran the experiment, let's say, for a longer period of time, if
you change different parameters in the equation, if you added more weight, if you added more
energy, if you speeded things up, then you can see what will be the effect and you can
analyze that from the equation using the tool that we call the differential calculus and
the complementary integral calculus. So the calculus is a powerful tool for dealing with
change and I also reminded you that change is the foundational problem for science of
nature. So change is also the fundamental fact of experience and it is a fact that change
as a fundamental fact of experience, together with a definition of knowledge which denies
the ultimate reality of change at some level, created a historic problem for science that
has repeatedly forced scientists and philosophers to deal with the question of how human beings
can have such knowledge. This denial of the ultimate reality of change takes a number
of forms in the most extreme form in the surviving fragmentary writings of Parmenides, who I've
referred to a number of times, but it is also the basis for the materialistic and atomistic
theories of nature that we are familiar with from ancient Greek natural philosophers, the
ones who preceded Plato and Aristotle. I've referred to these before, but the whole idea,
well that there is an ultimate reality that is matter and that in some form, in its elemental
form, matter does not change. It is the different combinations of matter and changing configurations
of these combinations of matter that generate the world of appearances which does change.
So for example, the early atomism of the form taught by Democritus and made famous through
the writings of Epicurus and his Roman follower Lucretius, who wrote a very influential poem
on the nature of things that promoted the atomic theory of matter. When you have configurations,
atoms come together quite coincidentally in various ways that form plants, trees, animals,
us, and then since atoms are constantly in motion, at some point they dissociate and
they form other combinations. The animal dies and the atoms that made up the body of the
animal become parts of other configurations of animals which could be flowers, grass, and
various forms of dirt. So this idea is that the atoms are ultimately changeless. So again,
the line of thinking here is that we can only explain change if we reduce the appearance
of change, if we explain the appearance of change by means of a changeless thing. Now
it seems as though Heraclitus represents the counterpoint to this. I referred to him as
the philosopher who said, no, no, these are materialistic theories of nature are ultimately
misconceived. That change is a fundamental reality. Change cannot be reduced. There is
no thing that is changeless. There is no thing that is changeless and that stands behind
change in the way that Parmenides said or the atomists said or the materialists like
Empedocles whose theory that there were four fundamental forms of matter, earthy or fire
and water and that these were changeless but combined in various ways to make up all the
different things that the world is made of. That was the theory that actually survived
right through the 18th century and much more than the atomic theory which only really became
a scientific theory in the 19th century as we will be discussing. Heraclitus says, no,
all of these are misconceived. Change is fundamental. It cannot be reduced. However, there are changeless
laws of change. So he too had to say that there are, that there is something changeless
but it's within change. That change is guided by rules. It's not anarchic. It's not chaotic
and we will eventually be talking about what today we, what we used to call chaos theory
and that arose, became particularly powerful in the 1970s and 80s. So Heraclitus' view
is that what we need to identify are the patterns of change and the calculus relates to that.
The calculus is a tool for discovering and identifying and analyzing processes, the patterns
of change. What we need to appreciate here and in this lecture I want to focus on two
very powerful scientific ideas. The idea of conservation and the idea of symmetry. There
is a bridging idea of invariance that I'm going to raise but the two focal ideas are
conservation and symmetry. That these ideas have played and continue to play fundamental
rules, roles in scientific reasoning and in scientific theories. But what they really
go back to is the recognition that if you, if you believe that nature is orderly and
experience suggests that it is orderly. What experience doesn't tell us is that there are
absolute rigid eternal universal orders of nature but certainly our experience is that
nature is orderly. The planets move in predictable ways. They seasons follow in predictable patterns.
We see predictability in creatures and plants and trees being born so to speak and going
through different phases and eventually dying. There is no experience of anyone coming into
existence fully grown and working backwards to a seedling. That is, so there is a basis
for the idea that nature is orderly but if you take the view that there is an absolute
order and that we're trying to get at it then you have to say well what is required in order
for us to make good on this, I'm calling it belief, that there is an absolute order
to nature. And one of the criteria, one of the things that you have to suppose is that
something is conserved because if everything is changing all the time then you can't explain
anything. The whole idea of an explanation, let alone a scientific explanation, presumes
that something is changed less because if everything is changing you can't have an explanation
to repeat myself. I pointed out that in the middle ages, in the context of the medieval
university and the study of natural philosophy, the invention of the clock stimulated the metaphor
that the universe is a clockwork mechanism. Now this metaphor is already found in the
14th century, just a few decades after the first weight driven mechanical clock was installed
in Europe in the late 13th century. So within 50, 60 years people were already using the
clock as a metaphor and using it as a metaphor for the cosmos, for the universe. It reflects
the idea that the hidden secret of gear train mechanisms is that they are deterministic.
When you have a collection of gears that are interconnected then by moving any one gear,
you assuming that they are not sloppily machined, then by moving any one gear you can predict
precisely the motion of every other gear. If that were not the case you wouldn't be
able to build a water mill or a wind powered machine. That worked in the way that you anticipated
that it is one of the things that's implicit in gear train mechanisms is determinism. If
to say that the universe is a clockwork mechanism, meaning by that it is a mechanism analogous
to a gear driven clock, then you are already committed to the view that the universe is
deterministic, that all natural phenomena are determined in the same way or analogous
to a clock. Now put that together with the contemporary commitment to the view that
nature is a closed system and you have to say, if you're religious and everybody at
the time was, that in the beginning God created the universe as this clockwork mechanism and
imparted a certain amount of motion, we would say energy, but in those days motion to the
inhabitants of the universe and one of two things is going to happen. Either the clock
winds down, motion is lost and eventually everything comes to a stop, or God designed it in such
a way, a way that a human clock maker cannot do, in such a way that motion is conserved
and therefore the universe will go on indefinitely, the clock never needs to be rewound. The
winning view is that motion is conserved. So the first explicit conservation law in western
nature philosophy is that there is a, that the total amount of motion in the universe
and in specific closed subsets of it, when you're analyzing a particular system, in principle,
if you're going to write equations of motion, which in the 16th and 17th century, nature
philosophers started doing in the way, for example, I've described with Galileo, but
he is already in a tradition of Italian mechanics, meaning of physicists doing analyses, trying
to give mathematical descriptions of the motion of material objects, then that goes back
perhaps 50 to 60 years before Galileo, and then of course from him continues on to the
present. When you start writing these equations of motion, the assumption is, which becomes
quite explicit in the 17th century, that the amount of motion in a system is conserved.
If this is not the case, then you can't predict the behavior of the system. So you say, well,
that's not a good reason for believing it. Well, it's a pretty good reason for scientists.
If you believe, and then by writing these equations, you in fact can predict the behavior
of the system, then you must assume that your assumption was correct, that motion is conserved.
I'm going to qualify that in a moment. Now, you all know that there's such a thing as
the conservation of matter. So that's another conservation rule, but that also is an idea
that begins to become explicit in the 16th century, and strangely enough, is only considered
to have been proven in the late 18th century with, in part, through the experimental work
of Lavoisier, who was credited as the discoverer of oxygen, but who certainly initiated the
transformation of chemistry from know-how to a modern science, but that's jumping ahead.
The conservation of matter as a conservation principle was a background idea, was there,
and sort of taken for granted from the 16th century through the 18th century, but it was
really only at the end of the 18th century that it was expressly used in the quantitative
analysis of chemical processes and transformations explicitly stated that since matter is conserved,
we must be able to draw the following inferences from the experimental data that we have. I'm
focusing now on this conservation of motion because that is, in a certain sense, a more
abstract thing to be conserved. Descartes, for example, is already, builds into his mechanics,
builds into his theory of nature, which for him, remember, was matter in motion. There
was nothing else for nature, for Descartes in nature, but matter in motion. All natural
phenomena had to be explained in terms of the complex combinations and collisions of
bits and pieces of different kinds of matter in motion, although for him, ultimately, all
matter was generically the same, but it came in different forms. Actually, seems to echo
ancient Greek materialistic monists of the sort, for example, like Thales, who thought
that there was only one ultimate form of matter, which he called water, but I think he really
meant fluid, that there's some kind of universal fluid that can be compressed and forms a solid
the way water forms ice. It can be rarefied to form a gas the way water does when it turns
into steam, and so he thought that from some one fundamental stuff that had a lot of flexibility
to it, and could be either a gas, a water, a solid or a liquid, and could be combined
in various, that these properties could be combined in various ways, that you could generate
all natural phenomena. Descartes' geometric physics, in which space is identified with
matter. There are no vacua and there's only matter, but it takes different forms, it comes
in different styles, the same stuff comes in different forms, that you could generate
all the natural phenomena. Descartes assumes conservation of motion, and for example, in
his philosophy, where he has to defend free will, because otherwise he will really be
in trouble with the Catholic Church, he decides that it's quite scientific to believe in free
will, because given his anatomical studies, he came to the conclusion, he did very creative
and intelligent anatomical studies, some of which like discovering the reflex arc we
still have today, he decided that the nervous system was made out of hollow tubes, and the
way that the body worked was that there was a fluid inside the nervous system that circulated
and selectively stimulated different muscles to cause the body to do all the things that
the body does. Now, in a creature like us, where we exercise free will, we selectively
energize the nervous fluid, how do we do that? Well, as a scientist, the motion of the fluid
in the nervous system must be conserved. However, without violating the conservation
of motion, Descartes, which is the product of mass and speed for Descartes, the amount
of motion in an object is the product of its mass and its speed, he thought that he identified
a gland, it is a gland called the pineal gland, in the brain, and he thought that was
like the central switchboard of the nervous system, that the nervous fluid flowed through
the pineal gland, and in the pineal gland, the mind could redirect the nervous fluid
to this nerve, to that nerve, and that would lead to raising this arm, raising that arm,
and that this didn't violate anything because motion is conserved, all you're doing is changing
the direction, the mass stays the same, the mass of the nervous fluid, the speed of the
nervous fluid stays the same, but the direction is changed, and that's perfectly okay. That
doesn't violate the conservation of motion. Now, whether he really meant this, I think
he did mean it, and people in the 17th century did seem to take him seriously in this, but
one of the things that Christian Hauchens, Huygens is the way we generally call him,
pronounce his name, but I think in Holland they call him Hauchens, who started life as
a Cartesian, in part because Descartes was a familiar of his father and a frequent guest
in their home in Holland, Hauchens quickly saw, and when he became a mature young scientist
that Descartes' physics doesn't work, and one of the things that, one of Huygens' greatest
contributions to modern science was the discovery that it takes a force in order to get an object
to change its direction. Even if the mass doesn't change, even if the speed doesn't change,
the velocity changes because velocity and speed are not identical. Descartes didn't
make a distinction between mass, speed and velocity. Velocity is speed in a direction,
and Descartes just assumed that the direction didn't matter, but Huygens showed that it did,
that any change of direction requires a force, and so it is not motion that is conserved.
Well, but if motion is not conserved, what is going to replace it? Ah, we call it conservation
of momentum. Momentum looks superficially just like motion. It's mass times velocity,
but the difference between velocity and speed is profound. So for example, it was only in
Huygens' work, published in the mid-17th century, that people finally got away from
the Greek notion that circular motion is natural and doesn't require a force. It was Huygens
who showed that circular motion is unnatural. You need a force to keep the planets in their
position. If the planets are moving in a circular path or in an elliptical path, anything other
than a straight line of force is necessary in order to keep that going. So it is Huygens'
work that opened the way to Newton's laws of motion, which became the foundation for
mechanics right through the 19th century, the laws of motion that an object in motion,
in the absence of any forces, an object in motion remains in uniform straight line motion
forever. And an object at rest stays at rest forever, because how could you write equations
of motion for billiard balls if they could jump all over the table depending on the way
they felt? I don't want to move now, or they start moving all by themselves before you
pick up your cue stick. So it is necessary to assume something like this, but the specific
form of the law of motion, that an object in motion remains in uniform straight line
motion in the absence of any force. Once forces are available, then either the path is not
straight or the object is either accelerating or decelerating. So the conservation of momentum
becomes, but notice, this is not immediately obvious. This is an idea. We must find something
that is conserved and that becomes a basis for the ability to do science. So the idea
of conservation is very central here. Conservation of momentum actually turns out, based on Huygens'
work, to take two forms, conservation of linear momentum and the conservation of angular momentum.
That means motion, circular motion, or curve, it's really curvilinear motion. That has to
be circular, any kind of curved motion. So, for example, the earth and the moon are gravitationally
coupled together. We see the evidence of this, of course, in the role that the moon plays
in the tides. Now, the distance between the sun, between the earth and the moon has been
changing ever since the moon first was formed or captured by the earth. I mean, billions
of years, well, whenever you decide that the moon became part of the earth's destiny.
So it was only about 140,000 miles away from the earth. Now it's 190,000 to 220,000 depending
on because its orbit is elliptical. The distance between the earth and the moon, the mean distance
between the earth and the moon is slowly increasing, has been slowly increasing for hundreds of
millions of years. In order for the angular momentum of the earth-moon system to be conserved,
the day is, the earth is slowing down and the day is getting longer. The earth's day
is measurably increasing in length as the moon, so to speak, drifts away. Now this is
a very, very small quantity, but it is measurable over decades and centuries. And now, of course,
that we have laser rangefinders planted on the moon, we can actually measure this phenomenon.
But all I'm interested in here is that the conservation of angular momentum is not merely
some abstract idea that we have to assume in order to do science. It is built into the
doing of science. As the conservation of matter was in science from the 17th and 18th century,
formalized, so to speak, by Lavoisier, made an explicit principle, in the 19th century,
we will be discussing in a future lecture the rise of the science of thermodynamics
and the invention of the idea of energy. In thermodynamics, in the 1850s, it was decided
that energy is conserved. Given how important we suddenly realized energy was, then like
motion, it must be the case that energy is conserved, because if energy can be created
or destroyed, then again, the ability to write equations of motion and the ability to describe
change in physical systems becomes impossible if energy can appear and disappear, so to
speak, at will. There was an interesting personal episode that bridges the conservation of momentum
and the conservation of energy. In the late 17th century, Leibniz, through his work as
a mathematical physicist in mechanics, had identified a quantity that he called vis-viva,
sort of living force, that was measured by the mathematical quantity mv squared. Some
of you may remember from high school physics or college physics, that that sounds like
kinetic energy. That word didn't exist at the time, but mv squared, which he thought
was an important quantity, that it was a conserved quantity and that it was an insight into the
structure of nature, that nature conserves mv squared. Nature conserves momentum, nature
conserves matter, and nature conserves mv squared. This is another fundamental principle
of nature. Newton, who by that time was already at loggerheads with Leibniz over this question
of who invented the calculus first, Newton decided nonsense. mv squared, just a number.
There's all kinds of numbers you make up when you're in the course of equations. It doesn't
have any physical significance whatsoever. They also had a very bit of dispute over the
whole business I raised about the clockwork universe. According to Leibniz, God wound
up the clock in the beginning and he's such a good clockmaker that God doesn't have to
do anything afterwards forever. The world will last forever conserving all of the mv squared
and the vis-viva and the momentum and the matter, etc. It's all conserved. Newton, who was deeply
religious in a different way from Leibniz, Newton claimed that, no, in spite of being
a perfect being, the universe, in fact, will run down and it's God's, these conservation
laws are a sign that God episodically intervenes in nature to restore the amount of motion,
the amount of what we would call energy. He wasn't saying that the universe is running
down, but what he's saying is that, look, there is conservation of momentum, there is
conservation of matter, and those are signs of God's continuing providential involvement
with the universe that God created. Leibniz's response is, oh, come on, there's religion
and then there's physics. That can't be part of physics. This debate took place in the
context of a series of five letters, four and a half letters, exchanged between Leibniz
and Newton through an intermediary because Newton did not take criticism lightly and
did not like to engage in controversy, but he wanted to make sure that his views were
defended so he had a mouthpiece, a man by the name of Samuel Clark. Now, in the middle
of the 19th century, as I said, we get the concept of energy and energy is conserved,
and now all of a sudden at the end of the 19th beginning of the 20th century, there
are three great principles of conservation that enable scientific explanations to take
place, the conservation of momentum, the conservation of matter, the conservation of energy. In 1905,
Einstein's paper that we call the special relativity theory paper, the one that is called on the
electrodynamics of moving bodies, but it was the founding paper of special relativity theory,
it comes out of Einstein's reformulation of Newtonian mechanics that equal mc2. Not
an equation Einstein was looking for, but it pops out of his reformulation of Newtonian
mechanics, which means that energy and matter are interconvertible. You can change, energy
can be destroyed, so to speak, it can be transformed into matter, matter can be destroyed, and
you can create matter, you can create matter out of energy, you can create energy out of,
you can annihilate matter as we do in the atomic and hydrogen bombs, for example, or
you can make matter out of photons. Now this is not easy to do, but we have done it. So
subsequently Einstein turned out to be correct, but notice the implication here, we used to
be very proud that it was conservation of matter, conservation of energy, and now all of a sudden
we have to say that only one thing is conserved, namely some, there is a lawful relationship
between energy and matter. When energy disappears, a certain amount of matter must appear, when
matter disappears, a certain amount of energy must appear. So there is still a conservation,
but okay, I want to get off that for a moment and talk about another form of conservation
that was forced by the form that scientific theories, especially the mathematically, increasingly
mathematical theory of physics in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and that is the
idea of invariance. What happened in the 19th century, and it is related to the power of
techno science, is that scientific theories finally in the 19th century became powerful
enough to describe nature in ways that we could actually apply technologically. Until
then it was mathematics, we saw that in the Renaissance for example, I won't review that,
mathematics was a powerful source of knowledge for technology, but in the 19th century, scientific
theories and especially these mathematical theories in electricity and electromagnetic
theory for example, but the core of 19th century physics was something called ether physics
and we will be talking about this in the future lecture, and the mathematics of ether physics,
the idea increasingly scientists came to the Pythagorean like idea that it is the mathematics
that has the reality to it, that mathematical equations had to be invariant under certain
kinds of transformations, that the equations, this is an abstract version of a conservation
of matter, it's now all of a sudden certain equations that describe what we believe reality
would be like, those equations must be invariant under certain kinds of transformations because
if they weren't then reality would be chaotic. The idea of invariance becomes especially important
in the general theory, the special and general theories of relativity, so we'll talk in
more detail about it, but I just want to get that on the record book, the idea of invariance
is related to a comparably abstract idea that has become very powerful in mid and 20th century
and subsequent physics, and that's the idea of symmetries. Now we will also talk a little
bit more about this in a subsequent lecture, but just again to get on the record, this
is a very strange thing, that nature observes certain symmetries and that we build our
theories around the idea that certain natural phenomena, fundamental natural phenomena are
symmetrical, for example, and we might not use the word symmetry in this particular way,
they're symmetrical in the sense that, for example, there was a time in the history of
the universe, shortly after it emerged, when the electromagnetic force and the force that's
called the weak force that is associated with the decay of radioactive nuclei, they were
both one force and then something happened and they split into two different forces,
this is described as analogous to like when water freezes and it undergoes a phase change,
so its properties after it freezes are different than its properties before it froze, when
it had liquid properties. So analogously, there is a certain symmetry that is observed
in nature, that symmetry is a fundamental fact about nature, but it's really an abstract
fact about certain kinds of mathematical theories of nature that would not work unless you assume
symmetry and together with this idea of symmetry comes an idea that came from a Japanese physicist
named Yohichiru Nambu of spontaneous symmetry breaking, that it is a fact about nature that
under certain circumstances, fundamental symmetries break and so all of a sudden you get the electromagnetic
force and the weak force even though at earlier there was no such distinction, there was just
one previous kind of force that was homogeneous, so this idea that nature, the most fundamental
natural phenomena, observes symmetry and that there's like a force at work, so to speak,
that makes them behave, makes them be symmetrical, they can't not be symmetrical unless a certain
situation changes that we'll be talking about the inflation theory of the universe in which
the symmetry spontaneously breaks and to a considerable extent these ideas of symmetry
breaking and symmetry are very fundamental to physics over the last 30 years and especially
to what's called string theory which in another name is called supersymmetry theory, finding
the ultimate symmetry, so these ideas become fundamental to the way we think about nature.
