The subject of this lecture is scientific instruments.
And perhaps there would be a collective sigh of relief if I could hear such a collective
sigh based on sort of getting away from the abstractness of the last couple of lectures
of dealing with scientific ideas of such abstractness as conservation, invariance, and symmetry,
and before that of algebra, calculus, and probability theory.
In fact, however, I don't want to talk about scientific instruments as bits of hardware.
They are, of course, and I will be talking about them at that level.
What I want to focus the lecture on is scientific instruments as ideas.
Now, that is an idea all by itself that I think we need to build up to.
It is self-evident that instruments are central to the conduct of what we mean by science
and scientific research.
It is as inconceivable to do hard science without instruments today as it is to do science
without writing.
So science is critically, it's not just dependent on them, instruments are woven into the fabric
of the practice of science, and yet instruments are almost never treated for purposes of understanding
the nature of science and scientific practice are never given the status of theory and ideas.
So philosophers of science, historians of science, sociologists of science have spent
a lot of time trying to understand the development and the dissemination of scientific ideas
and theories, but there is very little literature on the history of scientific instruments.
Obviously in the last 20 years, I shouldn't say obviously, but it is the case that in
the last 20 years, this has become obvious to more and more historians and philosophers
and sociologists, and we are beginning to see an increasing focus on instruments.
But primarily these are on sort of the hardware, the technology of the instruments, but some
attention now being given to the obvious dynamic interaction between scientific ideas and instruments.
It's not just that scientists use instruments in order to validate ideas, but that the invention
of new instruments often drives scientific ideas and scientific theories in ways that
we'll be discussing very shortly.
So I want to talk in particular about a view of instruments that may seem odd on the face
of it, but that is especially why it needs to be discussed in a course like this.
We ordinarily perhaps think of instruments as extensions of our senses and that therefore
they allow us to have experiences that we would not otherwise have, and we think of
such instruments, for example, as hearing aids and eyeglasses, prescription eyeglasses,
and magnifying lenses as clear extensions of the senses, and sort of by extension we
assume that things like telescopes and microscopes and special devices that let us hear sounds
that we cannot hear, that can detect sounds that we cannot respond to, let's say sounds
above somewhere in the 20,000 Hertz and up range, certainly above 30,000 or 40,000 Hertz,
I don't believe anybody claims the ability to have an auditory response to, as also extensions
of our senses.
But this is not correct, I believe.
These are extensions of our mind.
The crucial point is that scientific instruments, the instruments that scientists beginning
in the 17th century used in order to formulate and justify and defend their ideas about nature,
their theories of nature, their explanations of natural phenomena, these instruments gave
results that could not be verified by the senses, either in fact or in principle.
Nowadays, of course, it's in principle, you cannot verify the results that you get from
an electron microscope or from an X-ray crystallography machine or from a DNA sequencing machine
by looking at the natural phenomena very carefully close up, where you say, well, I don't want
to bother, it's very painstaking.
You can't do it.
But that was just as true in the 17th century, that is to say Galileo's claim that using
the telescope he had identified four moons that were circling Jupiter is not something
that could have been verified at that time.
So we could have said the same, it could not be verified until, let's say nowadays, we
could in principle send a spaceship up and we have sent the spaceships up into space
and then they have sent satellites out to probe Jupiter and Saturn and we can now take pictures
of those.
We have beautiful, close up pictures of many of the moons of Jupiter and now of Saturn.
But in Galileo's time, there was no way to verify that.
Just as nowadays, we have no way of verifying what X-ray telescopes, what gamma-ray telescopes,
what neutrino telescopes tell us by direct sensory observation using our senses.
You could not go up to Jupiter to say, yep, those are moons all right.
Now what happens is we get seduced into this because initially when the telescope was invented,
not by Galileo, and when Galileo first built the telescope, the way he sort of tested
it was by looking at things that were not visible, like let's suppose that there was
a big billboard in Florence and although at the time Galileo was not in Florence, but
let's suppose there was a big billboard in Florence and you move far enough away that
you can't read what it says on the billboard and then you look through the telescope and
you can read it.
So I say, now is the telescope really showing much written on the billboard?
So you go closer and you see that, yep, it told me, people use the telescope to look
for ships at sea as they were coming to the port and they could see them before they came
into the port.
And so they could see it.
Yes, the telescope showed me that this particular ship, long before I could see it with the
naked eye, that that was coming into port and so the telescope tells me the truth.
But that's because I can check the results of the telescope.
Once you use a telescope to make inferences about what the surface of the moon is like,
what whether Jupiter has moons or not, then you can't verify that by going there to check
to see if the telescope has really shown you moons around Jupiter or are there funny little
air bubbles in the lens that somehow are moving and that simulate or that I am confused with
that.
So you can see that the telescope is easily interpreting as moons circling around Jupiter.
So the results of using the telescope, and this of course is true for the microscope
as well.
Initially, the microscope is a magnifying lens, but once it becomes a compound microscope
with a power exceeding the magnifying lens capability so that you now can't look closely
around in the water.
The microscope slide under the microscope, you look at a drop of water as Lewinhoek
did in the 17th century and you see creatures squirming around in there that you have been
drinking, but you can't see them.
So how do you know that they're really there?
Maybe somehow for some weird reason that they're in the microscope or that they are artifacts
of the microscope.
Now again, this situation only becomes worse with time, worse in quotation marks, that
is the sense in which instruments are an extension of our mind, not of our senses, only becomes
more intensified as instruments become more complicated.
Once you get to the 19th century where microscopes become extremely powerful because techniques
were developed for correcting for chromatic aberration from the fact that as Newton already
knew that different what we would call frequencies of light come to a different focal point because
they have different frequencies and therefore different wavelengths, the different colors
that make up light, unless you're using a laser which can be as narrow as one frequency,
they then the different colors come to a focus at different points and the more curved the
lenses, the more power, the more magnification is capable of giving you, the more there's
going to be a blurring of the focus of those different frequencies that make up the light,
whether it's sunlight or whether it's the light that you're using to illuminate the
slide stage of the microscope.
In the 18th century a technique was developed to overcome this but it only became a commercial
product in the 19th century and between 1830's and 1870's much more powerful microscopes
were developed and now all of a sudden as we'll be discussing when we talk about the
cell theory of life, we could look inside the cell and discover that the nucleus of
the cell, look inside the nucleus and discover things like the chromosomes in the cell but
you can't verify that.
You have to trust the instrument and this was true even in the 17th century and it was
explicitly understood as a challenge that experimental science needed to address.
For example, one of the, just think of what were the core instruments that were used by
scientists in the 17th century, there was of course the telescope and the microscope,
not invented in the 17th century, invented in the 16th century but developed into a scientific
research instrument in part by Anton Luhannuk in Holland and by others including very notably
Robert Hook in England and Hook wrote a very beautiful book called Micrographia in
which he made drawings of the kinds of things that he saw under in the microscope, one of
which looking at a piece of cork, the cellular structure of the cork from which he speculated
that this cellular structure was fundamental to living things and an idea that sort of
dropped out of sight and then was recovered in the 19th century.
Those are two instruments that we recognize as identified with the early modern scientific
research, the transition to modern science using instruments like the telescope and the
microscope overturned earlier conceptions of nature.
Three other instruments that we don't often think about as scientific research instruments
but which were in the 17th century are the barometer, the thermometer and the air pump.
Now these are much simpler instruments in a certain sense than we normally identify with
scientific instruments, everybody's got a thermometer for example and lots of people
have barometer, some of them are built into alarm clocks and watches but the barometer
was invented specifically to explore a particular scientific idea and question.
Is there such a thing as a vacuum in nature?
The Greek prejudice was that nature abhors a vacuum and this prejudice was disseminated
and transmitted into the 17th century and it was a very lively argument in early modern
science as to whether there was such a thing as a vacuum.
Descartes for example, brilliant, clearly a brilliant individual, a science, mathematics,
philosophy, Descartes rejected the possibility of a vacuum that there is no such thing as
a region of space that is empty of matter.
That cannot be.
Galileo cautiously defended an atomic view of matter and believed that while there was
no large scale vacuum in nature that there was a vacuum at the atomic level in between
the atoms that made up matter but this was cautious because in his own lifetime and as
he understood very well when he was brought before the Inquisition, atomism was identified
with Epicureanism which is from the Catholic Church's point of view a fundamental heresy
and although the travesty of Epicurus' philosophy of that eat, drink and be merry and for tomorrow
we die was not something that he either said or could possibly have said, that was identified
with Epicureanism from an early Christian period and it is a fact however that if you
look deeply into Epicurus' theory, Epicurus' atomism, atomic theory of matter, was motivated
by his anti-religious attitude in ancient Greece.
His atomism was an attempt to show people that they should not be afraid of death and
they should not have anything to do with priests because death is the dissolution of the particular
atomic configuration of atoms that is you and there is nothing left of you when the
atoms dissociate so you don't have to worry about death, you will not be punished after
death for anything that you do, death is really the end of that particular configuration.
Now of course from the Catholic Church's point of view this is heretical and we now have
very good evidence that the Pope that initially encouraged Galileo to write his book about
Copernican astronomy became embroiled in a serious political battle within the Catholic
hierarchy that involved being so to speak soft on heretics at a time when the church
was fighting for its life against the Protestants.
Remember Galileo's trial came out in almost the middle of the Thirty Years War between
the Catholics and the Protestants 1618 to 1648 and so the Pope decided that he could
not defend Galileo, he had to let the Inquisition run with what they were doing in part because
of this atomism.
Anyway, the vacuum was a major issue in the first half of the 17th century and together
with the then recent invention of the air pump the question was connected with the question
of whether the atmosphere, whether air has weight and so Blaise Pascal, a brilliant French
scientist of the early 17th century, man who was a teenager invented the first as we think,
the first mechanical calculator for multiplication and addition and was a contributor to early
probability theory and to geometry and algebra generally before he got religion in a serious
way and decided that all of this was frivolous and he needed to save his soul.
But Pascal suggested to his brother-in-law that he build essentially this first device,
the barometer, and carry it up a mountain and see if the height of the column of mercury
that was supported in the barometer changed as a function of height.
It was an early and very important experiment and in fact, son of a gun, it did.
As you climbed, the size of the column of mercury supported by a barometer was shrank
and that showed that air pressure was lower, so to speak, the weight of the atmosphere
pressing down on the open tube of the barometer was less than at sea level and so the pressure
went down.
At least that was Pascal's interpretation of what was happening in the barometer and
that included that required believing that in the closed section of the barometer, the
empty space between the top of the level of mercury and the top of the barometer tube
was a vacuum and therefore did not exert any force on the column of mercury.
The only force was coming from the open tube which was exposed to the atmosphere and that
then became a source of controversy how to interpret the results of the experiment which
reinforces Descartes' view that experiments are equivocal, they're always equivocal, they
need to be interpreted so you have to use them very carefully, but the barometer tells
us about air pressure and we cannot independently verify that just as if a thermometer tells
you that the temperature of something is 413 degrees or even 186 degrees, you can't verify
that, you have to assume that well it's 186 degrees because the thermometer says so.
Now that can matter if you are, for example, monitoring a chemical process in which the
ingredients have to be kept above 186 degrees or below 186 degrees, so then it matters and
if the thing works and then you say well if the thermometer told me 186 then that's good
enough for me, it's telling me the truth and the third instrument which was actually related
to the barometer was the invention of the air pump which Robert Boyle and his then assistant
but subsequent peer collaborator Robert Hook used to discover the first laws of the behavior
of gases, the relationships among pressure, volume and temperature, mathematical algebraic
equations relating pressure, volume and temperature of a gas, these were formulated by Boyle and
Hook by using this air pump which created a partial vacuum and then could allow you
to see what happens to the pressure of a gas when you change the volume and conversely
on the same thing with temperature. Now at the time Thomas Hobbes, a rationalistic, deterministic
philosopher of a Cartesian type, Hobbes severely criticized what Boyle and Hook were doing,
he severely criticized the air pump on grounds that actually are not so much right but very
relevant to the issue that I'm trying to raise here. How do you know that what you are observing
is not being produced by the machine? How do you know that the machine is operating correctly?
Once you get below a certain level of sophistication and in fact even telescopes and microscopes
are at that level, you have to be trained in order to make sense of what the instrument
is showing you. The instrument has to be tuned, it has to be calibrated, you have to know
that the instrument is working right but when you're inventing a new instrument how do you
know it's working right? How are you supposed to confirm that? When your DNA sequencing
machine gives you a sequence, then you have to assume that the machine is working right
if those sequences make sense to you. So you're interpreting them and you're relating the
sequence that comes out to the results that you have read in the journals that yes, this
laboratory here identified that sequence and now that that's why I assume that the bits
and pieces in between are correct also because the machine, you know, at a very simple level,
we use electronic calculators all the time, for example, to do your tax returns. Nobody
checks to see if the calculator is working correctly. How come, you know, even Lexuses
have flaws, how come nobody wonders whether the calculator is giving the right multiplications
the right additions or not? But in fact, we don't do that. We could do it for arithmetic
calculations, it might be very tedious but we could do it when it comes to using the
computer for very complex simulations, for example, weather simulations, for simulations
of what's going on inside the earth reconstructed from picking up seismic waves from earthquakes
or from detonating explosives, then the computer is doing something that we can't check.
You know, it might take hundreds or thousands of scientists, engineers and mathematicians
years to reproduce that particular set of results so it ain't going to happen. When
you're talking about particle accelerators, as we have a picture of here, and the particle
accelerator generates a mountain of numerical data which needs to be interpreted. When the
top quark was discovered in 1995, it was after several years of analyzing data from the,
that had been taken in the earlier 1990s, some 15 million events within the particle accelerator
and it turned out that six of them were interpreted as signs that the top quark was created moment
terribly inside the particle accelerator at Fermilab. This seems to me a quite clear
example that instruments are extensions of our mind. They are not extensions of our senses.
A neutrino telescope buried deep under the ground in which thousands of photomultiplier
tubes float in super pure water and every now and then they go off and we interpret
this as, uh oh, neutrinos are passing through here. The instrument is designed in accordance
with ideas and theories and then the instrument, then the instrument tells us something which
we interpret by means of ideas and theories. So it's an interesting question, is there
a circularity here? Is there a sense in which, in which the sophists were really right? That
while we pay lip service in science to a definition of knowledge is universal necessary and certain,
while we insist that the presentation of scientific results be in this deductive format, that we
say that a theory is only correct if we can deduce from it consequences that match empirical
experience, that really the reasoning that goes on in the laboratory is very, very different
and it's really about experience, that it reflects ideas that we have derived from experience
that we then formalize and say they are true with a capital T as proven, as proven by the
fact that we can deduce, we can deduce from the assumptions of the theory, from the principles
that the theory employs, from the premises of the theory, we can deduce specific phenomena
that are confirmed in the laboratory. That suggests, if that's the case, then I think
that the study of instruments raises some very interesting questions about the idea
of science and the nature of scientific knowledge. It is the case of course, and that's what
makes life complicated and in some respects beautiful, it is the case that sometimes instruments
designed for a totally different purpose reveal outcomes, give results that force new ideas
and new theories. It was experiments done in the 19th century in support of this ether
physics that dominated European physics in the second half of the 19th century that suggested
that to Einstein, that maybe the absoluteness of the speed of light in a vacuum for all
observers that were in uniform motion with respect to one another, there were some experimental
outcomes that supported his inventing that axiom of special relativity theory. Nothing
that could be said to have proven it, but it was suggestive and it was not, certainly
that was not intended. When Carl Janski built a device in order to study static on long
distance transmission lines and inadvertently discovered that the sun is a source of radio
waves, electromagnetic energy that had not been anticipated, so that founded the discipline
of radio astronomy and radio astronomy subsequently building much more complicated and sophisticated
instruments has caused us to rethink what the universe is made up of and what stars
and galaxies are and intergalactic space are really like. We used to think of intergalactic
space as basically empty with some floating gas, with gas clouds and some dust, but we
had no idea what was really going on. Through radio telescopes, we have been able to identify
the atoms and molecules floating around in space and quite a complicated inventory of
molecules which has forced us to revise our conception of the universe in ways that we
will be talking about. So sometimes scientific instruments, even though they may be built
in accordance with some other, with one particular set of ideas, give outcomes which force us
to change our ideas. Sometimes an instrument that's not a scientific instrument strictly
speaking when Jansky was not building a scientific instrument, was really an engineering device
studying static on long distance telephone lines and trying to find sources of interference
with the telephone cables, then can also force us to change our ideas just as archaeologists
can discover something which forces us, they can discover objects in the ground. Objects
in the ground are not ideas. It may be that ideas led you to dig in a particular place,
but once you discover an object, then that object could force a reconsideration and in
fact, it can force whole new theories. When we started finding human fossils in East Africa,
for example, especially since World War II, then repeatedly new discoveries have changed
our theories about the evolution of human beings. And then when DNA was applied to the
study of these fossils, then it also has led to complete changes. So it's not that, oh,
instruments are merely ideas, or that instruments are neutral, that they are objective means
by which scientists study nature, and so they're not tainted, so to speak, by theories and
ideas, and there's no logical circularity. It's a more complex situation than that. That
is, scientific instruments and scientific theories have a complicated relationship, a relationship
of reciprocal influence. And I think that a crucial insight, the one that I'm focusing
on in this lecture, the point that I want to make sure that I get across to you in this
lecture, is the idea that instruments, as a matter of fact, it is a mistake, it is misleading
at least misleading, and I think it is an error to think of instruments as extensions
of our senses. We must appreciate the role that ideas and theories play in the design
and construction of instruments, but also in the interpretation of the results of what
it is that the instruments have revealed to us. Instruments do not simply reveal what's
out there. You have to make sense of what they reveal. When you look through an atomic
force microscope, and the computer paints a picture on the computer monitor screen of
one type of atom, gold atoms sitting on top of silicon atoms, spelling out IBM, and in
a very famous illustration recently, then that is a computer reconstruction. You're
not seeing atoms, you're seeing a computer reconstruction, and the computer program is
based on quantum theory, and it's based on very complex mathematical algorithms that
interpret minute fluctuations in the electromagnetic energy at the tip of the probe of the atomic
force microscope, and the surface of the material that you're trying to create an image of.
This is even true for observational astronomy, and I think, well, nevertheless, I'm exaggerating.
When you talk about a telescope, we still look through the telescope and we see what's
at least optical astronomy, but that hasn't been true for decades. Astronomers really
don't look through telescopes anymore, because the latest generation of telescopes are computer
controlled, not just computer controlled in terms of their direction, but they're computer
controlled because they have multiple mirrors that are flexed in real time by computers
to keep them in focus as temperature changes, as humidity changes, and because they have
what's called adaptive optics to compensate for the turbulence in the atmosphere, that
computers now collect light not through lenses that give you an image on the human eye, they
collect light using charged couple devices, like the things in your digital camera, so
that the observational astronomer sits in a room and looks at a computer screen and observes
the images constructed by the computer software based on the light coming in. So even for
observational astronomy, let alone cosmic ray astronomy, gamma ray astronomy, x-ray astronomy,
neutrino astronomy, etc., all of those are more obviously cases in which the instruments
are extensions of the mind, but even optical astronomy. So this is a very interesting idea.
The idea of scientific instruments, which became identified with science in the 17th
century, so that the invention of such instruments that are extensions of our mind is a pivotal
development in modern science. If you're talking about one of the scientific ideas that have
changed the world, it is through instruments that scientists have developed theories that
have changed the world, and those instruments did not drop down out of the sky, those instruments
themselves are extensions of the minds of the scientists that were trying to understand the world.
