The last lecture on instruments as extensions of the mind contained an implicit problem
that's worth getting back to and making explicit as a way of a lead-in to the subject of this
lecture, which is the idea of time.
The implicit problem is the distinction between an instrument and a tool.
What's the difference between a scientific instrument like the Hubble Space Telescope,
for example, and a tool like a screwdriver?
It would seem as though there is a clear distinction between something as complex as the Hubble Space Telescope
and maybe that's exemplary of a scientific instrument and something as simple as a screwdriver.
Well, surely that's not an instrument.
And yet, it turns out to be the case that the difference between an instrument and a tool
is much less clear than may at first seem to be the case.
For example, the tool like a screwdriver already shapes the kinds of problems that it is capable
of solving and the kind of solution that it offers to that problem.
For example, if the problem is fastening two objects together, then the screw is one solution to that problem.
But the screw and the screwdriver are complementary.
You can't have screws without a screwdriver.
You can't have a screwdriver without the screw.
Is the screwdriver going to have a plane head, for example,
or is it going to have a Phillips head just to pick two examples?
The screwdriver does not exist separately from the screw and from a problem context
that the screw and the screwdriver are both part of, let's call it, a simple system that solves that problem,
that offers a solution to that problem.
Obviously, nails and the nail and the hammer and glue would be other solutions to the problem
of fastening objects together and there have been historically many solutions
to the problem of fastening objects together.
It depends on what the context of the fastening is.
The point here is that instruments and tools both define a problem space, so to speak,
metaphorically speaking, the space of defining a problem in a particular way
and then offering a particular kind of solution rather than a different kind of solution.
And we must think of a scientific instrument as an element in a broader context of posing problems,
defining problems, and then suggesting ways of solving or addressing that problem.
An instrument or a tool can take a number of different forms.
It can be an artifact, like the Hubble Space Telescope,
or a tool can be a concept or an idea.
For example, two lectures back, we talked about the ideas of conservation and symmetry.
Conservation and symmetry are ideas.
They become scientific concepts when they are defined in specific ways
and they serve the way tools do in defining a problem area
and addressing proposing a solution to that problem area.
So although it sounds odd, metaphorically at least, concepts can be, and in general,
it is good to say that concepts are, tools.
In particular, we are going to look now at the concept time,
at the idea of time as a scientific idea
and use it as a way of illustrating the difference between an idea and a scientific idea.
This is a very important distinction to keep in mind.
Generically, and we've been making it throughout this course,
an idea is a scientific idea when it functions in the context of a scientific explanation,
which includes defining a problem in a specific way
and suggesting that x will be a solution to that problem as opposed to y or z, for example.
So a scientific idea is not just an idea, it contains within it an implicit and explicit set of definitions
that allow us to shrink the problem space to one that has a very specific form
and then to address solutions to that problem space, to that problem,
and to see whether, in fact, we consider that problem solved.
This is what you might call in a very broad sense of the underlying logic of scientific inquiry.
So if we look at the idea of time and of how time became a scientific idea
and how time became an issue for science, especially in the 19th century,
then I think we'll get a good idea of how scientific ideas generally evolve
from a casual notion or from a common sense, ordinary language notion of an idea to a precise scientific idea
and the fact that they are precise does not necessarily mean that now they are clear and unambiguous
because they can be given a precise definition but the definition itself is contingent.
It could take a number of different forms and it could well be the case
that you have multiple precise definitions of time that are conflicting
and although this is very bad technique in comedy as it is in prize fighting,
I will telegraph that our conclusion is going to be to show that the idea of time in 19th and 20th century physics
was in fact deeply conflicted and that contrary definitions of time as ultimately real and ultimately unreal
are somehow both being carried along within the framework of scientific theorizing.
I want to begin by reading a passage from Augustine's Confessions, Book 11 of Augustine's Confessions
because this is one of the classic expressions of inquiry into time,
which is of course a universal aspect of human experience and so when philosophers look for a philosophical idea of time,
they must do the same thing that scientists do when they take the ordinary sense of time
and convert it into a scientific idea.
Let's begin with Augustine who writes in Book 11,
What then is time?
I know well enough what it is provided that nobody asks me,
but if I am asked what it is and try to explain, I am baffled.
All the same, I can confidently say that I know that if nothing passed, there would be no past time.
If nothing were going to happen, there would be no future time.
And if nothing were, there would be no present time.
Of these three divisions of time then, past, present and future,
how can two, the past and the future, be when the past no longer is and the future is not yet?
As for the present, if it were always present and never moved on to become the past,
it would not be time but eternity.
If therefore the present is time only by reason of the fact that it moves on to become the past,
how can we say that even the present is when the reason why it is is that it is not to be?
The whole point of the present is that it slides into the past and becomes the past,
so we can never grasp the present, the future doesn't exist yet,
and when it does exist, it's the present which is sliding into the past which no longer exists.
And so Augustine leaves us with this puzzle of what can time be?
How can we clarify the idea of time given the common sense perception
that time falls into one of three categories, past, present and future,
and yet none of these fully is in a way that allows us to give any reality to time?
Well, Augustine later on in book 11 or we would call it chapter 11 of his book
or philosophical autobiography called The Confessions gives a philosophical theory of time,
but what I'd like to do now is turn to Isaac Newton, his mathematical principles of natural philosophy,
his great work of 1687 in the translation by Ibernard Cohen and Wittman,
a superb recent English translation with extensive commentary,
and at the very beginning Newton who was going to offer us a theory of mechanics,
that is to say of how one can reduce the motion of material particles to scientific law,
the universal laws must define space and time in ways that are adequate to the problem of describing motion,
because motion is change of space over change of time, change of position in time.
So without definitions of space and time, we can't even begin to write an equation of motion.
Newton wants to make these definitions explicit.
Now, getting back to what I started with, the screwdriver, Newton is going to define space precisely,
define time precisely, at least philosophically speaking,
and for purposes of contracting the problem space of the problem here being how to describe the motion of material particles
in a way that gives us universal laws of motion, he's going to define them in very specific ways,
but it will turn out in 1915 when Einstein formulates the general theory of relativity
that these ideas of space and time are by no means obvious, Newton's ideas are by no means obvious,
and in fact have to be given up in order to do justice to 20th century physical theories about space, time, matter, motion and energy.
But listen to what Newton wrote and this becomes foundational for modern science from the end of the 17th century
from Newton's Principia right up to the general theory of relativity.
Although time, space, place and motion are very familiar to everyone, sounds a lot like Augustine,
it must be noted that these quantities are popularly conceived solely with reference to the objects of sense perception,
and this is the source of certain preconceptions.
Ordinarily we have various preconceptions about space, time, place and motion,
and these have to be clarified if we're going to do anything as precise as right equations of motion that are universally valid.
To eliminate these preconceptions it is useful to distinguish these quantities, space, time, place and motion,
into absolute and relative, true and apparent, mathematical and common.
Absolute, true and mathematical time, in and of itself and of its own nature,
without reference to anything external, flows uniformly and by another name is called duration.
Relative, apparent and common time is any sensible and external measure of duration by means of motion.
Such a measure for example as an hour, a day, a month, a year is commonly used instead of true time,
which for Newton again is an absolute entity which exists independently of anything happening in time,
as if there were an absolute clock slowly ticking away at the center of the universe,
and that becomes the absolute metronome so to speak of all of the affairs of the natural world.
All of the processes of the natural world from the smallest to the largest are measured,
and the change in any of these processes is measured ideally in accordance with this absolute clock.
Now this definition when you harp on it to this extent is clearly highly problematic
because then you can ask the question, how do you measure it?
And it's interesting that people did not until the early 20th century until Einstein challenged this definition.
Einstein was not the first, but Einstein was the first to build it into a systematic theory of the universe,
challenged this definition and to claim that the fact is the definition cannot be sustained.
This notion of absolute time and Newton gives a definition of space as absolute as well.
So now we have the, let's call it the foundational definition of time for science which is absolute in this particular way.
Nevertheless, time as Newton describes it is still flowing.
It has an absolute character and it flows uniformly.
How we know that this next second is just as long as the preceding second is a thorny problem.
Once you start thinking about it, it's liable to make you dizzy.
But there's another aspect of time that was brought into science from the very beginning,
and that is the timelessness of knowledge, truth and reality.
The timelessness of reason that was brought into modern science when it incorporated
the Greek philosophical definition of knowledge that we've talked about in earlier lectures right at the beginning of this course,
defining knowledge in a way that is universal, necessary and certain,
and epitomized by deductive reasoning, that deductive reasoning gives us access to truth,
then that implies that ultimately knowledge, truth and reality are timeless because deduction is timeless.
What makes deduction work, so to speak, the reason why the conclusion of a deductive argument is a necessary consequence
of the truth of its premises is because the conclusion is already implicit in the premises.
It is merely an accident that we have to draw the conclusion.
The conclusion was always in the premises.
And this notion of deduction, deductive reasoning as the sole means to truth,
knowledge and the exposure of reality is means that in physics the effect is deducible from the cause.
All scientific theories present themselves in this way.
This is the Archimedean method that Galileo and Newton made the centerpiece of their own scientific methodology.
The effect is deducible from the cause.
That means that the effect was always in the cause and therefore time is an illusion.
There is ultimately the future is already contained in the present, which was of course the future of a past,
and so from the very beginning of the existence of the universe,
every subsequent moment of time, everything that happened and everything that was, that will be,
was already implicit in the beginning and is deducible from it and therefore time is, so to speak, superficial.
It ultimately doesn't matter.
It matters to us, of course, but in the ultimate scheme of things,
time is an illusion of that limited consciousness that human beings possess
that requires that they draw the conclusion of deductive arguments
instead of seeing the conclusion in the argument instantaneously.
And so in fact this was part of Augustine's solution to the problem of time
and it is referred to explicitly by Galileo that God does not need to draw conclusions.
God sees all future time in the instant of creation.
And in fact this is fundamental to science and as we will see, even into the 20th century,
this notion that if we knew, if we had a clear understanding of the nature of the universe,
the instant it sprang into existence, we would be able to predict the existence of stars, galaxies, planets,
the possibility of life and the emergence of an intelligence such as ours
capable of figuring out the nature of the universe.
That all of this is implicit in the premises, logically speaking, the premises of the universe
and physically speaking, the initial moment of the physical existence of the universe
is pregnant with the whole future of the universe.
And in fact Leibniz, one of the founders of modern philosophy and of modern science,
Leibniz used that expression, the present is pregnant with the future.
The future is already in the present and it is only so to speak accidental that it takes time to emerge.
Concurrently from the late 17th and throughout the 18th century, concurrently while Leibniz was saying this,
in the context in which embryological theory had taken the form that we call pre-formationism,
that's what they called it as well.
Pre-formationism is the theory that the embryo is in fact fully formed within the,
well there were two different pre-formationism,
some held that the embryo was fully formed in the egg of the female,
some that it was in the sperm of the male, and if you had a powerful enough microscope,
you could look inside a sperm cell or inside an egg cell, although that language is anachronistic for 1700,
you could look inside and you would see the infant with all of its organs fully formed.
But the implication of that is, so that means that embryological development is simply an unfolding of what is already there.
The implication is that if you went back to Adam, in Adam's sperm you would see Seth,
but then if you looked in Seth's sperm then you would see the sperm of his children forever,
which does seem a bit implausible, and the same thing for those who believe that pre-formationism was centered on the egg.
If you looked in Eve's eggs, one of Eve's eggs, you would be able to see folded inside each other an egg, an egg, an egg for all future human beings.
The idea here, of course, is it really reduces the flow of time to something incidental.
The form that this took in physics, for example, was the reversibility of the equations of motion of matter.
Now, this comes to a head, this vision of time comes to a head in Pierre Simon Laplace's statement in the early 1800s,
that if we knew that all of the complete description of the motions of the material particles that made up the physical universe
at any given moment in time, call that T0.
If we knew the position and the momentum of every particular particle of matter in the universe, finite, in principle, such a thing could be done,
although obviously we can't do it, and maybe nobody else other than God could do it as well,
if you had such an intelligence then that intelligence would be able to predict the future with unlimited accuracy
and retro-dick the past with unlimited accuracy.
Again, the implication of this is that time really doesn't matter, and that is a fundamental feature of modern physics,
of modern science centered on the physical account of matter.
I have to be careful now because this conception of time underwent a transformation and ultimately a radical alternative was offered by the 19th century.
The transformation, in a sense, begins, and here again we see something that I've referred to a number of times in these lectures,
that the history of ideas is pretty fuzzy, and people have an enormous capacity for even people who claim to be dealing with precise ideas
like philosophers and scientists, that they have a tremendous capacity for keeping ideas and inconsistent alternative ideas together
when it suits their particular intellectual agendas, but the challenge to this notion of time as ultimately irrelevant
because at the deepest level reality does not change, then began innocuously enough with the Renaissance humanists who I've referred to before,
who erected history contrary to Aristotle into a science.
Aristotle had said that history could not be a science precisely because it is contingent, it does not have this deductive character,
it is particular and contingent, whereas the humanists claim that that's exactly what makes it the real science,
not this philosophical notion of knowledge that the Plato and Aristotle argued for in which knowledge is universal, necessary, and certain.
The humanists argued that history was a science, because history captured a fundamental truth about reality,
which is that it is contingent, that it is merely probable, that it is highly particular and context specific,
and in the course of the 16th, 17th, 18th centuries, this idea of the historicity of reality,
that reality develops in time and that it makes a difference, becomes increasingly important.
We devoted a lecture to the idea of progress, and clearly the idea of progress is a temporal idea.
It is the secular version of the religious idea in the Judeo-Christian tradition that history is the dimension of hope and salvation.
The secular version of that, which again the Renaissance humanists were instrumental in making central to European consciousness,
is the idea of progress, that time is the dimension in which hope for an improvement in the human condition is contained.
It is in time and history is the story of time in which becomes the dimension of opportunity.
Now the future is the dimension of opportunity. It is not mechanically implicit in the past and inevitable.
The future can be one of hope because of opportunities that we can exploit, that we can shape in order to improve the human condition.
In the course of the 18th century especially, we see more and more theories that make reality in many different forms historical.
So the Italian, I would still call him a humanist thinker, Giambattista Vico, published a book early in the 18th century called The New Science
that argued for the historicity of human consciousness, that we didn't always think the same way.
Human beings did not always think the same way. We did not mean by reasoning what the Greek philosopher is meant by reasoning in antiquity.
In the time that was antique when the ancient Greeks lived. So in the beginnings of the human race, we experienced the world differently.
We spoke differently about the world. We thought and felt and reasoned differently about the world.
And in this book, he gives an argument for what we would now call the evolution of human consciousness and human reasoning.
And we see this notion of historicity applied to the development of the universe, the development of the solar system, the development of the earth as a planet.
Aristotle had said that on balance, the earth has always been the way it is.
An earthquake here, a volcanic eruption there, a tidal wave there, but those are simply local phenomena.
Whereas in the 18th century, we began to understand that the earth had a history.
There was a time when it was fundamentally different from what it is now and that it is changing in ways that make it irreversibly different from what it had been.
At the end of the 18th century, Gottfried Herder argued for the historicity of human cultures, that cultures go through periods, through historical development and change over time.
This concept of changing, that time as a dimension in which fundamental change manifests itself, is made time an issue for philosophy.
And Hegel at the beginning of the 19th century, perhaps the most influential philosopher of the 19th century, Hegel tried to develop a new deductive theory, a new theory of deduction, a new logic of deduction, which incorporated time.
But it was a time which was deterministic in its character, so that the future did unfold deductively, but time manifested itself.
It was a dynamic logic, but it still retained this deductive developmental character.
We see this in the Maverick Hegelian Karl Marx, whose materialistic determinism was one in which the future is an inevitable product of the past and the present.
In science too, in the 19th century, time became an issue, and we are going to explore this in a future lecture on the idea of energy.
But telegraphing that in advance, in the middle of the 19th century, within physics and chemistry, the idea of energy forced in the second law of thermodynamics, the science of energy that emerged in the 1850s and 60s,
that the second law of thermodynamics is that heat can only flow from a hotter body to a colder body to a less hot body, and that implied that there was an arrow to time, that time could only go in one direction.
It was not reversible, it was irreversible, and Darwin's theory, the Darwin Wallace theory of evolution, which we will again be exploring in another lecture,
that theory too implies that there are irreversible and unpredictable dimensions to time.
That time is the dimension of unpredictability of the contingent, and that, in fact, time is the dimension in which true novelty appears.
Something is truly novel if it is not a deductive consequence of the present.
Now this notion of time, as having an arrow, as having a direction so that it is not reversible, poses a serious challenge to the prevailing notion of time in physics,
where the equations are all reversible in time, given any equation of motion.
If you plug in a plus value for time, then the particles that the equation described evolve, so to speak, in one direction into what we call the future.
If you replace it with minus value and negative value for time, then it flows into the past.
Prediction and retro addiction are perfectly symmetrical.
The emergence of thermodynamics and evolutionary theory in biology forced, so to speak,
many physicists to develop statistical interpretations of thermodynamics and ultimately statistical interpretations of mechanics that preserved the reversibility of time.
There was a positive need, so to speak, intellectually, for time to be reversible, which means that ultimately time is not real.
And this led, even as late as the middle of the 20th century, Einstein, for example, to insist that quantum theory, because of its probabilistic character,
cannot be the ultimate theory in physics because Einstein, among many others, continued to believe that time in the end was an illusion of the limited nature of human consciousness.
It was not ultimately real.
Meanwhile, from the middle of the 19th century on throughout the 20th century, as we will be exploring in subsequent lectures, there was a continual growth in this challenge to this notion of time,
a growth in the characterization of time as irreversible and therefore ultimately real.
So we have within science, I would call it an ambivalence at best, or a serious conflict about time on the one side, a feeling that if time is not reducible to ultimately being merely an accident,
then, or incidental to the way human beings experience the world, then we lose the power of scientific explanation because we cannot use deduction and predictability and law cannot mean what it has meant.
But on the other hand, a more and more powerful case continued to be made for the view that time is not reversible, that it is fundamentally irreversible, and that probability must come into our description of the world.
We are going in the next lecture to begin exploring a series of ideas in which the concept of time and this ambivalence are very real features that shape the development of those ideas, and we'll begin with the concept of the timeless atom.
