I hope that your seatbelts are firmly fastened because in this lecture we're going to make
an abrupt change of direction and as you know from the work in 17th century mechanics, changing
direction means a force has to be applied and so we're going to be shoved in a new direction
as we look at the idea of energy. The idea of energy represents a reorientation of modern
science because it is in a certain sense incompatible with the atomistic style of thinking. So here
we have in the 19th century which is when the idea of energy becomes a scientific idea
and becomes incorporated into a whole new science called thermodynamics, which literally
means heat force, that the dynamics of heat, that's thermodynamics, and that the rise of
thermodynamics in the middle of the 19th century occurs at the, I guess you might call it at the
highest point of development at what seems like the triumphal realization of the atomistic style
of thinking. The atomic theory of matter, the cell theory of life, the germ theory of disease,
the gene theory of inheritance are all 19th century constructs and here we see unfolding
an extremely powerful, fruit, explanatorily fruitful approach to studying natural phenomena
which is keyed to atoms literally and metaphorically and a growing conviction that these atoms are real
immediate universal acceptance practically in the case of the cell, a little more slowly in the case
of the germ, split between chemistry and physics in the case of the physical atom and in the case
of the gene at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century. So right at the moment of
the greatest flowering of the atomistic style of thinking, there is now emerging a subversion
of the atomistic style of thinking from the side of process, the process style of thinking.
The atomistic style of thinking is expressive of this Parmenides substance metaphysics that I've
been referring to throughout this course. The process side which we haven't had much
talk about yet but between the mid 19th century to the present it becomes increasingly important
and increasingly a source of many of the most important scientific ideas that emerge associated
with Heraclitus' theories that change is fundamental and that we need to explain
a natural phenomenon in terms of change, not reducing change to timeless things. So that's
process metaphysics. So it's kind of acute, well, acute is perhaps not the right term. It's an
ironic thing consistent with the philosophy of Hegel who held that the seed of transformation
was always buried in the current stage of the status quo that's a status quo
contained within it at any given time, some contradiction that undermined the status quo
and led to, so to speak, the next phase of, in Hegel's case, the next phase of history.
Hegel, of course, I've referred to earlier as the philosopher, the rationalist philosopher,
that tried to introduce time into deduction because in the 19th century time had become
such an issue for philosophers and then for scientists as I discussed in the lecture on time.
So it's kind of a cute thing that from a Hegelian perspective the triumph of atomistic style of
thinking is now being sort of eaten away at by the rise of non-atomistic style, a process style
of thinking. The fundamental problem for science, as I've referred to in a number of lectures,
is explaining change. That's in a certain sense the core mission of science, explaining change.
And the modern science explains change in terms of matter in motion. The Parmenidian approach
is to say that the explanation of matter of change by way of matter in motion is to focus
on matter and its properties. So thinghood is the key. Atoms are things. Cells are things.
Germs are things. Genes are things. They have properties. Their properties are what explain
change. The Heraclitean approach, and by the way, Hegel in his perhaps most accessible book,
The Phenomenology of Spirit, sometimes translated The Phenomenology of Mind,
that uses Heraclitus very much in the introduction to explain what he's trying to do to bring Heraclitus
Heraclitus' process view into the Parmenidian character of deductive reasoning. So the Heraclitean
view is to say, oh, we have to explain change by way of matter in motion by focusing not on matter,
not on things, but on motion, on the nature of process. And processes must also have properties,
and they must be relatively fixed properties, because otherwise you won't be able to predict
the future. If anything can happen at any time, we've seen this. That's the key to science in any
event. The reason why things have fixed properties, so processes have to have fixed properties. And
so the focus now shifts from matter to motion, broadly speaking, to processes. And it is,
perhaps it may seem odd, that something as relatively innocuous and unsophisticated as
heat, the study of heat, should be the occasion for this fundamental reorientation of the direction
of science from the mid-19th century to the present. We'll talk in the future, in the next few
lectures, about this, the great ideas of the 19th century associated with this orientation.
The study of heat was problematic, because ever since, at least since Francis Bacon at the beginning
of the 17th century, there had been contrary views of heat. One view holding that heat was
simply the motion of particles of matter, and therefore was not a thing at all. It was a name
for motion, for a particular kind of mechanical process. The other view holding that note,
heat is a thing called caloric. It's a weightless fluid. Everything is loaded with caloric. And
when something is hot, when we say that something is hot, what we're saying is that for a variety
of reasons, the caloric is escaping from that thing. A thing is hot when caloric is leaving
that thing. When something burns, it's losing caloric. Caloric is a thing. Alternatively,
heat is merely a name for the motion of the tiny parts of which matter is composed. And if you
make the particles move very rapidly, for example, by rubbing them together through friction,
it gets hot because now they're moving more quickly. Notice, you can't see that happening,
not even with the microscope, and you can't see the caloric. It is defined in a way that it is,
in a certain sense, not detectable, except by its release. So we say, oh, there's caloric. That
thing's hot. It's losing caloric. This controversy became increasingly nasty around the turn of
the 19th century. And while we think that all sophisticated people were on the side of those
who held that heat as motion, as a matter of fact, some of the most eminent scientists of the late
18th and early 19th century strongly believed that heat was caloric, that heat was this weightless
fluid that escaped from what we call hot bodies. They were hot because they were losing caloric.
This debate was lent urgency by the introduction of improved steam engines,
which were now becoming important commercial objects, starting in the last decade or so
of the 18th century. And with increasing rapidity in the first half of the 19th century,
steam engines powered the new industrial revolution. And the performance of steam engines was very
important. It was very important commercially. And belatedly, scientists began to pay attention to
that. But let me refer to what was supposed to have been a crucial experiment that established
that heat was motion, not a thing. This experiment was done by an odd character, a British subject
who lived in America at the time of the revolution, sided with the king, and so was uncomfortable
by the outcome of the Revolutionary War. America went back to England and had a very
bizarre career in England, France, and what became Germany over the next decades along the way,
marrying Lavoisier's widow and becoming a count. And so he called himself Count Rumford.
And he decided that he could show once and for all that heat was motion. And he set up an experiment
in which he set up a cannon-boring machine, cast iron cannon, the central cylindrical hole in the
cannon being bored by an iron-boring device. And this was in a tub of water, very large tub of
water, obviously. And then as the boring device bored the hole in the cast iron blank that the
cannon was to be made from, the water got hotter and hotter and started boiling. And it kept boiling
and had to keep adding more water for days as teams of horses turned the boring machine
and kept the cast iron hot enough to boil the water. And after a while Rumford said,
look, it's obvious. There can't be an infinite amount of caloric in this cast iron. This proves once
and for all that heat is motion. Well, it didn't prove it once and for all because, for example,
P.S. Simone Laplace, one of the greatest mathematical physicists of that time,
quite familiar with all of this work, believed to the end of his life that heat was caloric.
John Dalton, who we see as the father of atomic theory, spent almost as much time in his book
that founded the modern theory of the atom, defending the caloric theory of heat as he did,
the atomic theory of matter. And interestingly, a French engineer, Saadi Carnot,
who was interested in the performance of heat engines, not in an abstract scientific theory
of heat, but in the performance of heat engines, he believed in the caloric theory of heat. And
in a book that was published in 1824, which expanded work of his engineer father back in the 1790s,
but with many original contributions of his own, Saadi Carnot argued for a law of conservation
of caloric because, of course, there could not be an infinite amount of caloric, as
as Thompson pointed out in his experiment. So there must be a law of conservation of caloric,
but what he did was he set up a mathematical, a quantitative, a quantitative, relatively
simple quantitative relationship between the performance, the mechanical output of a steam
engine and the caloric lost by the fuel that was used in order to create the heat for the
steam engine. In order to transform the water into steam, so you have to use a certain amount
of fuel, let's say coal is burned, that coal loses caloric, and we can measure the efficiency of a
steam engine by looking at the, by this quantitative relationship, which tells us how much work,
now work means how much mechanical output did we get from this machine, given this much fuel,
given the burning of this much fuel. These ideas were expressed relatively qualitatively,
except for this quantitative relationship having to do with work, so he redefined work and work
now becomes a scientific term and a scientific idea, not the sort of thing where you get dressed
in the morning and you go to work, but that work refers to a very specific, scientifically defined
quantity, in his case the relationship between fuel and fuel consumed and mechanical output.
These ideas were formulated mathematically by a physicist named Emil Clapeyron and published
again giving Carnot full credit and came to the attention of a wider range of physicists
who probably would not have looked at, at Carnot's, who probably would not have looked at
Carnot's monograph, which called Reflections on the Motive Power of Heat, which he had published
in 1824, but which contained the Clapeyron's version, contained this same idea relating
heat and mechanical work. Now we have to step back for a moment and say there's something else
going on in the background that is very important to the emergence of the idea of energy, and that
is another controversy within science over the nature of forces. We've referred to this a number
of times, the strict Cartesian view was that the only force that scientists could use in order to
explain change by way of matter in motion was mechanical contact. That was Descartes' restriction,
that with that, for him that's what made philosophy of nature scientific and rational,
is if it only referred to contact forces, because those we could in a certain sense
see happening, we needed to quantify those forces and identify the forms that they could take,
for example gravity, electricity, magnetism, and then we would explain, we would be required to,
on this view, explain all natural phenomena in terms of contact forces. Now I've referred to the
fact that even by the end of the 18th century Newton gave up on that and claimed that we needed to
assume that there was a force called gravity, that whatever it was it was not a contact force,
that electricity and magnetism and chemical attraction and the interaction between light and
matter, Newton believed that there was a force that material objects exerted on light, on his
little atoms of light, that all of those were non-contact forces. He didn't believe they were
mystical, but they were lawful and they obeyed quantitative relationships as his mathematical
theory of gravity did, but they were not contact forces. In the course of the 18th century this
Newtonian emphasis on force-based physics and chemistry conflicted with the Cartesian view,
but even the continental Cartesians simply absorbed the Newtonian force physics and increasingly
this was necessary because more and more attention was paid especially in the second half of the
18th century on the study of electricity, secondarily magnetism, and people were beginning to do lots
of experiments with electricity and magnetism, discovering the law of electric charges and
magnetic attraction and repulsion, that these obeyed a law analogous to Newton's theory of
gravity. The laws had the same form as the form of Newton's equation for the action of gravity,
and so we had this a set of forces. We had heat was in some sense a force, electricity is a force,
magnetism is a force, and of course mechanical contact is a force, and we have a suite of forces
and we ask are there any relationships among these forces? Well, at the end of the 18th century
through the work of Luigi Galvani and Alessandro Volta, the battery was invented,
electric current was discovered and sort of captured in the battery so that much more
sophisticated experiments could be done with electricity than when we only had sparks to deal
with, and among many other researchers Humphrey Davy did work showing that you can electrically
decompose molecules into these Lavoisier's new elements, and so there's a relationship between
electricity and chemistry. We have a relationship between heat and mechanical action of work.
There is in 1820 a Scandinavian physicist in the course of giving a class lecture in physics
made a startling observation. He had nearby a small battery hooked up to a little electric
circuit, and nearby there was a compass that was not there for any specific for any specific reason,
and as he was lecturing he sort of played with the on-off switch of the electric circuit he
had set up to demonstrate to his students the flow of current electricity, and as he's lecturing
he notices that the flow of that the compass needle jumps every time he turns the electric current
on or off either way. So he gets through the lecture and then he starts studying this phenomenon
systematically and publishes this. There is an interesting connection between electricity and
magnetism without any physical connection between the electric current, between the electric circuit,
and the nearby magnetized compass needle. There is some kind of a relationship, the electricity,
the electric current generates some kind of a force that attracts the magnet.
Now, Ersted was himself a sort of a member of the Romantic Nature Philosophy Movement,
which was primarily rooted in Germany, and the Romantic Nature Philosophers, for reasons
having to do with their philosophy, and they included in their membership the great German
poet and intellectual Goethe, that all the forces of nature that were one, that there that this
range of forces, electricity, magnetism, gravity, heat, that they were all fundamentally one force,
that nature was at its deepest level, nature was unified, and Ersted thought that here was
a contribution to proving that. Look at this, electricity and magnetism are related somehow.
A few years later, Michael Faraday in England, who had been an apprentice to Humphrey Davy,
who had done this work in electrochemistry, showing this relationship between electrical
electrical force and chemical force, because electricity can decompose molecules, break the
bonds. Faraday devoted many years of his life to the relationship between electricity and
magnetism, and in the process, inventing the dynamo, which is a way of getting an electric
current out of the relationship between a current between electricity and a magnet. So,
discovering that if you move a magnet around a conducting wire, a current automatically flows
through that wire, if you leave the magnet stationary, but move the conductor, then an
electric current flows through that wire, and in effect, there's an endless amount of electricity
to be gotten as long as you continually move one or the other, either a magnet or a conducting
wire in the presence of the other. And so, again, we have a relationship between mechanical action,
electricity, and magnetism, so that we have such a thing as electromagnetism. Faraday went on to
show that electricity affects light, and magnetism affects light, leading him eventually to speculate
that maybe light itself is an electromagnetic phenomenon. We see here a stepwise unification
of the different forces of nature. Oh, look, there are important connections between,
not yet a blanket statement that there is, and there is no such word, scientific idea of energy
hasn't emerged yet. It was, in the 1840s, a British physicist named James Prescott Jowell,
sometimes pronounced jewel, Jowell did a systematic study of what Carnot had been talking about,
looking for the quantitative relationship between mechanical action and work.
And he came up with equations describing how much between mechanical action and heat,
which is the measure of work. And he came up with equations that described
how much heat you can get from mechanical action by rotating a paddle inside a beaker of water
and measuring the temperature rise of the water as a function of the amount of what we would call
energy that was put into the paddle, the rate at which the paddle turned, how large the paddle was,
and so the amount of work that was done mechanically to rotate the paddle transforms
into a specific amount of heat being raised in water, and in different fluids there is a
different relationship. Now, Jowell himself did not accept the conservation of caloric.
He thought that caloric was consumed in the process of converting mechanical action into heat,
but his work was familiar to William Thomson, subsequently named Lord Kelvin, William Thomson,
who was familiar with Carnot's work through Clapeyron, and recognized that if you assumed
that matter was atomic, which Thomson was not inclined to do at the time, and if you assumed
that heat was motion, not caloric, then it looked to him that heat had to be
a conserved quantity, that something was being conserved here, although we don't know exactly
what it is that's being conserved in Jowell's experiments. It can't be the caloric because
he's saying heat is motion now, not caloric, and in the course of the 1840s, a number of
researchers were looking into all of the convergence of all of these ideas that I've been referring
to, and finally in 1847, the German physicist Hermann Helmholtz published a monograph,
which explicitly announced, so to speak, the conservation of Kraft, the German term Kraft,
which really means more like force or power, but in 1850, the British physicist William Rankine
sort of adopted the word energy, giving it its scientific meaning, and the conservation of energy
now emerged as a fundamental principle coming out of this work, I must say the centerpiece
of this work was the heat studies. It was a kind of a bonus that we had in the background going on
the recognition that chemical forces, electrical, magnetic, light, gravity, they are also forms,
they're also forces and forms of energy, and they also figure into this new concept of energy,
which Kelvin shortly afterwards identified as the most important development in physics since
Newton's Principia, since Newton's theory of gravity, that this, because he recognized that
this fundamentally altered the character of physics, moving us away from the atomistic style of
thinking towards a process view. A new science emerged in the 1850s, especially through the
others of Rudolf Clausius, that acquired the name thermodynamics, which shows the central
role of heat in all of this, and the size of thermodynamics includes within it, as its first
law, the conservation of energy. Energy can either be created or destroyed, not just heat energy,
no form, energy can not, whatever form it takes, energy can be transformed, but it cannot be created
or destroyed, and the second law is the famous one that he can only flow from a hotter body to a
colder body, it cannot flow from a colder body to a hotter body. And Clausius identified a mathematical
quantity associated with the flow of heat that he gave the name entropy to, and pointed out that in
all, in all natural processes, in all processes that's what's called in a closed system, where
energy is not, is not flowing into the system, this mathematical quantity called entropy always
increases, it never decreases, and just a few years later, maybe even a year later,
Kelvin, reading Clausius, recognized that this means that time is irreversible, so the arrow of
time emerges within thermodynamics out of the recognition that, that heat, that energy in a
system always becomes, to some degree, unavailable. It's not destroyed, it simply becomes unavailable.
This is a very controversial notion, and in a later lecture on self-organization we'll see
how in the last third of the 20th century, the notion of entropy was qualified, but at the time
it was recognized that this implies what was called the heat death of the universe, that in time the
universe is going to become cooler and cooler, it's going to lose energy, it's going to take a long
time, but eventually the universe is going to die. This goes back to that, that, that controversy
between Newton and Leibniz over whether the universe needs to be wound up, and that back to the 13th,
14th century metaphor that the universe is a clockwork mechanism. God created the universe in
the beginning. Did he give it, did God create it in such a way that it will go on forever,
or does it lose a little bit of motion, momentum, energy? The concepts are, are redefined over
the last 800 years, but here we have the idea that no, the, it turns out that Leibniz was wrong in
this one, and that, that the, the universe in fact is winding down, and there is a, an end to all
structure, order to all, to life especially as the, as energy increasingly is lost with entropy
increasing. Lost in the sense of becomes unavailable in the same way that if you drop a
tennis ball from a height of three feet, it cannot bounce back to three feet.
A certain amount of energy is lost as friction when the ball deforms when it, when it, when it hits
the ground. So the, the rise of the science of thermodynamics now brings into physics the idea
of energy. Now something fascinating about this idea of energy, energy only is physically real
in specific forms, but no specific form of energy is really energy. Energy has a generic
character, but it only manifests itself as heat energy, gravitational energy, chemical binding
energy, electrical energy, magnetic energy. You can convert electricity into magnetism,
magnetism into electricity, and magnetism into light. You can convert heat into mechanical work,
you can convert mechanical work into heat and to electricity, but, and there are strict rules
about all of these transformations. That's why energy has to be conserved, because if they're,
if it were not conserved, you would not have strict rules that there are limits to the,
to the transformation of one form of energy into another. But there's no, we have no experience
of, and there can be no experience of energy in and of itself. And that's not because we don't
have the instruments for it, it's because energy only manifests itself in specific forms, and yet
we believe that each specific form is an, is a specific instance of a generic phenomenon
and a generic quantity. It's the generic quantity that's conserved, not the specific form of it,
because the specific form can be transformed. So that's a fascinating idea in its own right,
and it enhances the gulf between atomistic thing-hood thinking and process thinking. And
energy is immaterial, there's a conservation of matter, conservation of energy, energy is not
material, and, but it is, it has the characteristics of matter and explanatory characteristics of
matter. It is, it has properties, energy has properties, energy exerts causal influences,
it is a force that acts on material objects and, and changes them. So by the middle of the
19th century, starting from the 1860s on, energy becomes an increasingly powerful idea in every
branch of science, so much so, so much so that the Irish physicist George Fitzgerald around 1880
developed a theory in, we'll talk a little bit more about this in the next lecture, that, that
developed a theory in which matter itself is produced by energy, that matter is derivative,
and that energy is the only fundamental reality, and that matter is just another form that energy
can take. So here is, I think, a one, one facet of the rise of process thinking in, in, in science.
We're going to explore a number of other facets of process thinking, undermining, so to speak,
of the atomistic style of thinking, in, in, starting especially from the second half of the
19th century, but only undermining it in the sense that it undermines the unilateral character
of atomistic style of thinking, saying that only atomistic style of thinking is necessary in order
to explain change. The process view is not, does not deny that there is merit to the atomistic
style of thinking, but we'll talk more about that in future lectures.
