At the end of the last lecture, the aether disappeared, but fields didn't disappear.
Fields and the physical reality of fields are fundamental to the general theory of relativity
and to quantum theory.
They are absolutely fundamental to our most powerful theories of matter, energy, space, time, and gravity.
So what we have to appreciate here, and it's even more startling, is that the fields remain real,
immaterial fields remain real, even when the material substrate that was proposed in order to explain
how these fields could be physically real drops out of sight.
The field is immaterial, but it is a source of forces.
Energy is transmitted, forces are transmitted through the field, and the field fills space,
but it is not a material thing.
The aether was invented in order to explain how a pattern of energy and forces,
how a pattern could exist filling space without something supporting it, material supporting it,
and that was the reason why Faraday proposed the aether.
He also, of course, was the one who named and proposed the field.
So the electromagnetic field continues to exist even when the aether drops away
and becomes central to relativity theory and quantum theory.
The two great theories of 20th century physics, the ones that here at the beginning of the 21st century,
give us our most profound descriptions of reality at its most fundamental level.
Now, what we've seen in the last two lectures is the idea of energy and the idea of the field.
Those two are, as I said in the last lecture, are closely related that represent a challenge to the atomistic style of thinking
and that attribute physical reality to immaterial entities and, furthermore,
entities that are continuously distributed in space as opposed to atoms which are sharply localized in space.
But it may be that you think that energy and field still have some of the qualities of a substance.
It sounds like an oxymoron to talk about an immaterial substance,
but the original meaning of the term substance, substantia, that which stands under something else,
could be applied. We would have to redefine what we mean by a substance.
So it's not a thing now, like an atom with fixed properties,
but that energy and fields are in some broader sense of the term in a redefined use of the term substance
that they also represent substances and stand under natural phenomena,
but with a nod in the direction of Heraclitus' notion that process is the ultimate reality, not atoms.
And I think that we need to recognize the power of the atomistic style of thinking.
The fact that it is challenged does not detract from the great successes achieved by the atomic theory
of matter and physics and chemistry, by the cell theory of life,
by the germ theory of disease, by the gene theory of inheritance.
The challenge doesn't change their results,
but it reminds us that it is always possible to abuse a good idea by pushing it too far.
And again, as I've mentioned earlier and will have occasion to say again,
it reveals a tendency on our part to either or thinking,
either the Parmenidaean atomistic approach or the Heraclitian process approach,
whereas, in fact, perhaps what we really should be saying as we look back at the history of scientific ideas
is that these are complementary approaches, very consistent with ideas that we will see emerging
when we, in the lecture on quantum theory, that there are complementary concepts
that are logically contradictory, but in fact work together very well
to give more powerful explanations than either one or the other,
either thinghood or process.
This lecture is going to push the attribution of reality to immaterial entities,
attributing reality to them because they have causal consequences
that could not be explained without attributing reality to them,
focuses on relationships and at first on structural relationships in chemistry,
in 19th century chemistry, because structure is a spatial relationship.
The idea that relationships are physically real,
that relationships have a causal character,
that they can be causal agents, independent of the Rilata,
is a very powerful idea.
And perhaps, depending on your own sort of psychology,
it may be more of a challenge to the atomistic style of thinking
than energy and fields were, because fields certainly sound like things of a kind,
even though they aren't material, and energy seems to have some kind of non-material solidity to it,
but relationships are truly abstract, and attributing reality to relationships
is, I think, a powerful revelation of the return in the 19th century
of a process approach to explaining natural phenomena.
And I referred earlier to our tendency to an either-or approach in many areas of life,
that either this is the right way to do it, or that's the right way to do it,
but resisting the idea that both may be necessary,
even though they seem to conflict with one another,
but that they can be reconciled within a broader vision,
is somewhat reminiscent of Freud's theory of repression,
in which Freud, in a famous series of lectures that he gave at Clark University
on his one and only visit to the United States, that's in Worcester, Massachusetts,
referred to the return of the press, of the repressed,
by way of that repressed feelings and ideas are continually knocking at the door,
asking to be introduced back into consciousness.
And in the 19th century, it's as if the process approach to natural philosophy
was knocking at the door and saying,
look, you guys are obsessively focused on the atomistic style of thinking,
let us in, let us in with by way of energy, by way of the field,
and now by way of the physical reality of relationships.
So let me start this part of the story by way of 19th century chemistry
and a very startling revelation, or a startling discovery,
or idea, if you prefer, in 1837, a young French chemist named August Laurent
proposed what he came to call a nucleus theory of chemical structure.
If you take seriously the idea that molecules are composed of atoms,
that chemical substances have a molecular character and that they are composed of atoms,
so until Laurent, and really for another decade after him,
the overwhelming majority of chemists who accepted the idea that the properties of a molecule
are determined by the atoms that make up the molecule.
So CO2, carbon dioxide, has one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms,
and the properties of carbon dioxide, that it is a gas and that it behaves in the ways that it does,
are determined by the fact that it is a combination of one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms.
H2SO4, sulfuric acid, has the properties it has because it has two hydrogen atoms,
one sulfur atom, and four oxygen atoms.
So what you have described a substance on this view,
when you have identified the atoms that make it up and the proportions in which they exist.
So you have CO and carbon monoxide, CO2 gives you carbon dioxide,
and H2SO4 gives you sulfuric acid,
but other combinations of hydrogen, sulfur and oxygen would give you different substances.
So that was the prevailing view when Laurent came on the scene with this strange sounding idea
that the spatial arrangement of the atoms within a molecule,
all by itself, had some consequence for the physical properties of the molecule.
Now, I want to describe this carefully because we're going to see another variant of this idea in a moment.
Laurent's idea was that atoms, in certain substances, the atoms were clustered into a geometric form
in such a way that even if you substituted different atoms at the vertices of this geometric structure,
if you like, think of a triangle, that the atoms are arranged in a triangle
and at each vertex you have a different atom,
there are certain substances where the geometric form is responsible for the properties of the molecule
and if you substitute different atoms at the vertices of that triangle,
you will have a family of substances with roughly the same properties even though you have changed the atoms.
So the idea is that somehow the geometric shape of the molecule, which is obviously an immaterial thing,
the shape is itself responsible for the properties of the molecule
because you can substitute, so it's a substitution theory,
that you can't just substitute anything, of course, because not all atoms will get together with all other atoms.
But within a relatively wide range, you can substitute atoms for the ones in any given triangular configuration of this stuff
and if you retain the triangular, if the new combination remains triangular,
then it's going to have family resemblance properties.
And as I said, he called this his nucleus theory of substitution chemistry.
His teacher, Jean-Baptiste Dumas, obviously much more famous than Laurent, picked up on this
and to some extent to Laurent's dismay, he became identified with this substitution theory and chemistry
although he called it a type theory and he expanded it by doing experiments involving many other substances
and to some extent I think it's only fair to say that Dumas maybe originally came up with this idea independently of Laurent
but was certainly aware of Laurent's work and then subsumed Laurent's work into his.
Dumas developed this type theory in which you have types of substances, types of chemical molecules
that have a distinctive spatial arrangement of the molecules
and when you substitute, it's essentially the same as Laurent's but it's more sophisticated and of wider application.
Laurent died relatively young or he may have developed this theory along somewhat the same lines.
It is important to notice that Laurent and Dumas were mocked for decades by some of the leading German chemists
especially Justice Liebig and a colleague Verla, very important 19th century chemist
for having been the first person to synthesize a molecule that exists within living beings.
Urea in this sense, he synthesized Urea and Verla and Liebig made fun of this idea
that this was a ridiculous idea that the spatial arrangement of molecules was itself responsible for physical properties of the molecule.
Not just the atomic constitution, here you can change the atomic constitution and get similar properties.
Now it turns out to be the case somewhat ironically that Liebig's students, Liebig was not just a famous chemist in his own right,
his power came from the fact that his laboratory trained generations of new scientific chemists.
Ironically, some of his most prominent students in spite of his mocking Dumas, in fact,
adopted the Dumas model as the basis for their own research programs and synthesized important chemicals
using the substitution reactions that were suggested by Dumas theory.
We'll talk a little bit more about that in a moment.
Another irony, which I think is quite rich and directly relevant to these lectures,
is that the substitution model by attributing reality to the physical arrangement of the atoms within the molecule
reinforced the physical reality of atoms even as it was attributing physical reality
to the immaterial phenomenon called a relationship, a spatial relationship,
which was given the name chemical structure only much later.
So they would not have talked about structure.
Chemical structure refers to the spatial arrangement of the atoms within a molecule.
So that's quite ironic.
That spatial arrangement is an immaterial physical reality.
It is process-like based on the dichotomy that I set up,
and it reinforces the physical reality of the atoms, atomistic style of thinking,
because it says that they are sharply localized at the vertices of the geometric shape.
Now, this is not a shift of gears, but we have to shift personality to Louis Pasteur,
who as a young man was a graduate student with August Laurent in Dumas Laboratory.
They both did research as graduate students in Dumas Laboratory,
and in the 1840s Pasteur took as his research project for his doctoral dissertation
a problem that had come up, it was published in 1844 by a chemist named Iod Ielhard Mitsurlisch,
who published an observation that the crystals of tartaric acid come in two types.
One type is optically active and one type is not.
Now, this sounds more obscure than it really is.
Tartaric acid is the residue of wines.
What forms at the bottom of a bottle of wine if you leave it stand for a very long period of time
or in wine casks.
So, it was a very important byproduct because it can ruin the taste of wine in the wine industry.
Pasteur's success in this eventually is what led him to be called in by the wine industry
to study the process of fermentation, leading to his famous 1857 publication on fermentation
that led to the germ theory of disease.
But in the 1840s he's a young researcher and he picks up on this topic
and decides to study the crystals of tartaric acid that form quite naturally.
And this curious observation that tartaric acid has two forms.
One is optically active, one is not.
By optically active it means that if you pass light through these crystals, nothing happens to it.
It goes through it as if it were just glass.
And that's if it's optically inactive.
If it's optically active, then it does something to the light.
What's called it rotates the plane of polarization of light.
Light waves are polarized or can be polarized.
And going through one type of tartaric acid, they get polarized.
Their polarization is changed coming out compared to going in.
And the other crystals, now it acts just like, let's call it glass.
Now, Pasteur discovered through a very careful experiment that he designed.
And this became the hallmark of his whole career.
Discovered that Mitsunish was wrong, that there is only one type of tartaric acid crystal,
both of which are optically active.
But the tartaric acid crystallizes in two geometric forms.
One form rotates the plane of polarization of a light wave, let's say, to the right.
And the other one rotates it to the left.
It so happened that in the crystals Mitsunish was studying,
one specimen was dominated by the crystals that rotated it in a single direction,
whereas the other specimen was a combination of the two.
And since one was rotating it to the right, one was rotating it to the left,
when he observed the light, it looked as though there had been no rotation whatsoever.
The two rotations effectively canceled each other out.
He was wrong about that.
But the implication of Pasteur's work, which was immediately drawn,
is that the same atoms are arranged spatially in the crystals of tartaric acid
in two different ways and lead to two different kinds of properties.
So here is the spatial arrangement of the same atoms within the tartaric acid crystal type A
and the other one, they affect light in different ways.
They exert different forces on light.
And Pasteur shortly noticed that penicillin mold, for example, was differentially 8.
If you fed penicillin mold tartaric acid crystals, they preferred one of these two to the other.
They only ate, so the penicillin could distinguish between the left hand
and the right hand versions of the tartaric acid crystals.
So now we have a strong reinforcement of the idea of structure that Laurent Dumas had developed.
There, it was different atoms maintained a kind of semi-constancy of type
and that the properties of the molecule had a family resemblance,
in spite of the fact that you had changed the atoms
and the causes attributed to the geometric shape of the molecule in Pasteur's work, the same exact atoms.
So knowing the chemical formula does not give you enough information to predict the properties of a molecule
because you now have to know something else.
You have to know how are those molecules arranged in space.
And that is a really dramatic instance of the attribution of reality to an immaterial entity, really a relationship.
In the course of the rest of the 19th century, this became increasingly important,
especially as the field that's called stereochemistry became prominent.
Stereochemistry is the study of the spatial arrangement of atoms within molecules
and in the 1860s August Cochule, a German chemist and his graduate students,
showed that there's a family of compounds called aromatic hydrocarbons, hydrogen and carbon atoms,
that have a ring structure.
The ring structure, six-sided ring structure, hexagonal structure,
and that depending on which atoms you stick on the vertices,
you can dramatically change the properties of the molecule that results in a controlled way.
These are relatively simple chemical reactions and one of these is benzene, a very important compound,
and that has a ring structure, but it's symptomatic of a whole family of compounds
and this unleashed a tremendous amount of research in stereochemistry.
It also had as a byproduct of the discovery that carbon atoms can form long chains
and in the 20th century this became the basis of polymer chemistry,
that you can have long chains of carbon atoms that form a backbone
and then by attaching different molecules at different points on this chain,
you generate basically a tremendous range of artificial materials, synthetic materials.
Plastics, for example, the plastics that was whispered to Dustin Hoffman in the graduate,
refers to what turned out in retrospect to be sort of like the peak of the transformation
of these kinds of carbon chain molecules into plastics materials of a wide range.
We still have lots, obviously we're still surrounded by plastics, but not just plastics.
There are whole families of synthetic materials that are produced by exploiting this stereochemistry.
Now, we need to look a little more closely at how powerful and how deep this idea of attributing reality
to relationships ran in the 19th century.
It was not just in the area of chemistry, although I personally don't see how you could quibble
with the idea that spatial relationships are immaterial and attributing causal properties
to spatial relationships is a serious undermining of the atomistic style of thinking as uniquely correct.
Clearly, you can, knowing the matter of which a molecule is composed is everybody acknowledges
by the end of the 19th century is not enough in order to explain what the properties of the molecule are
and why the molecule behaves as it does.
But the recognition of relationships as real runs much deeper than chemistry.
One of the great intellectual developments of the 19th century is the rise of symbolic logic.
Into the 19th century, the one piece of Aristotle that had survived the rise of modern science
was his writings on logic.
Aristotelian logic, this sort of epitome of Greek logic of the 4th century BCE,
survived into the 19th century and it was a fundamentally subject predicate logic.
That is to say, the fundamental entities in the logic are subjects which possess various kinds of predicates
and then we reason about the relationship among subjects and predicates based on certain forms of inference
like the types of valid deductive arguments or inductive arguments, whatever.
This subject predicate logic is very, very much an echo of this Parmenidian substance approach to explaining natural phenomena.
Things with properties, subjects with predicates are the basis of explaining all natural phenomena.
In the 19th century, a group of thinkers across Europe, but August de Morgan and George Boole in England
were particularly important in the beginning, Charles Sanders Peirce in the middle of the 19th century
and later Giuseppe Piano in Italy, Gottlob Frege in Germany at the beginning of the 20th century,
Bertrand Russell back in England, invented and developed symbolic logic, something that Leibniz had attempted
but didn't get very far with at the end of the 17th century that invented symbolic logic
which had the same, the notation, the symbolic notation for logical arguments.
Reducing logical arguments to a symbolic form instead of a verbal form was just like what we saw happen to algebra
when we shifted from word equations to symbols.
It led to an explosion in the growth of mathematics and similarly in the 19th century there was an explosion in the growth of logic
now recognizing that relationships had a character of their own and had properties of their own
that were quite independent of what it was that was being related.
The subject drops out and the relationships remain.
So for example, one, being a parent is a relationship.
Parent A is the parent of B is the name of a relationship.
So we don't care who A and B are, but we can talk about the nature of that relationship.
It is, for example, not a reflexive relationship.
Reflexivity is a property of relationships, of some relationships, but not of being a parent.
If A is the parent of B, B is not the parent of A.
It is not a symmetric relationship.
A cannot be the parent of itself, that means it's not reflexive.
And if A is the parent of B, then B can't be the parent of A.
That means it's not a symmetric relationship.
If A is the parent of B and B is the parent of C, A is not the parent of C,
grandparent maybe, but not the parent of C, so it's not a transitive.
So we can start reasoning about the property's transitivity, symmetry, and reflexivity.
And we can say, well, what's the relationship between reflexivity and transitivity?
If a relationship is reflexive, is it also transitive?
Is it also symmetric or not?
And symbolic representations of these relationships became increasingly not just fun intellectually,
but they started generating real results in mathematics
and led to a serious reconceptualization of the nature of mathematics and the ground of mathematics.
Along the way, George Bull published a book that was effectively a handbook on the laws of thought,
reduced thinking, reduced human reasoning to this kind of symbolic notation
that he and De Morgan and others had been developing for describing logical arguments.
And these were called the laws of thought, and we could now symbolize thought.
Well, it was a very interesting exercise at the time,
but within a couple of decades, Charles Sanders Purse in America noticed that
that Bull's laws of thought could be simulated in an electrical network.
Nothing happened with that in the 1860s or 70s when Purse wrote it down,
largely because the overwhelming majority of Purse's writings were not published until after he was dead,
but in 1948 Claude Shannon then at Bell Laboratories
published a theory of information that we will be talking about in a lecture on information theory,
which in fact is based on Bull's laws of thought incorporated into an electrical network
that became the basis for the design of virtually all computer chips.
But we'll be talking about that in the future,
and that lecture by the way will sort of put the capstone on this notion of attributing reality to immaterial entities
because whilst relationships become real in this lecture,
in that lecture information becomes physically real, information becomes a source of causal action.
It was the study of relationships in their own right, independent of the relata,
the things that they related, is very characteristic of major developments in 19th century mathematics,
many of which turned out to have fruitful applications in the 20th century.
I'll just mention a few of them, differential geometry is one kind of a universalized geometry,
very abstract, became very, very important in quantum theory, and topology,
the study of spatial relationships in a very generalized way,
a subject that had been started by Leibniz, dropped out of sight for over 150 years,
and then suddenly was sort of rediscovered at the end of the 19th century,
topology which looks at, as I said, generalized spatial relationships
and has become very important to mathematical research in the 20th century,
the idea that relationships have properties of their own,
that they have a physical reality of their own as causal agents spread from chemistry and mathematics,
so I should say they had a much wider recognition than in chemistry and in mathematics.
For example, in sociology through the work of Emil Dorkheim and in linguistic theory
through the work of Ferdinand de Saussure who argued that a language was a system of relationships
and the specific noises that were made had nothing to do with meaning,
that the meaning derived from the relationships among the sounds that were made,
Dorkheim, that social relationships determined social behavior,
and this reinforces the challenge to the atomistic style of thinking
from the side of attributing reality to immaterial non-things,
to entities that are physically real but are not things.
In the next lecture, we're going to see how the idea of evolution
is the basis of a theory in which the process is the key to the explanation of the theory,
not things with properties.
Process is quite clearly in the case of evolution,
the key to what as evolution comes to explain,
and we'll be exploring taking that look at the idea of theory of evolution in the next lecture.
