The subject of this lecture is the quantum idea, which evolved into quantum theory.
And with quantum theory, we cross the imaginary divide called centuries into the 20th century.
One of the things that makes it imaginary, of course, is that events simply do not organize
themselves in ways that respect the division into centuries that we like so much.
For example, while quantum theory and relativity theory are clearly 20th century theories,
it was in the same decade, the first decade of the 20th century, that the quantum and
relativity theories were first formulated that the theory of evolution and the intrusion
of stochastic processes into nature were extremely lively subjects of debate.
So while evolution could be seen as a mid-19th century theory, it was only in the first decade
of the 20th century that there were these vigorous debates about, I would say, bitter
controversies about whether Darwinian evolution was consistent with Mendelian genetics, etc.,
as we discussed in an earlier lecture.
But we're going to focus now on the idea of the quantum, which is simple to state but
had a very confusing birth that we're going to clarify right now.
The idea of the quantum is that natural processes are quantized.
They are packaged, so to speak, in discrete units.
Initially, the quantum idea was only applied to electromagnetic energy.
That electromagnetic energy is quantized is to say that instead of being continuously
distributed in a continuous field, which is what is explicit in Maxwell's electromagnetic
theory, that electromagnetic energy is distributed in space continuously, and that's why we
had ether physics in order to try to explain how the electromagnetic field could have a
substantial underpinning, how it could be carried, so to speak, through space because
the physicists of the day rejected action at a distance, or were wary at least of action
at a distance as a kind of a mystical concept.
So in Maxwell's theory, electromagnetic energy is continuously distributed, whereas in quantum
theory, the initial idea of the quantum is that electromagnetic energy is only comes
in discrete units, which are multiples of a fundamental unit, and it would be like saying
that you can buy one ounce of sugar, or two ounces of sugar, or three ounces of sugar,
but you cannot buy an ounce and a half or an ounce and a quarter.
In Maxwell's theory, you can buy as much electromagnetic energy as you like.
The field is continuous, it means it's infinitely divisible.
You can get down to smaller and smaller, there's no limit to the smallness with which the field
can be divided, but the quantum idea is that there is a limit, and that all manifestations
of electromagnetic energy are packages that are multiples, whole multiples of a discrete
unit.
Now, the original quantum idea, the credit for the original quantum idea unquestionably
belongs to Max Planck, who in 1900, at the end of 1900, announced his solution to a problem
that had been vexing physicists for much of the previous decade.
It was a relatively straightforward problem in the sense that everyone initially thought
that Maxwell's theory could easily explain this problem.
The problem was to describe the behavior of an idealized entity called a black body.
A black body is a body that anybody that absorbs all of the electromagnetic radiation that
falls on it.
So for example, no matter what frequency the radiation is, whether it's below visibility,
whether it's x-rays, whether it's gamma rays, anachronistic to speak of that in 1900, but
the gamma rays, whether it's visible light or infrared or ultraviolet, whatever the frequency,
a black body absorbs it all.
Now actually, a thick black coded object comes pretty close to being a black body, but it's
an idealization, the way physicists deal with frictionless planes and weightless strings
and so on, and the idea is that Maxwell's theory should tell us how a body that absorbs
all of the electromagnetic energy that falls upon it would then, as it warms up from absorbing
all of this electromagnetic energy, eventually reach a temperature where it starts radiating
energy, electromagnetic energy.
So for example, you heat it up, it starts to glow, so maybe it starts getting hotter
and hotter, and it gets red hot, it gets white hot, it gets blue hot.
What is the distribution of the energy that it's radiating among all the frequencies of
electromagnetic energy?
It absorbs all the energy, absorbs energy of all frequencies, does it radiate energy
of all frequencies, and what's the distribution?
Does it favor low frequency or high frequency?
This is called the black body radiation problem, and it resisted solution until 1900 when Planck
came up with an equation that correctly described the distribution of energy radiated by such
a black body.
But in the course of arriving at his solution, Planck had to interpret the equation as implying
that within the black body, electromagnetic energy was absorbed and radiated in discrete
units that he called quanta.
So he introduced the concept of quanta of energy, which at that time are electromagnetic
energy in the processes of absorption and emission only.
He believed that in space, electromagnetic energy was continuously distributed, it was
not quantized.
Electromagnetic energy was really not quantized, light was not quantized, it's a form of electromagnetic
energy of course, but when it is absorbed and emitted, somehow the process of absorption
and of radiation emission causes somehow in some mysterious way, and he didn't like
that hypothesis at all.
Over the next 10 or 11 years, he tried to arrive at that same equation without the assumption
of the quantization of the absorption and emission of electromagnetic energy.
So Planck is the father of the quantum idea, but then he sort of speaks steps to the side
of the evolution of the quantum idea into quantum theory, quantum physics, quantum mechanics
because he himself in the first decade or so was not convinced, did not believe that
electromagnetic energy really was quantized.
So now in 1905, one of these seminal papers that Einstein published in 1905 was on the
so-called photoelectric effect.
The behavior of certain metals when exposed to light is to release electrons, and puzzlingly,
while the number of electrons that are released is a function of how intense the light source
is, so if you have a 50 watt bulb and you switch it to 100 watt bulb, you'll get more
electrons coming off, but no matter how powerful you make the same light, if you make it from
a 50 watts to 100 watts to 200 watts, the energy of the electrons that come off is the same.
The number increases, but the energy is the same, and it should not be that way.
If light is really a wave, the way the wave theory of light in the 19th century said it
was, it's an electromagnetic wave, then if you have a strong wave hitting something on
the shore, it transfers a lot more energy than a small wave does.
So how come when you ratchet up the power of a light bulb from 50 to 200 watts, the energy
that it transfers is the same, just the number is different.
However, if you change the frequency of the light, and you have higher frequency light,
then while the numbers won't change, if you have a 50 watt bulb, but now you've changed
it so that the light that comes out is a higher frequency, let's say it's violet light instead
of green light, then the energy, the number of electrons stays the same, but the energy
of the electrons that come off is much greater.
And so Einstein explained the photoelectric effect, gave a solution to this problem by
supposing that electromagnetic energy really is quantized.
That light, for example, as an instance of electromagnetic energy, travels through space
as if it were a kind of an atom.
And if you then use Planck's equation, which Einstein derived knowing that Planck already
had the equation, but he showed that it could be derived independently of some of the assumptions
that Planck made, that troubled Einstein, then you can explain the photoelectric effect,
and then you have assumed that light really is quantized, not just in the processes of
emission and absorption, but contrary to Maxwell's theory, light is quantized, all electromagnetic
energy is quantized.
This hypothesis, well it's more than a hypothesis, this posture of Einstein's, then can be used
and you can explain other phenomena, Einstein then in 1906 to 1908, applied this quantum
hypothesis to a wider range of problems in physics and in physical chemistry beyond
just the quantization of electromagnetic energy, and that really launched quantum theory.
Einstein's working in this area, although it was a modest theory that attracted modest
attention until approximately 1912 when Niels Bohr, a brand new Danish PhD in physics, won
an award from the Karlsberg Beer Company to go to England to study in the laboratory
of J. J. Thompson, who was a very famous physicist at the time, the man who discovered
the electron, the director of the Cavendish laboratory at Cambridge University, and Bohr
came to England, found that his personality did not click with Thompson's personality,
and found it much more congenial to spend his time in Ernest Rutherford's laboratory
at the University of Manchester, and there, he was there when Rutherford had just recently
announced the solar system model of the atom, but the problem with the solar system model
of the atom, which looked like a fatal problem, was that if it is the case that electrons
orbit around a central nucleus, then according to Maxwell's electromagnetic theory, the
atom should collapse almost instantaneously because the electron should spiral into the
nucleus. Maxwell's electromagnetic theory claims that a charged particle moving in an
electric field, an electrically charged particle, moving in an electric field, interacts with
the field in such a way that it should spiral into the source of that field. That doesn't
happen if the solar system model is correct. How can it be? Niels Bohr came up with this
idea, which he published in 1913, and one can see perhaps this as the founding paper
of the beginning of the maturation of quantum theory. He proposed the following. Let us
suppose, contrary to Maxwell's theory, and we don't understand why or how, let us suppose
that it is a fact of nature that electrons orbiting a nucleus do not radiate electromagnetic
energy. They only radiate energy when they change orbits, and the amount of energy that
they radiate is a function of the difference of the energy levels of orbiting far away
and orbiting closer, or the other way around. So when they change orbits, that's when they
radiate energy, and the amount that they radiate is equal to the difference in the energy level
between the two orbits. Furthermore, and here's where the quantum idea comes in. Furthermore,
electrons around a particular nucleus are not allowed to orbit at any old place they
want to. They can only be in certain specific orbits. What Bohr was proposing was to quantize
the mechanical energy of the orbital electron. An electron orbiting at some particular radius
around a nucleus has a certain mechanical energy, which is measured by its velocity,
and that's determined by the strength of the electromagnetic field and its distance from
the nucleus. What Bohr is claiming is that there are only certain rails, so to speak.
The rails that electrons can orbit on are only located at specific places around concentric
with the nucleus of the atom, and as long as they're on those rails, electrons do not
radiate. It is only when they change, jump from one rail to the next, that they radiate
energy, and it's the difference between the energy levels of those two orbits of those
two concentric rails, metaphorically speaking. Now these are completely ad-hoc hypotheses.
There's no question about that. These are completely ad-hoc hypotheses, and you say,
well, why would anybody pay attention to Bohr? The answer, there's a big payoff. The big
payoff is that for about 50 years, physicists had accumulated a tremendous amount of spectroscopic
data, forbidding term, which is that they had discovered that in the middle of the 19th
century, that all glowing specimens of matter, of elements, when they are made hot, they
all radiate electromagnetic energy, they radiate light of specific frequencies. Every element
has its own light print analogous to fingerprints. If it's sodium, if it's mercury, if it's
carbon, it has its own set of frequencies that it radiates, and nobody understood why
it radiated those frequencies. Bohr instantly provides an explanation by saying that when
we make an electron, when we excite an electron with atoms, when we excite atoms by adding heat
to a specimen of carbon, let's say, or sodium, then what's happening is that we are pumping
thermal energy into the atoms. The electrons are absorbing photons, and they're jumping up
and they're changing their energy levels, and they are radiating electromagnetic energy
that is exactly the difference between the two orbits. So that from the spectroscopic data,
we can then calculate what the orbits have to be for that exact amount of energy corresponding
to the frequency radiated, different frequencies radiated. Each one of those frequencies represents
an energy level in the atom, and now we can calculate what the permitted orbits are.
So Bohr coupled quantum theory to this body of spectroscopic data, which was enormous
and very precise, but completely unexplained, and it was the promise of explaining that data that
made people look at his theory. But once they did that, and they took it seriously, they can now
actually start calculating what the permitted orbits are for different atoms, which led to the
idea that maybe now we can make sense out of the periodic table and explain how the elements
are built up as the nucleus becomes more and more complex, as you add protons, and we would now
say neutrons, to the nuclei of hydrogen atoms. So we are transforming the hydrogen into helium,
into carbon, into oxygen, etc., by adding protons to the nucleus where we're also changing the
configuration of electrons, and that means changing the sets of orbits that electrons can occupy.
Maybe this new quantum theory can actually explain why the elements are built up in the
way that they did, and that was an important promise of the new quantum theory between
approximately 1912 and the early 1920s. So they gathered around the Bohr, and Einstein was an
enthusiastic participant in this, because he was in some sense the adoptive father of quantum theory
since his paper in 1905. It was in the mid-1910s that he and Bohr argued that, published papers
showing that it made sense to assume that these orbital transitions were completely random in
the same way that radioactivity was random, lawful but random, and that it was possible to use
radioactivity-like statistics to describe the jumping of electrons from one orbit to another
within an atom. The randomness applied to the orbital change and to the direction in which the
photon, as we now call it, the quantum of electromagnetic energy, if it is now called a
photon that got that name in the 1920s, the direction in which it's emitted. So here's another
example in which stochastic processes, statistical processes, became attached to fundamental
natural processes. Quantum theory is perhaps the most powerful example of how deeply entrenched the
statistical idea became. And so we had a growing community of mostly young physicists who adopted
the quantum hypothesis and started exploring it. And of course, because it was coupled to
spectroscopy, the natural thing to do was to use more and more sophisticated spectroscopic
experiments in order to get more insight into the internal structure of the atom. Remember,
that was the whole point of Bohr's argument, was that we can now make sense out of the
spectroscopic data why each element has the light print that it has, but the frequencies
in that light print give us insight into the way that the electrons are organized around
any given nucleus, the nucleus of, let's say, uranium or whatever element you care to explore.
So the spectroscopic data also gives us insight into the internal configuration of the electrons
within given elements atoms. More sophisticated experiments, however, showed that Bohr's initial
version of the theory did not work well, that it generated all kinds of inconsistencies with the
data so that in the early 1920s, and this is beautifully ironic in a certain sense,
quantum theory encountered its first serious crisis in which it was now no longer consistent
with the growing body of much more sophisticated spectroscopic data using new kinds of instruments
to analyze much more closely the light that is radiated by hot sodium, let's say, or mercury.
And then we find that these frequencies are split in ways that are not explained by
Bohr's initial version of the theory. And there was some talk about whether we had now,
we now needed to look for a new theory and maybe give up the quantum hypothesis completely.
Now a further irony is that in the early 1920s, 1922, 1923, a young French physicist writing
his doctoral dissertation, Louis de Broglie, applied to matter the same curious observation
that Einstein had made in his 1905 paper about light. In that paper, Einstein, remember,
argued that light behaves as if it were particular, which sounds like he's returning to Newton's
corpuscular theory of light, where light is like a series of bullets or atoms. But for Einstein,
as in fact for Newton as well, although at the time it was a very puzzling thing to Newton,
and it was puzzling in the 20th century also, these little light atoms, these little light
atoms have a frequency. How can a particle have a frequency? Well, we're going to treat,
it is clear that light has a frequency, all electromagnetic energy has a frequency and a
wavelength. And nevertheless, as Einstein, it also acts as if it travels through space,
as if it were packaged as some kind of an atom. So it has a dual nature.
de Broglie showed that based on his application of this quantum idea to mechanics, that particles
like electrons and protons and atoms, for that matter, also they are particles, but they must
also have a frequency and a wavelength associated with them. That matter must have a wavelength
character. In 1905, Einstein argued that that wavelength stuff, electromagnetic energy has
a particulate character. de Broglie argued in his doctoral dissertation that particles must have
a wavelength character. And by the end of the 1920s, this was completely vindicated
experimentally to show that as a matter of fact, electrons, protons, and even whole atoms
do behave, do display, wave-like behavior. So this was, in a sense, a strong confirmation of the
quantum idea at the same time that people were beginning to seriously doubt the quantum idea.
And quantum theory wasn't, in a certain sense, rescued in 1925 when Werner Heisenberg and Irwin
Schrodinger, in different ways, working quite independently, using totally different approaches,
founded what came to be called, what Max Born called, quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics
was able to explain all of the new spectroscopic data. It anchored the quantum theory very powerfully
between 19, but it had a problem. The biggest problem was, it was not clear what the theory
meant physically. There were terms in the theory that did not obviously correlate with the physical
world, and that was a bit of, that was a problem at a time when physicists believed that their
theories were describing reality. And between 1925 and 1929, a number of physicists, especially
Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg, but others were involved as well, essentially looked at
quantum mechanics philosophically. And one of the important, one of the important conclusions
that Heisenberg reached was something called the uncertainty principle, was that there were limits
to the precision with which certain quantities could be measured. Bohr formulated something
called the principle of complementarity, which is that sometimes we have to use complementary,
logically contrary, contradictory concepts in order to describe the phenomena that we experience,
and that's because our concepts reflect experience. We cannot give pictures of reality. We can only
provide theories that give us pictures of experience, which was very controversial and
remained somewhat controversial even to this day, but it led to very interesting philosophical
discussions in the 1930s and 40s and 50s about whether quantum theory finally had broken,
so to speak, the stranglehold of the Platonic Aristotelian definition of knowledge that had been
supporting, that had been part of the conceptual skeleton of modern science from its beginnings.
In 1929, Paul Dirac took the quantum mechanics of the day and made it partially consistent
with the special theory of relativity, which had been ignored in the first simple form of
quantum mechanics, simple, relatively speaking, and laid the foundation for what lasted for 35
years until the early 1960s as the decisive quantum theory of matter and energy and came
to have the name quantum electrodynamics. Quantum electrodynamics describes the interaction of
matter and electromagnetic energy, and it does it with extraordinary precision, experimentally
confirmed to a very high degree. It was what we used in the 1930s to study nuclear physics
and fission. It underlies the creation of those particle accelerators that Adam smashers, that
let us explore the internal of the atom. It underlies the invention of the transistor,
for example, and the laser, so it has direct technoscientific applications that have changed
our lives. But by the early 1960s, the success of the atom smashers had created another problem.
The problem was that we had so successfully smashed atoms to pieces that we now had over 200
particles that could be called, in some sense, elementary. And that was obviously impossible.
And that led to a new phase of quantum theory, which we're still in, and the transformation
of quantum electrodynamics, generally referred to as QED, into QCD, quantum chromodynamics,
or what most of us have heard of as the quark theory of matter. Murray Gelman here in the
United States and George Zweig in Switzerland independently came up with the idea that we
have to give up the idea that protons and neutrons are elementary particles, and we
have to propose that there are the really elementary bits of matter, are called quarks,
and that protons and neutrons are compound particles made up out of combinations of quarks,
three quarks are necessary to make protons and neutrons, and we need electrons. They are
truly elementary. And then you come up with a theory called quantum chromodynamics, which
explains why the nucleus stays together, why the nucleus is stable, which had been a problem ever
since the 1930s when nuclear physics began to be studied seriously. And so sometimes quantum
chromodynamics is called the theory of the strong force, the force that holds the nucleus of atoms
together, because you've got all those protons jammed together, they should repel one another,
right? And another curious nuclear phenomenon that we discovered in the 1930s, really,
is that in radioactive atoms what happens is that a neutron inside the nucleus
suddenly spits out an electron, turns into a proton, it also spins out something called,
spits out something called an antinutrino, and so the force that controls the decay of
neutrons into protons and electrons is called the weak force, although those terms are not to be
taken literally. Electrons respond to the weak force, they are not affected at all by the strong
force, and particles that respond to the strong force do not respond to the weak force. Quantum
chromodynamics is about the strong force, and it has been developing since the 1960s, and experiments
have in fact found quarks, and we have in 1995, especially, we found what is believed to be the
sixth and final quark, called the top quark, and in some sense that puts the final stamp of
experimental approval on the Gelman quark theory of matter, or quantum chromodynamics,
but more happened to quantum theory starting in 1963, that used the rise of quantum
chromodynamics in order to come up with a more complete theory of matter and energy,
and that was early in the 1960s, it was also recognized that there really were just four
fundamental forces that explained all natural phenomena at the level of physics. This was
the strong force that I just referred to, the weak force, the electromagnetic force, and gravity,
and now began in the 1960s and 70s especially a movement towards coming up with a theory that
unified these forces. The first was an attempt to unify the electromagnetic force photons with
the weak force that electrons are sensitive to. That made a lot of sense because the electromagnetic
force is about the way electrons interact with electromagnetic energy, and so it's already
a theory of electrons and electromagnetic energy. The electrons are the creatures that
the particles that respond to the weak force, so that was a very reasonable first step.
Glaciao Weinberg and Abdus Salam shared a Nobel Prize for coming up with this so-called
electro-weak theory, which successfully united the electromagnetic force and the weak force,
predicting the existence of a bizarre new family of particles, and they were discovered with the
properties that the theory predicted that they would have. The next step was to unite
the electro-weak theory with the strong force, and that was accomplished in the 1970s and 1980s
especially, and what emerged is something called the standard model. The standard model in quantum
theory, which is, I guess we would say today, this is the status quo in quantum theory. It is our
most powerful theory of matter and energy at not just at the microscopic level,
but even at the cosmological level, and it is a theory that unites the strong force,
the weak force, and the electromagnetic force. What it ignores is gravity for the moment.
The standard model is not only applied to matter and energy at the microscopic level,
but since the 1960s, it became part of cosmology, as we will be discussing in the lecture on the
newly reinvented universe in the early 20th century, that it became an element in cosmological
theory because the theory was used to explain how atoms are built up from hydrogen to helium to
provide all of the other elements that we see in the world, and it has been used very powerfully
to analyze black holes, and it turns out that black hole physics has turned out to be a very,
very fertile area of physics, as we will be discussing especially in the very last lecture
when we talk about string theory, because the natural next step in unification is to unify
the standard model with the force of gravity into what Weinberg and others call a theory of
everything, a single theory that encompasses all of the four major forces that we think explain
all natural phenomena at the level of, at the level of physics. Meanwhile, we're going to look
in the next lecture at the second great theory in 20th century physics, and that is the special
and general theories of relativity.
