In the very first lecture of this course, I said that by the end of the lectures that
the individual explorations of ideas would fit together to form a coherent picture that
emerges out of a mosaic. So you've got all of these individual little tiles and you can't
tell or pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. And from the individual piece, you don't see the overall
picture, but when you put all the pieces together correctly, then a picture emerges. And I said
in the first lecture that that would be the case with this course. And so we have a right
to ask now in this closing lecture, what is the image that has emerged from putting together,
if we put together all of the pieces that we have sketched out, mixing metaphors, then
how can, what is the picture that we see? I think that the picture is that science is
as much a social as an intellectual phenomenon. That's the picture. The picture reveals that
science is a driver of social change, which was the motivation for the whole course to
try to understand how scientific ideas have changed the world, how they continue to change
the world. That science is a driver of social change because society has empowered science
to be a driver of social change. That I think is the conceptual picture. That is the sort
of the image of science that emerges from putting together all of the ideas that we
have been exploring. And let me suggest how that happens. The biggest piece in the Mosaic
was the discussion in the first six lectures of how science emerges, how the idea of science
emerges out of very deliberate, highly controversial, at the time, definitions of knowledge, reason,
truth, and reality among the ancient Greek philosophers. That in the context of these
very specific definitions, the idea of knowledge of nature, and in particular of mathematics
as the underlying order of nature linked to experiment and observation, but that mathematics
was an underlying order, emerges as part of an idea of knowledge of nature. So the idea
of science in its, so to speak, first articulation is keyed to these deliberate definitions.
A generic lesson that we learned from this is that definition plays a fundamental role
in the practice of science and continues to do so, of course, as we saw when the atom
continually as we defined, as we find out more things about it, that it wasn't the solid
atom that Newton and Dalton thought and that it wasn't just the solar system model as conceived
by Rutherford, etc. So this is a generic lesson that emerges. One generic lesson is the role
that contingent definitions, that definitions of scientific terms, that scientific concepts
are not natural, they are invented, they are formulated with specific objectives in mind.
So the idea of science in the ancient world represented one big piece of the mosaic and
the tail end of that piece, so to speak, a little projection from that was the idea of
techno science, which is quite startling in antiquity for two reasons. First, because
the knowledge of nature that was possessed in the Greco-Roman period was barely useful
in any way, so the claim that knowledge of nature would be the source of powerful technologies
is a very interesting claim. And the second reason is that why the idea of techno science
startles us is because, as we noted, Plato and Aristotle, the Greek philosophers who
defined knowledge in the way they did, explicitly excluded know-how from knowledge. They didn't
want know-how to be a part of knowledge and Plato and Aristotle would not have considered
it a plus for science, for knowledge of nature, that it was being used in order to act on
nature. That was for them a much less noble activity, that was art, that was craft, that
was not true knowledge of the kind that ennobles the soul or that reflects the highest form
of human being in the world. This elitism with regard to science and scientific knowledge,
so that it should not be used to be translated into technological innovation, continued right
through the 19th century. Here in America there were bitter controversies over pure
science versus applied science, the commercialization of science. I referred in one of the lectures
to Joseph Henry, professor of physics at Princeton in the early 19th century, who invented
an electric telegraph before Morse did, but refused to commercialize it and sort of just
showed Morse the error of his ways in terms of physics, but did not want to be a consultant
to his company or to have a share in the company by being their science advisor. So that was
one piece of the mosaic and one of the powerful lessons that it gave us was an insight into
the role that that conjectural contingent definition plays in the process called science.
The second largest piece of the mosaic was the rise of modern science in the 17th century,
and we needed to understand how the emergence of modern science in the 17th century was not
a revolutionary development, but it was an evolutionary development out of developments
in the Middle Ages and Renaissance, in particular from the 12th century through the Renaissance,
specifically highlighting the role of the idea of progress, the idea of progress which came to be
identified with technological innovation, and especially with the application of scientific
knowledge, mathematics initially, to generate new kinds of technological capabilities. The idea of
progress as a secular knowledge, and we saw how the 12th century industrial revolution, as I
called it, the 12th century cultural renaissance and the university as an institution created in
order to be a vehicle of that cultural renaissance was deeply imbued with secular and naturalistic
values as opposed to religious values and sometimes in conflict with religious values, as for example
in the problem with usury and the expansion of commerce at that time, and through the renaissance
provides the, not just the seedbed for ideas for modern science, but a motivation for linking,
for pursuing knowledge, and for linking that knowledge to technological action of the sort
that causes the physical and social world to be changed, and we saw how Francis Bacon and
Rene Descartes in the early 17th century, founders of modern science explicitly stated the promise
of true knowledge of nature would translate into power over nature. Here the lesson is,
what we saw repeatedly was that technological innovations opened doors, but the way societies
responded to them is a function of the society, not a function of the innovation. The same
innovation so to speak at some technical level in China, Islam, Japan, and in Western Europe
had evoked very different responses from the respective societies, and we saw this in the
case of printing especially, and with reference to gunpowder and the compass as well, and the use
of mathematics in order to generate new kinds of technologies that were put into action by society.
The society determines whether society will enter through the doors that are opened by
technological innovations, but then we saw that a third lesson is that scientific ideas also opened
doors. We saw this in the case of Copernicus' redefinition of the universe. We saw this in
the case of the 17th century, founding knowledge of nature on an impersonal method, removing the
person from the knowledge claims and insisting that knowledge was generated by the operation of
an impersonal and objective methodology, as we would call it today, that was key to mathematics as
the language of nature, experiment and observation, captured in universal laws with a mathematical
form, and so we see here how indeed the emergence of modern science, how deeply indebted it was
to the idea of science as it was articulated in ancient Greece, and the motivation to science,
and to the translation of scientific knowledge into action on the world that is contained
within the idea of progress. The idea of progress is a motivator, it's a driver, and that's why
even though we don't normally associate the work of somebody like Newton with the idea of progress,
the social perception of scientific knowledge and its value is carried to a considerable
extent, and in the 19th century explicitly so by this idea that knowledge is going to
give us transformative power over our experience. We then began to accumulate individual
tiles in this mosaic by looking at the ideas underlying the great theories of science,
especially in the 19th and 20th centuries when those theories became fertile enough
to be translated into technological action, so what I called technoscience, and there I
divided the ideas into two clusters. I pointed out how through the 19th century there was a
strong prejudice in favor of an atomistic style of thinking, and we saw this reflected in the
cell theory, in the atomic theory of matter, in the cell theory of life, in the germ theory of
disease, in the gene theory of inheritance. Beginning in the mid 19th century and increasingly
since then we have seen the rise of what I called a process style of thinking through the idea of
energy, the idea of the field, the idea of relationships having causal efficacy, that
relationships, for example the structure as we just discussed in the preceding lecture, the
structure of molecules, the same atoms arranged differently in space have different properties,
evolution as a process, the explanation what evolution explains is by way of a process rather
than by things, by identifying atoms metaphorically speaking with fixed properties,
and the rise of the notion of statistical laws, and the introduction of probability stochastic
processes into nature at the most fundamental levels of phenomena. In quantum theory our
really our ultimate theory of matter and energy, a fundamentally stochastic dimension to quantum
theory that has a probabilistic character to it, and we saw that that prevented Einstein from
accepting it as the ultimate theory of nature because of his insistence on a more classical
deterministic notion of what it meant to explain, namely to deduce with certainty and so probability
is a stop gap from that perspective, but the consensus of the physics community is that
that quantum theory is correct and that its probabilistic character is a reflection of
the ultimately probabilistic character of the most fundamental processes in nature.
We looked at 20th century theories that carried forward these classical ideas,
the idea of science, and the styles of thinking which have become intertwined by the end of the
20th century, the quantum theory, the relativity theory, the role, the idea underlying the computer,
the idea of a mathematical theory of information, the systems idea, molecular biology, these
individual ideas now fit together, I think, and show that scientific ideas win acceptance and
change over time in ways that reflect the role that science plays in society, that institutions
needed to be created in order to make it possible for these scientific theories and the rich ideas
at their cores to translate them into technological action, and we saw again how society created
institutions in the 19th century and the early 20th century, commercial institutions, industrial
institutions, academic institutions, governmental institutions, in order to empower science to
become the agent of change that it has been, primarily, of course, since the early 19th century.
So here we have, I think, a useful image that emerges out of these individual lectures,
where, so that while the individual pieces have an individual character of their own,
we can talk about the quantum theory, but always connecting them, always connecting the theories
to other theories that they are correlated with. We saw that again and again, I would have to say,
well, as we saw with the cell theory of life, as we saw in the rise of probability theory,
and these ideas cross-fertilize one another in ways that are not immediately obvious,
as when we saw in molecular biology and the indebtedness of molecular biology to quantum
theory, to chemistry generally, to physics generally, and this was true in so many other areas,
this cross-fertilization is a reflection of the fact that these ideas do not exist in a vacuum.
You don't have a specific individual who's sitting and thinking deep thoughts that are
completely original with them, that ideas function within a social context,
they have to be transmitted, they have to be disseminated, we talked about the role of writing
and the role of text in disseminating knowledge, that ideas need to find a manifestation,
dissemination, transmission, and they need to be taught, and these are all social functions.
Again, ideas emerge as door-openers, and the way that a society responds to those ideas
is because society makes the decision to respond to those ideas. Now, as we come to the beginning
of the 21st century, it is, I think, reasonable to ask if we can identify what over the next
few decades are likely to be ideas that are going to be perceived as changing the world
over the next few decades, the way that science and technology, or in ways that are analogous to
the way that science and technology have changed the world over the last 200 years. Now, extrapolating
from the status quo is a perilous thing to do, even when you've been on a 400-year role,
but assuming that there are no catastrophic changes to western society, let's say,
over the next few decades, which is something we all hope for, but there are other possibilities,
assuming that current institutions, roughly speaking, sort of morph into modifications of
themselves but don't radically change, then it seems to me that from the point of view of
science and techno science, we can identify three areas that are likely to be perceived by society,
to be empowered by society, to generate fundamental change. The most pragmatically
rich one of these is, of course, nanotechnology, which I referred to in an earlier lecture.
Nanotechnology is very likely to be the techno science of the 21st century
that semiconductor physics-based microelectronics technologies were in the last third of the
20th century. The nanotechnology will be using, intensively using, quantum physics and quantum
chemistry. I think that's what when you're talking about nanometer is a billionth of a meter.
So now we're talking about sizes that are comparable to the size of small clusters of atoms.
So once you get down to atomic small molecule sizes or the sizes of atoms, then the behavior of
those atoms is no longer reliably captured by classical physics, meaning physics from the 19th
to the mid-20th century. You've got to use quantum physics, and so quantum physics and
quantum chemistry will become important knowledge bases that will be used to create new technologies
based on structures that small. Interestingly, it is increasingly being discovered by companies
that are doing research in nanotechnology that self-organization is a critical factor in
fabricating nanostructures, structures on this scale of a billionth of a meter, making machines,
making devices, making tubes, and making containers for atoms and molecules, making little cages,
what they are discovering is that the chemicals that they mix under the appropriate combinations
and circumstances of temperature and pressure, etc., self-organized, just as Prigargin described,
without this self-organization, it would be tediously, in fact, perhaps even impossible,
to commercially manipulate one atom at a time in order to create these structures,
but it turns out you don't need to do that. That the kind of self-organization associated with
organic molecules in living things also takes place among inorganic substances
when you manipulate them at this nano level, and so they have been in the last few years,
especially, there are a growing number of reports of how to make carbon nanotubes, for example,
which ultimately, perhaps, will be woven into nanofibers that self-organize as tubes
when you mix the ingredients in the right way, and very recently a cubic cage that forms automatically
once you have made a two-dimensional, once you've put down a two-dimensional structure of atoms
using the same kind of technique we used to make computer chips called photolithography,
that with the right materials organized in the right way, as soon as you release the
two-dimensional structure from the surface on which you laid it down, it forms all by itself
into a cube with holes in the sides, and that you can cause, you can trap molecules,
small molecules, or atoms inside the cube, and deliver them by moving them from one place to
another inside these cages. We also have other sized cages that have also that self-form,
so that the idea of self-organization that we discussed in the last lecture
is proving to be a powerful new technological tool, so again, techno-science, science-based
technology. The second area that I think is likely to be perceived as changing our world
but perhaps not through technologies is the continued development of neuroscience,
the new kinds of imaging techniques that are allowing us to correlate brain and mind with
increasing detail. This represents really the last step in the total naturalization of humanity,
and it has been announced throughout the 19th century with the
scientization of psychology, but in fact it's only now that we can really begin to claim that
we're beginning to understand how the mind correlates with specific states of neurons and
complexes of neurons within the brain. A lot of this work is coming out of the use of functional
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging techniques, and other similar sort of high technology instruments
based on science, including quantum physics, and the magnetic resonance imaging is based on
quantum physics phenomenon, namely the magnetic moments of hydrogen atoms. So what we are going
to encounter over the next 20 years is a serious challenge to the last area in which
human beings could think that there was really something special about them, and this in a sense
is the undoing of that little bit of humanity that Descartes tried to buffer from mechanization
back in the 17th century. The mind, which he thought, no, the mind is not material, so it is
not subject to mechanism, we can't have free will. Neuroscience has the potential over the next few
decades of profoundly influencing our self-image, what the social consequences of that will be
are obviously quite unclear, and it may not happen, but it does look as though that's the
track on which cognitive neuroscience is moving. The third area is the one that has prompted a
whole mini-industry, and that is the area of what some physicists call the theory of everything,
and that is the unification of gravity with the standard model of quantum theory,
the standard model in quantum theory, so that we have one single theory that encompasses
the four fundamental forces responsible for the behavior of all natural phenomena,
and if we had such a theory, then in principle at least we would have an explanation for everything.
Quantum theory, of course, explains the behavior of matter and energy at the atomic level,
and at the molecular level, through quantum chemistry at the molecular level, we have
a growing field of molecular psychology, molecular biology, we talked about, molecular psychology
explaining the function of the nervous system and the function of the mind in terms of molecules.
Molecular psychiatry is a well-defined discipline with its own journals and a growing body of
knowledge, and even molecular sociology in the sense of identifying those segments
of the genomes of social creatures that are responsible for social behavior. Most recently,
the genome of the bee, in order to see what segments of that genome are like, what segments on
the genes of primates, for example, and in order to identify that's where sociality comes from,
that social behavior, social values are ultimately keyed to molecular structures,
and since the behavior of molecules and atoms is ultimately reducible to quantum theory,
a theory of everything would promise to explain everything, everything in principle,
right from matter and energy to sociology. The theory that claims to be on the threshold
of doing this is string theory, and that's where the mini-industry is. The mini-industry is
in books for the general public about string theory. Now, a reaction to string theory that,
in fact, by some physicists, that it's a dead end, and we have to admit that it's a dead end,
and look for other ways of unifying gravity with the general theory of relativity with
the standard model in quantum theory. What's really interesting, I think, in this process,
is not the string theory by itself, which contrary to all of these popular books,
some of them by quite competent physicists, really is not comprehensible to the general
public, to people who do not have significant training in physics and mathematics, because
once you start talking about 12-dimensional space-time structures and you start talking
the complex transformations of equations that you need to take into account,
people read the words, but I don't think there is a real comprehension of what it means to say
that, well, what we're now going to say is that ultimately, matter and energy are all
manifestations of vibrating strings. Yes, anybody can understand that, but now what?
What I find fascinating here is the goal of unification. Remember the romantic nature
philosophers of the late 18th, early 19th century, the romantic nature philosophers,
romantic with a capital R. I don't know if they wrote love poetry or listened to country western
music, but they were romantic with a capital R. They believed in the ultimate unity of nature,
the unity of life, the unity of all the forces of nature. There's a very interesting strand of
thought here of desiring unification, of wanting to pull everything together into a single
source. All life comes down to a single original cell. All of the universe comes down to a single
original instant out of which the entire universe emerged. Unification is an interesting
idea all by itself and the longing for unification as opposed to having a palette
of theories from which you can dip into to paint the picture of reality that you want to paint.
It is difficult in thinking about unification not to hear echoes of monotheism, for example,
the idea of somehow condensing all the gods of pagan antiquity into one god and also echoes
on a secular level of ancient Greek philosophy at the level of materialistic monism. In an earlier
lecture, I mentioned that some of the earliest Greek philosophers like Thales believed that
there was really only one stuff out of which all of nature was composed. And I mentioned that he
thought he called that stuff water, but perhaps more generically he meant fluid. And so the idea
that all of nature emerges out of a single stuff that is variously processed, that is condensed
or rarefied and combined in various ways is already a theme in ancient Greek philosophy.
It is, I think, extremely interesting that so many ideas that have been fleshed out and incorporated
into 20th and 21st century science can actually be linked to speculations in ancient Greek philosophy
like the concept of the atom, like the concept of the field in ancient Stoic physics, like this
unification idea. And so the unification, I think, is the thrust to unification within physics
has very interesting cultural echoes and cultural implications. The question that we confront at
the close of this course is, are there great scientific ideas in our future or are all the
great scientific ideas in the past? With the theory of everything, if the theory of everything
pans out, will it now become the case that in the future science has pretty much done its job
and techno science will dominate, that applications of the knowledge that the theory of everything
will give us will be the dominant factor changing our world, but not new scientific ideas. This
claim has been made before. The claim that science is pretty much over has been made before explicitly
at the turn of the 20th century, right around 1900, when physicists were convinced that they
pretty much had nature wrapped up, except for a couple of small points. Those small points turned
out to be quantum theory and relativity theory. So it is tempting to say that, well, the same
thing is likely to happen now, and that new scientific ideas will appear in the next few
decades that will fundamentally transform 21st century science the way 20th century
science transformed 19th century science. On the other hand, since, as people say,
a broken clock is correct twice a day, maybe by saying this now, saying that now science really
is over, maybe it is. Only time will tell.
