Neoliberalism has devastated so many people's ways of living and ways of working, forced
them from their homes and their jobs, or made life increasingly precarious.
So people are made nervous, they're made nervous by climate change, by war escalating
as we speak.
As a right-wing political operator, if you reach into that fear and say, guess what?
The reason you're so afraid, the reason you're so anxious, the reason that the future is unclear,
is gender or race or migration, you're able to reorganize and stoke those fears and anxieties
in a direction that moves against those minorities or against those populations in favor of
a really strong state.
Hello and welcome to this very special edition of Downstream IRL, very kindly hosted by Reference
Point.
If you're watching this on YouTube, you've got no idea that 100 people have dragged their
carcasses early in the morning to be with us today, and that's for a very special reason
that I'm delighted to say that we are joined by Judith Butler, philosopher, author and
as I found out this morning, fan of hard-boiled eggs.
They need no introduction, but I'm going to do it anyway.
They are the author of seminal works such as Gender Trouble, Bodies That Matter, Frames
of War and their new book, Who's Afraid of Gender, which examines how a transphobic backlash
morphed into an all-out war against so-called gender ideology.
It takes us from the Vatican to the conservative right, and it best of all dissects how Britain
became turf island.
I'm so sorry that you have to be with us today, but I'm glad to be here, glad to be here.
Very honored actually.
So I guess my first question is, when someone pops up and says, what is a woman, what are
they really asking?
How is that such a good question?
Well, it depends who's asking and to whom the question is addressed.
But if Rishi Sunak asks that question of the Labour Party more generally, or its current
representative, he's trying to ridicule them or catch them out because you look kind of
foolish if you don't know, or you say, well, I'm not sure, or actually the category is
open.
It's like, oh, come on, it's common sense.
Everybody knows you're like in some airy, obscurantist, woke ether, and you're having
a problem with a very commonsensical question.
So the person who asks it in that way is trying to ally with common sense or with the common
people who share a common sense.
But the so-called common people who share a common sense also might have a trans kid
or a cousin or have a gender non-conforming uncle, didn't we all have a gender non-conforming
uncle?
I'm going to ask him.
Yeah.
No.
I mean, it's a way of re-consolidating this idea of common sense, of natural difference,
debunking those who open up the question as either detached intellectuals out of touch
with common sense or with some kind of wokeism understood as a set of principles that are
being imposed on common sense reality from a doctrinaire position.
Is there a way to answer that question in good faith, in a way which is inclusive and
acknowledges the variety of the human species, but also is able to grapple with that when
someone says, woman, it doesn't mean something to most people?
Well, I think if we were even to try to answer the question, we would need a multilingual
framework.
Right?
What's that?
Well, how are women referred to or understood in various languages, in various ways of speaking?
How are women thought about in history?
How has the idea of what a woman is changed in different histories, in different parts
of the globe?
So we would need a global framework.
We would need a multilingual framework looking at different ways that women are defined.
We would then need to understand why it was always so important to feminism to keep the
question open.
Why would feminists do that?
Well, because they didn't like received ideas of what a woman is or is supposed to be, right?
Stays at home, involved in reproductive labor alone, supposed to be sentimental, not supposed
to be rational, not capable of certain kinds of labor, uniquely capable for other kinds
of labor.
We opened the question, what is a woman?
We even opened the question, what does a woman want in psychoanalysis?
We opened those questions because we were not happy with the ways in which those definitions
were operating.
And people did, of course, have some pretty intense ways of thinking about this.
So if you live in a society in which women aren't supposed to do certain labor or aren't
supposed to look a certain way, are you still a woman if you do that labor or you look a
certain way?
Right?
We, as feminists, I thought, we're saying, yeah, you are, of course you are.
You want to be a woman, come on in, of course you are.
Let's expand that category.
Let's make it more inclusive.
So it's been important to an emancipatory project to keep the question of what a woman
is open.
So why would we, at a certain point in our illustrious history, as feminists, ever decide,
no, we're closing the door.
We're not going to extend the category.
You can't claim it.
Well, why not?
We've been expanding that category, accepting its internal diversification for a really
long time.
We've gone on the streets for that purpose.
Why would we suddenly decide, oh, this is the limit case?
I mean, you're referring a lot to feminism there, and I suppose that leads me onto the
question of why is it that in the UK, transphobia has come in the guise of feminism, so-called
gender critical feminism, as opposed to the much more explicitly right-wing, family-oriented,
religiously inflected iterations of other countries?
That's such a good question.
Well, first of all, let me just say, I think we need to reclaim feminism, transfeminism,
intersectional feminism, post-ND colonial feminism.
There are all kinds of feminisms out there that are really important abolitionists.
Black feminism, we do not give feminism away.
We do not.
We reclaim it.
We make sure that we know how to keep it open, keep it thoughtful, keep it self-critical.
We talk about critical, gender-critical.
I never understand what's being said.
Because critical means, what does it mean if you're a feminist and you're critical?
That means you call into question the presuppositions that you have received unthinkingly.
It's like you become more thoughtful.
You ask, well, why have I proceeded with that category in that way?
You allow yourself to be changed by the history of emancipatory movements to rethink the fundamental
categories and you have humility and you change and you become more inclusive and you
offer more recognition and you accept that the categories that we often consider to be
so fundamental are historically changing and it's a good thing because we want to be part
of that historical change.
I think that I can't give you the so-called account diagnosis of UK turfism.
I think...
We're undiagnosable as a country and they take great pride in that.
But I do think it's against the background of a shattered left that these kinds of intensely
sectarian fights start happening.
The only way to have a political position is to identify perhaps as a woman or perhaps
as a lesbian and to guard that territory and to make it into a kind of vault or a gated
community that controls who can enter and who belongs.
And I think that kind of territoriality happens when people are very unsure about their alliances
or where they belong and what their broader political aims are.
So I don't exactly know how to account for it but I do think that there are great fears
that I hear trans-exclusionary feminists speaking about.
They're afraid of being replaced.
They're afraid of being violated.
They're afraid of having the definition of womanhood appropriated.
And I think it's worth thinking about, well, what are the conditions under which those
become primary fears?
And what are the ways of addressing that fear without seeking recourse to an exclusionary
politics?
It would be great if that could be opened as a debate, as a really serious question.
I think we should take other people's fears seriously, especially when they turn quickly
to either to hatred or to discriminatory or exclusionary politics.
But maybe there's a way to go back to the fear and say, well, let's talk about that
first and see whether another path is possible.
I'm using the word transphobia quite broadly and of course a lot of the time what we're
talking about is the demonization of trans women in particular.
We're not talking about the demonization of trans men, though of course that does happen.
I don't know.
Trans men are called self-hating lesbians or whatever happened to the butch.
The butch is being effaced from the earth and the trans, you know, you know.
How are the butches getting along?
Still there?
Still all right?
I mean, well, you can affirm a history as a butch and be a trans man and Jack Halberstam
has taught us a little bit about how trans-astrics works in that way to be a more inclusive category.
But why is it trans women in particular?
Because when I try and sort of extract what the big story is from a lot of the things that
I'm reading, whether it's in The Times of the Guardian, it's sort of this idea of, you
know, here's someone who's assigned male at birth and they've got this power and they
can only be using it for ill, they're becoming like a wolf in sheep's clothing or something
like that.
Is that a genuine fear or is it a convenient way of appropriating the position of the victim
when wanting to oppress others?
You know, I think the fear does rest on a misunderstanding or perhaps a willful ignorance
about what trans masculinity is and how it operates or what trans femininity is and
how it operates.
And I think we need to go back to some fundamentals here.
If you're assigned male at birth that doesn't immediately give you power.
It's once you enter into the social world that you see what that assignment can mean.
A lot of people assigned male at birth are really unhappy with that assignment and it
doesn't serve them and in fact they suffer under it.
And they may well not like the expectations of sexuality or the expectations of gender
that go along with that assignment and contest it.
Those folks have to go through some real social challenges to secure the sex assignment that
they do want and need to live in the way that they want.
So that history of suffering, of aspiration, of desire, that deep sense of self that needs
and ought to have social recognition is not properly honored by those who would reduce
somebody to their sex assignment or even the fact that they may well have a penis.
Having a penis does not immediately give you social power, especially if you don't want
it.
It's just kind of complicated.
Or you want it out of play or some other things are more erotic for you.
We don't even have that discussion openly.
It's just assumed like, oh, you're assigned male, you have a penis, therefore you are
a potential rapist.
Is that the way we feel about our sons?
No.
Our fathers, our friends, our lovers, no.
We know that men negotiate social violence in different ways that a lot of men can be
ethical and that masculinity is in the process of being reproduced in some interesting ways
by trans men, by younger men who've been brought up by feminist parents or who've entered culture
and learned a lot about what it is ethically to be a man, how to comport yourself ethically
as a man in this world.
We want that.
We hope for that.
We support that.
Like I was saying about the category of woman, the category of man is also historical.
We need to be interested in the social reproduction of masculinity and make sure it's being reproduced
in some good ways.
Not that the devil needs an advocate, but someone like J.K. Rowling or Julie Bindle,
they would say that they're speaking up for the most disadvantaged women in society.
Women in prison, survivors of domestic violence, and sure, debating who goes in what prison
might be an edge case, but it certainly does matter if you're a woman in that prison.
So what would you say to those people who would say that actually they're coming at
it from a perspective of risk management?
Yes.
I wonder whether we could easily in the U.K., in the U.S. and elsewhere find statistics that
support the notion that prison guards are actually more dangerous to women in prison.
By whom are women in prison violated?
Sometimes by other women, sometimes by prison guards, both men and women.
I think the way gender operates, the way power operates in prison, the way sexual violation
operates is a larger picture.
I'd like to see the larger picture first, and then we can ask that question about this
trans woman who happens to be in a women's prison rather than a men's, because what's
going to happen to that trans woman in a men's prison, that trans woman is going to be the
object of sexual violation.
So if you say that person should, out of concern for the sexual violation of women, and we'll
just leave that open category, that a trans woman should be in a men's prison, what you're
doing is recommending sexual violation over there in order to protect yourself against
the prospect, the fantasy of a sexual violation over here.
Maybe we need the broader picture of how is sexual violation actually happening in prisons,
and then we can make a more grounded judgment.
I mean, what we know is that trans women in prisons in England or Wales are much more
likely to be victims of sexual violation than perpetrators of sexual violation, and
that broader picture of statistics bears that out, but someone might say, okay, drawing
back to that bigger picture isn't telling me what to do with this immediate situation
as and when it arises.
There's a question of rights here and how you balance them, and I suppose I'm interested
in, do you buy that there are conflicts of rights here, or are there ways to integrate
them?
The question for anybody who is at risk of being sexually violated in prison is what
is the recourse within prison to protect oneself against it?
So the group that we would want women to be protected against are all those who might
violate them.
So the same procedure that would be used against a male guard or a woman guard or the exceptional
trans woman would hold.
We wouldn't single out a particular group, especially if statistically that group is
not primarily responsible for sexual violation in prison.
So it's not on the basis of identity or classification that we make that decision.
We say anybody who violates another person sexually needs to be held accountable, and
we need procedures for that, but we don't discriminate against kinds of violators.
They're all bad.
But look, there's an obvious point here that probably needs to be restated, and I always
forget.
You can find your example of a trans woman who did, in fact, threaten or violate another
woman in prison.
You can find your example.
But if you make that example into then the general truth of the category, all trans women
are this way, or all trans women represent this risk, then you are actually engaging
in what's technically transphobia.
Because we wouldn't say, oh, you know, I went into this store, and I bought something from
a Jewish store owner, and I think I was overcharged.
Somebody said to you, oh yeah, all the Jews do that.
You would say, fuck you, that's like, excuse my language, sorry, you would say that's anti-Semitism.
Don't worry, I've heard that before.
No, no, no, no, no, but seriously, or one black person does one thing, well, that's what
black people, and that's what happens in right wing propaganda.
That is exactly how presidential elections are run in the US.
You find one migrant who did this one thing, and then that stands for all migrants.
So that's a right wing strategy, it's a racist, it's a transphobic, it's an anti-Semitic
strategy.
You know how that works, you take the instance, you inflate it into the general category.
So that needs to be stopped.
Before we move on from this discussion about gender critical feminism, I'm going to do
something really annoying and quote your own partner back to you, but as I was reading
your book, I was wondering about whether this narrative that you get from gender critical
feminists that trans and non-binary people are taking something from them.
Yeah, what are they taking?
Taking language, taking attention, taking social capital status from them.
I wonder if that could be linked to Wendy Brown's idea of wounded attachment, that you have
a wounded attachment to a position of marginality and there is a certain amount of social capital
that comes with it, and you don't want to let it go.
Well, if I understand Wendy Brown correctly.
This is the scariest moment of my life, by the way.
She's actually up the road, we could probably call her.
We do suffer wounds, many of us, gay, lesbian, trans, women, people of color, workers, a
lot of us have been wounded, exploited, violated, we come with histories of wounds, there's
no question about it.
The question is, do we then stay attached to that wound, and does that wound become
the source of our identity, and we just stay as a wounded identity in the political sphere,
and that's our operation to assert that wounded identity and stay attached to it?
Or do we look around and say, well, who else got wounded, and what did they do to overcome
those wounds, and what kind of alliances are necessary to make sure other people don't
get wounded in this way, and that we can affirm life, not just from a wounded position, but
from a place of what she's now calling reparation, or a place indeed of emancipation or social
struggle.
So, there are different trajectories that you can go through, but the question is, what
is the wound to feminism, what's the wound to lesbianism really, if the category of
women is expanded to include trans women?
How do any of the people who live in that category, how are they actually suffering?
It seems to me that what they're suffering from is a kind of hatred or phobia that is
overwhelming to them, and that that's a corrosive set of emotions to live with, but I do understand
that as, unfortunately, self-inflicted.
I do think some of the debates here in the UK, especially online, where people are free
to be as mean as they possibly can, some of the debates on all sides in the UK have been
very disturbing to me.
I don't think hideous insults and condemnations and accusations and vile ways of referring
to other people are okay.
I'd rather see kind of meaningful open debate on these issues, so I don't think social media
has helped this so-called conflict, because it does escalate and foreground the cruelest
and the meanest kinds of utterances, and maybe it's important to stay away from those.
It's hard when you're fighting, you want to be cruel, you want to be snide, you want
to ridicule people, you want to show that their position is preposterous.
It's not going to persuade anybody.
I think it might be better to figure out what are people really fearing and do they need
to, and is there another way to talk about that?
I want to move the conversation on a little bit.
When somebody says, I'm a man, I'm a woman, I'm non-binary, it's not just about their
right to perceive themselves in a certain way, it's also about the right to be perceived
and affirmed and addressed in a certain way.
I'm interested in the bit which is socially negotiated, so it's not just about what I
say about myself, it's also about how other people address me, perceive me.
Are there limits to the powers of self-definition?
Tell me what you have in mind.
So for instance, if I was to continue presenting in the way that I am now exactly the same
and I was to say, actually, my preference would be for he, him pronouns, I'd like to
be addressed as a man, there are lots of people who would say, I find this very challenging
what I'm seeing in front of me and what you're asking me to do.
There's a challenge here, so I've got the right to say, live with it, live with the
challenge.
I do think your question raises something interesting, the term gender.
Back in the day, we would talk about the gender division of labor and some socialist
feminists still do, and it's important to do that, especially as we think about care
work and social reproduction, and their gender is not about identity, it's actually about
how society is organized according to this exceedingly important power differential.
So gender is a framework, it's a structure, and then there's gender identity, and some
people think, oh, gender is just gender identity, it's become synonymous with or shorthand for.
And then once we go into the question of gender identity, we see that there's gender
presentation, how we appear to ourselves, perhaps or to others, and that can be very
divergent, but that's divergent anyway, even among like so-called cis people.
It's like, I think I look a certain way and you think I don't, and it's like, well, why?
Well, because the way we perceive ourselves in the ways others perceive us can differ,
and they can differ actually rather radically.
So let's hold that in mind, that there's no bridging of that gap once and for all
in my mind, even if you say, I'm a woman, and I say, yeah, I think you probably are,
do we mean the same thing at that moment? Maybe not, maybe I'm thinking one thing
and you're thinking another, okay. And there are different ways of being and presenting as a woman,
right? And then it gets controversial. It's like, well, I don't think that presentation is,
okay, in any case, my point is simply that very often of a felt sense of who one is
and how one identifies is not always matched by a socially perceived gender presentation.
And so if somebody tells you this is actually how I understand myself, this is my lived reality,
you do have a challenge, but you have a challenge because you are, if you're having trouble
reconciling a certain gender presentation with that person's self-definition,
you're assuming that gender identification can be read off of gender presentation and it is not
always the case. I understand that, and I understand that it's not always the case,
but if I was talking to someone who was outside of this room, not super duper political, they say,
it is quite often the case though. And as a society, we live by rules of thumb, we can change
those rules of thumb when we come across an exception, but I make judgments in a generalized
way. That's how I get through my day. We do, and it's actually one of the reasons why queer and
gender non-conforming and trans kids have had such a hard time, because they're coming to school,
they're looking the way they're supposed to look, more or less, where they're challenging that and
people are just saying, you're in this category, you're in this one, we need to order society in a
certain way. And what is the internal sense of suffering happens when you're put into a
category that actually effaces who you are because you look a certain way to somebody
who's imposing a set of social expectations on you at school, in religious institutions,
on the street, in the family. It's like, but that's who you are, but that's how you look,
but that's how I understand you. It's like, how to live with that deep sense of disjunction,
and you're effaced by the very category by which you are generally recognized.
So it seems to me that a lot of the time when I'm talking to people, I'm very, very much
involved with trans rights. There's sort of two ways of understanding it. There's one way where
you sort of say, okay, what we're asking for isn't very much at all. It is the right to be
affirmed in our chosen gender, and that is not an imposition on anyone else at all.
Changing how you speak, and it's coming from a respect for my humanity. And then there's
another way of looking at it, which is saying, well, actually, people choosing to live in a gender,
which is not the one they were assigned at birth, and straining against these categories,
and challenging these categories, and the connections between gender identification,
gender presentation, and socially recognized gender, that that is actually a really big deal.
And so I suppose my question is, how much of a big deal is it? Is it a small
alteration of social norms, or is it actually something which is a lot more fundamental
that's being posed here? Inherently, we're talking about blowing up some of these categories of gender.
Well, if you're a biological essentialist, it's a revolution. If you are
a member of a right-wing partisan of the Catholic Church, and you believe in the
natural family and creationism, and that God created male and female, it's revolutionary.
Okay, so for all those folks, it's really rough. And I'm sorry that they're having a hard time,
but I think they need to go through it, and come out the other end, and join the rest of us in a
better world. So it's okay, you know. I mean, I accept it's hard. Sure, it's like deeply
sentimented, kind of the lease and habits and ways of seeing. But it is true that a lot of people
just want to be left alone and live without being pathologized and discriminated against,
or the object of violence or disdain. And that seems right to be able to,
like, natal women, they want to walk down the street without being harassed.
Like natal women, they want to get a job without being discriminated against. They want to love
who they want to love. They want their lives and their loves to be recognized minimally or
maximally by society and to live in freedom and without fear. Seems pretty reasonable.
One of the things that you object to in the book is an idea of self-definition as being
simply a form of radical liberty. The idea of, well, anyone can do anything now.
That's right.
So what is self-definition if not a form of radical liberty? And not a simply a
volunteerist decision of I'm just now? I think it's really important to understand
that there's a wide range of positions about gender identification or what some would insist is
sex identifications. Identify as the sex, right? So I don't want to any more at least make a
distinction between sex as somehow natural and gender is somehow cultural and social.
I think sex assignment is already political. It's already the act of social institutions.
It's a way of organizing our bodies at the very beginning of time. So sex assignment is
already the work of gender in my framework. You don't have to accept my framework.
But I think for many people,
the sex assignment they receive is deeply right and true and absolutely
incontrovertible and they would never change it and they kind of like it or they really like it
and they're living it out and it's all good. Okay, but that's a relationship to a sex assignment.
Happens to be a very harmonious one. It's like, yeah, I was called a girl. Now I'm a girl and
this girl is great and I'm working with this category and I love it. Okay, good. Go live, enjoy.
I feel like you are channeling every member of the Spice Girls at once for that.
We really, really were. Well, but it's also kind of, it's always been amazing to me how people
like do their girl thing. It's like, wow. You know, and I'm still kind of a child. I think I was,
and I was a child ethnographer. It's like, wow. Look at these people. They're like doing their
gender in this way. It's like so amazing. It's like, wow, it's like a boy. It's like boy, boy.
It's like doing this boy thing. It's like, wow. And I was like, you know, I was, I was in this
ethnographic, you know, interval, like, not sure, not sure, can do either one very well.
You know, so it's, but it's interesting. But then look for some people, it's very fundamental.
Like this was never right. And for some, it's like, well, this was right for a while. That
don't really wasn't right. Or this was okay for a while. And then it was not right. Or I'm able to
change this category and the expectations that it makes of me and still stay within it. And others
are like, I can't stay within this category. It's unlivable to me. So I think what we're asking
about is what is the threshold of livability for people? And why wouldn't we respect that?
If somebody says this, this is not livable. And this is, and this is my chance for a livable life.
Why would we say, oh, no, no, no, sorry, you stay in the unlivable category and deprive you and we
will deprive you of a livable life? No, I think if we're not cruel people, we accept that somebody
is telling us what's livable and what's unlivable. But do we call that a choice? It's like, well,
it may be that the deepest sense of who one is as a sexed being or
as a gender if we're using that language is not fully formed by us, right? We find ourselves
feeling a certain way. We find ourselves understanding ourselves in a certain way.
We come to grips with our sense of reality. And it's, we're formed, we're formed by
many different social familial institutional powers, but we also form ourselves or we come
to understand ourselves. And it's at that point that we do make a choice, but it doesn't mean
it's a choice from the very beginning. I mean, thinking about, you know, something that you
said in your book is that no one individual or class owns a gender category. So you can't say
what Beyonce does. So glad you said that. That was such an easy derailment. It really threw me
like she's doing country music now, guys, and I really feel we need to discuss it.
Taking over, just taking over. It's so easy to distract me. So easy. But like, you know,
no one individual class owns gender categories apart from Beyonce, the exception to every
philosophical rule. We're clear. Yeah, we are very, very clear. Does the same apply to race?
Because when I saw Rachel Dollars out, I had this instinctive sense that there's something
wrong here. Yes. But I don't own the category of race, right, no individual black person or class,
right, socially constructed class of black people in the category of race. Rachel Dollars out saying,
well, look, I'm identifying as a black woman, I live my life as a black woman. My appearance is
such that people are treating me as a black woman. Is it logically coherent to have different rules
for gender as opposed to race? Was it coherent for me to feel very differently about
Rachel Dollars out than I intuitively think about gender identity? Well, first of all, I agree with
you that what Rachel Dollars out did and what white people do who want to capitalize on
cross-racial definition, identification, is completely objectionable. But they're not exactly
parallel. As I was just saying, you know, gender is formed. It's very complicated.
Race as a category, race as a classification has a different history. And anybody who works in
intersectional feminism would know that you don't tell the history of gender in the exact same way
you tell the history of race, you actually look to see how these categories are intersecting
in specific sites and through historical practices. But I don't think that they are parallel
because I don't even accept the idea that you just arbitrarily announce what your gender is.
There's a formation process there. But racial identification is so intensely a
matter of interpolation like how you have been born into the world in and through a set of
racial categories and formed as part of a community or part of a demographic classification,
how you've been treated, how your self-understanding emerges. So we need to tell the specific history
of that in order to understand why what Donazal did was so inappropriate and wrong.
And she wasn't... I think when this question gets posed in this way, it assumes like, oh,
I'm just going to choose a new sex because I'm going to get some kind of publicity for this,
like a fully volunteeristic notion. So I neither think of trans reassignment or self-definition
as radically arbitrary, nor do I think it is possible or right for that to happen,
for that particular kind of volunteeristic self-interested claim on blackness.
I don't think that's ever justified. She didn't have that history. She didn't come into the world
that way. She has not been interpolated. She has not lived through the history of that interpolation
in the way that black people actually have. And that's a violation of that history.
But when we're talking about the history of a trans person, well, they have been violated
by categories, the wrong ones, and they're trying to emerge from violation. So let's think about
where and how do we locate violation in both of those scenes? I mean, to take it away from
Rachel Dolezal, perhaps locate it in someone who is racialized in a way which marginalizes them,
you talk about the threshold of livability. For lots of people of color, they'd say, well,
this racial category is a violation of my humanity, how it's been made and how I'm
made to live in it the way society treats me. It is a violation. But the only thing there is to do
is to sort of strain at what it might mean to be South Asian, to be Muslim, to be black, to be
indigenous. And again, it's sort of saying, you know, is it okay to have just different rules for
it? Like different rules, different pathways to go down when you are at that threshold of livability
that is just different for race and for gender? Well, it is, although, you know,
it's very funny that we're involved in a discussion about analogy, because race and gender are lived
together. Like gender is never unmarked by race, race is never unmarked by gender, and we know this.
And yet, analytically, we set up this kind of hypothesis, which forces us into a kind of separation
that's problematic. But just to stay with your example, I mean, isn't the lived historical
reality that there are people who are like, don't racialize me, I'm just a human, treat me like a
human. Others are like, don't racialize me in this way. This is the way I am participating in and
living out my racial affinity, identity, community. I may be straining against an interpolation that
I feel like is falsifying or discriminatory, but I am also reproducing it in a way that I find to
be affirmative, and actually making connections and coalitions among people of color or across
even larger alliances. So we see that this is all lived out differently. I don't know if that answers
your question, but I mean, that's the norm. That's the descriptive fact. I mean, moving on a little
bit. In the book, you distinguish between the demonization of so-called gender ideology and
legitimate fears like forced migration, climate change, economic inequality, so on and so forth.
An imaginary thoughtful right-winger might say, well, look, actually
fearing the breakdown of social reproduction is a legitimate fear. You look at what happens in
countries which are richer, which have got more rights for women in terms of reproduction and
the labor market, you get falling birth rates. And so without the sort of coercive stick of gender
roles, you don't get babies. I mean, how would you respond to this? Well, that is Victor Orban's
argument, right? But he's also really worried, not just that he won't get babies, but that they
won't be reproducing the nation in its purity, which is why he's opposed to miscegenation.
So I think we actually have to think about how the emphasis on birth rates is linked to nationalism
and also the war against migration, right? So the same people, Orban is one, Maloney is another,
who want to reproduce the nation and want to have control over social reproduction in that way
are, tend to be both racist and homophobic and transphobic. I'm sorry, not both, but all of these
things are working together. There's an anti-migrant, pro-heteronormative family, anti-gay lesbian
family in most cases, not Israel, because if you're reproducing the demographic advantage for
Jewish people, they will give you technology. So I think we have to put it in that context.
I'm not worried about falling birth rates. I think the earth could probably handle that.
I mean, is there a way to talk about demographic aging without falling into, as you say, these
very homophobic, very transphobic and often very nationalist and racist discourses?
Yes. Well, give me an example. Okay. So for instance, if I'm looking at the UK and I go,
okay, we have an aging population, my friends, we have a economy which is then going to require
much more taxation on the working age population to support people who are aging. So a way to talk
about that and talk about the, I mean, to put it really crudely, the sort of needs of the labor
market and how it relates to social reproduction without falling into something which is inherently,
yeah, like a patriarch or forcing people into these categories which might not fit with
them, some humanity. I think opening the door to further migration would be a great idea,
emptying your indefinite detention camps. Yeah, I think that would be good. You'd have labor,
more people. Seems like a great idea. I'm with you. You in the book, you connect this war on
so-called gender ideology to fascism, to climate catastrophe and saying these are not things that
you can separate off from one another. These are all working to support one another. And then when
it comes to what is to be done about it, you talk about developing a counter-imaginary. And I suppose
I'm wondering, what is a counter-imaginary? Yeah, what's what we're doing right now? We're
developing one together. I don't think it can defeat Victor Orban though. We're just getting started.
But I mean, to talk about, you know, what we're doing now and to be harsh on it, like,
are we not sort of, this is a self-selecting group of people? Yes, but we are interested in this.
We all go out in the world. Is the sort of the ambition of political activity to sort of get
self-selecting groups of people to change how they talk and think and the hope that it will change
how other people talk and think? Because the other side, they've got newspapers. I know, I know.
Fuck ton of money. Think tanks. I know. Are we bringing vibes to a gunfight?
I hear what you're saying. Well, let me take a couple of steps back and
quit my vocation as a comedian, although it was always an alternative path for me.
I do regret not having taken it sometimes, especially last week when the media was so
rough on me. Okay. This is what I think. First of all, I just think it needs to be known that the
anti-gender ideology movement, as it works throughout Eastern Europe, Latin America,
parts of Africa, East Asia, certainly Russia as well, as we know, that it is not just focused
on trans. It's focused on gay and lesbian rights, gay and lesbian parenting and families.
It's focused on women, women's reproductive rights. It's focused on gender-based violence,
wanting to undermine international protections against gender-based violence, as, for instance,
encoded in the Istanbul Convention. Many countries have now, under the influence of the
anti-gender ideology movement, withdrawn from that convention, including Turkey.
Okay. So this movement is not just focused on trans. It certainly is. But it's actually
sex education, books, books for children, activism, lesbian, gay, trans feminist activism in Russia
elsewhere, in Hungary, very rough going, Poland's opening a little bit more now. We should ask about
their mobilizations and why that's happening in the way that it is. It's really exciting.
But I think we have to remember that this right-wing movement, it's a movement, but it's also a trend
within several right-wing movements, which is a distinction, that this is targeting all these
people who are arguing with each other here. Okay. We think we're on different sides of the debate,
but we're being targeted by the exact same people. And we would be very foolish to let them
target us and unify us as a target better than we unify ourselves as a movement of
resistance and social transformation. So this book is trying to produce a more global framework
for some of these local debates so that we might remind ourselves what the stakes are.
And if you look in Latin America, for instance, in Chile or Argentina, the feminist movements
are saying we're against violence and genocide, we're also against the killing of trans people,
we're against the abandonment and injury of Indigenous people and the killing of Indigenous
people. We actually are seeing that the same powers or an interlocking set of powers are
hurting a wide range of people in very similar ways, and we need to bond together. And that's
what an expansive coalition is. So if you ask me about a counter-imaginary, I want to say,
let's look at the expansive coalitions and see how they're operating, how they represent themselves,
how they persuade broader publics. And they went into churches, they went into factories,
they helped unionize the women janitors. They went into a wide number of communities where it
was not clear that they would be welcomed, both to listen and to also revise their analysis on
the basis of what they heard. Oh, great idea. And to make broader alliances, which is why they
could have a million people on the street just, I think, 10 days ago. So I think the counter-imaginary
is with us, but it has to do with being willing to be part of alliances where we don't love each
other. We don't want to have dinner together. We're not going to be reading the same books,
maybe some of the same books. That would be good if we could have a reading list for a potential
future alliance. You know, alliance is not love. Alliance can be really rough. But right now,
it seems to me, given how I do think that there are fascist passions being stoked, like
migrants are going to come take your job, the Great Replacement Theory, trans people are going
to come take your status as a woman away. Trans people are going to de-sex you. You're not going
to be able to be a male or a female anymore. They're going to destroy your family. They're going to
insert the devil into your children's curriculum rather than God's word.
You know, we actually need to get smarter about how this is working, because all those people
who are now afraid, oh, race, gender, ethnic studies, migrants, trans people, those fears
help support increasingly authoritarian regimes that promise order, authority, a return to a
time past when everything was ordered and you knew who you were and what your life was and your
livelihood was secured. Now, when I say your livelihood was secured, we see
a lot of people are afraid that their livelihood is no longer secured. Most young people I know
don't believe their livelihood is secured. Neoliberalism has devastated so many people's
ways of living and ways of working, forced them from their homes and their jobs or made life
increasingly precarious. So people are made nervous. They're made nervous by climate change,
by war escalating as we speak. As a right-wing political operator, if you reach into that fear
and say, guess what? The reason you're so afraid, the reason you're so anxious, the reason that the
future is unclear, is gender or race or migration, you're able to reorganize and stoke those fears
and anxieties in a direction that moves against those minorities or against those populations
in favor of a really strong state and that promises you a reactionary and impossible dream of return.
So I think we have to get wise that this is happening. And for my friends on the left,
I would also say I would not dismiss gender as some distraction or problem or mere identity
politics that's getting in the way of a broader left coalition. No, no, there is no broader left
coalition without having this at its center because the attack on gender isn't an attack on
democracy. It's also an attack on education. So we should not be letting them assign us a
tertiary place in the hierarchy of oppression. I'm just not going to do that.
That's all we have time for. And I want to say thank you all for coming this morning and thank
you so much, Judith, for joining us. It's been a delight.
