Why do we only take things seriously when it's about war?
And this is an important question today given that we have a terrible tragic war happening.
But look what happened even in Germany.
After months saying there was no money and there was a lot of pressure in government
having to cut its budget, 100 billion was found overnight for the war effort.
That happens all the time with war because we take it seriously.
What do management consultants do?
I think it's an important question because this is a global industry worth as much as a trillion
dollars. And yet if you ask somebody like my dad, he drives a taxi for a living,
or as a management consultant, he wouldn't have the faintest idea.
Yet they play an increasingly prominent role in the public sector with extraordinarily large
public contracts, whether it's test and trace or delivering healthcare websites to the United States.
And of course, they're in business too.
A new book by Mariana Matzikato, The Big Con, makes some pretty provocative statements.
It says that actually, consultants don't just undermine democracy,
they lead to less effective government. Mariana Matzikato, welcome to Downstream.
Thank you. I'm very happy to be here.
How are you doing more generally at the moment?
Oh god, you really want to know?
Oh my god, actually fine. I'm thrilled because this week I got to speak a lot with the Prime
Minister of Barbados, Mia Motley, who I think is the hero of the 21st century.
That's true. She's in the UK at the moment, right?
Well, actually, so I was just in Barbados. I was in Barbados two weeks ago working with her,
but she was supposed to be in London this week, but we ended up having her virtually.
She was at the first event we had for this book, the launch event at the RSA.
She was in dialogue with me about why we need not only financial space,
which is what her big global mission is about, but also the kind of fiscal space and state
capacity, which our new book kind of looks at why we don't have that. It was a great conversation.
So your new book, you have many books. They're all very good. I have to say,
actually, this is one of my favourites, the big con.
But you're only halfway through, I can tell.
No, no, no. I've made notes. No, no, no. I finished this last night.
And it's going to sound strange how a book about the consulting industry is quite riveting.
I think pretty people watching this probably won't believe me.
They think I might be trying to flatter you, but it is because there are so many amazing stories.
But let's start from the top. So what are consultants and what do they do?
So first of all, there's different types of consultants. Some are more on the counting side,
some are more on the strategy side. So Deloitte versus McKinsey.
But there's also other types of consultants, which we talk about in the book,
even though we don't focus on them, which have been organizations like Circo and G4S,
where the government has actually decided to outsource a lot of its activities to those
companies. We kind of treat them differently, but they're all part of the same phenomena of
basically the decapacitation, if that's a word. I don't know if that sounds more Italian than
English of government. So what do they do? They consult, they advise.
But we look at it as an industry. This is a very important point. So there's many different types
of consultants. You might have a head teacher of a school who might consult. A nurse could
consult. A doctor could consult. Academics, myself, we could consult. But that's based on
our expertise. It's not actually core to our lives. I might consult based on 20 years of research
in an area. Again, a head teacher might have great knowledge about the schooling system.
We look at a business model of the consulting industry as a sector, which is making lots of
money consulting and where that business model has lots of different problems. It has conflicts of
interest. It has lack of transparency and kind of a veil of secrecy. And especially we look at
its role in, even though it's not its fault, because we look also at governments and we ask,
why do you allow yourself to get captured in some ways by consultants? So easily we look at
the co-evolution between consulting and some of modern problems in capitalism today from
financialization to outsourcing. So you said there's a big sector. Some people watching this
will be familiar with the names, McKinsey, Deloitte, et cetera. How big is it? What kind of numbers
are we talking about? Close to a trillion per year. Wow. Yeah. And also it's rising. So the
subtitle here, turn it around so I can remember what our subtitle is. The big con, how the consulting
industry weakens our businesses and infantilizes our governments and warps our economies. The
infantilizes our governments, but came from a quote by a Tory, so conservative Lord, Lord Agnew,
who during COVID on the back of all the contracts that he was witnessing that the government was
using to bring in consultants, you might remember that Deloitte was charged with the test and trace
system, but also with Brexit, lots of money went to consultants. He said, oh my God, we are infantilizing
Whitehall. In other words, if we keep outsourcing the role of government, we will stop learning.
We will actually become like babies who haven't learned yet. We won't be doing,
so we're not learning by doing. And this is actually something I've been talking about for
decades. So it was very, not surprised, but it was very interesting that it was actually coming
from the conservative side of government because it's not necessarily intuitive that that's where
it would have come from. The numbers here are really impressive in terms of the growth. And
it's something I'm pulling out of the book. This isn't my own personal research. This is so memorable.
It's a fact. When Margaret Thatcher becomes Prime Minister in 1979, the British state is spending
£6 million a year on consultants. When she leaves in 1990, so we're talking 30 years plus,
£246 million. So it's gone up more than 40 times. And it's obviously gone up considerably more than
then. This is hardly shrinking the state, is it? Well, that's what's so interesting. First of all,
you mentioned Thatcher. So that's the bit that might be intuitive. You might think, okay,
a government, a Reaganite government, a Thatcherite government, which is, I don't want to say
anti-state because actually both of them spent a lot on things like war, right? I mean, actually
what Reagan shrunk was the welfare state. My first book, The Entrepreneurial State, I actually looked
at state investment in the US also during the Reagan years actually rising around whether it's
the military industrial complex, but even the National Institutes of Health, which in the
United States spent billions just last year, £42 billion on drug innovation, that happened also
under Ronald Reagan. So we should also just remember that that's sort of been a propaganda
that they put out, but didn't necessarily believe themselves. There was lots of state
investment in both of those governments. It was actually more a war on the welfare state
and really taking away a lot of the social fabric of society, which we've also seen recently in
the UK with austerity for the last 10 years, all the cuts to very, very concrete areas,
whether it's after school clubs, youth centers, mental health, I'm talking about what I just
noticed in my community, let alone the kind of more macroeconomic figures, that's very different
from just saying anti-state, right? Because there was actually lots of investment that
went elsewhere. Anyway, so what's interesting is if you look at kind of a more conservative,
in quotes, neoliberal government, you might intuitively think they want to reduce state
investment and bring in the private sector, both through privatization, but also consultification
of government. So that figure you just mentioned from £6 to £246 million is part of that. But then
there's two questions. One, the one you just said that cost a lot of money. So in terms of actual
expenditure by the state, it didn't necessarily reduce it, but was that really the point of
Thatcher's government? I would argue no. It was actually to dismantle in some ways the ambition
of the state or the structures of the state. And by bringing in consultants, regardless of how
much it costs, and it costs a lot, you are helping to render the state actually in some ways weaker,
at least the structures you might not necessarily care about, you know, health, education, public
transport, again, very different on the military. And yet, one of the things we talk about in the
book is how the real door opened to the consultants actually under new labor. So if you don't really
have a strong idea of what the state is for, you want the state, so it's not the neoliberal idea
of no state, you want the state, but you want it to look efficient and responsible and business
friendly, then ultimately, you bring in business sector metrics into the state apparatus. So
cost-benefit analysis, net present value in the whole idea in economics, which is that at best
the state should fix market failures. So all my work has been saying that that's actually not very
smart. What we actually need for all the problems we have, whether it's climate, health, digital,
is co-creating and co-shaping not just the market, but the economy. Economic growth has not just a
rate, but a direction. The sustainable development goals are 17 of them. That's about directionality,
whether it's about hunger, poverty, climate, the digital divide, health.
Is the UN sustainable development goals?
Yeah, sorry, I always forget that not everyone knows about the SDGs. My kids actually went to
state schools here in London where they sung about the SDGs. Oh, wow, that's progress.
So I think, actually, interestingly, young kids probably know more about the sustainable
development goals than you and me. But yeah, anyway, so the 17 sustainable development goals,
very important, we've had them since 2015, not that long. They require huge ambition,
they require mission, they require collaboration, collective intelligence,
co-investment, so on and so forth. And what my work has been looking at since the entrepreneurial
state is how if we don't have a proper understanding of the state as anything more than fixing
market failures, we will always be too little, too late. We will always be just reacting.
We will at best be filling the gap so that literally even public space will be just the
space that you're allowed to fill up when private space is not there. Think of it even
architecturally in some ways, but really in terms of even public goods and economics,
the word public good sounds good. There's two words, one is good. If you actually look at the
framing of it in economics, it's fixing a market failure problem that occurs when we have positive
externalities. The new labor thing is really interesting for me because obviously they spent
a great deal of money on things like the NHS compared to the Tories, historic amounts of money,
they reduced child poverty, pensioner poverty, so people say, how could you say this? But actually,
when you go into the nuts and bolts of how they did government, so for instance, I find this
fascinating, you talk about this new delivery unit which is created under Tony Blair, which basically
seems to me to be saying tacitly that government should just be done by management consultancy,
or it should be a major part of the state's capacity, and it's not something which is just
bolted on or an afterthought, it's central to how new labor wants to run things.
Yeah, so one of the things I was just talking to Rosie about, she's my co-author, she's actually
one of my PhD students at the Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose, is that in some
ways you could sum up what you've just said as the fact that new labor had an idea of
private public partnerships, not public private partnerships, right? So a public private partnerships,
I would argue, is what we had with the moon landing. It was a public idea, there was strong
public directionality, but ultimately there was 400,000 people involved, so many different
private sector industries from nutrition, materials, electronics, software, it wasn't just aerospace,
and what government had to do was to redesign all its different tools at the time, especially not
only procurement, so government as purchaser, to catalyze as much bottom-up experimentation
towards that goal, and the goal was getting to the moon and back in a short amount of time.
I would argue that what new labor did was kind of forget, you know, what's the actual mission,
the moonshot around health, around public education, around public transport. If you're
going to bring in the private sector, you better make sure you're very clear what the public goal
is, so you're working together to actually deliver on the moonshot, as opposed to just what we end
up having, which is a lot of private activity in areas that used to be publicly run, and it's not
about saying that's wrong, I think it's actually wrong to say it's about private or nationalization,
kind of in a Corbynite kind of way, I think that's where Corbyn went wrong, it's about
how do you actually organize that partnership, so it's truly about actually doing something
good, purpose-oriented for people. Let's fast forward to Keir Starmer, because this morning
he's talked about missions rather than pledges, now a cynic would say well he's exhausted the
rhetoric of pledges, because of course he's broken so many from his leadership election,
but for somebody like yourself, actually no this is substantially different, this means
something quite different, but reading his missions, crime, decarbonization, they seem quite
sort of ambiguous, is the point of a mission that's actually quite specific and measurable?
So I mean I've had the honor to, I don't want to say be responsible, but for having written
about missions and having actually seen it put into policy, so I first wrote about it,
actually for a long time, but when I first wrote about it where it became policy was 2017
for the European Commission, I said look guys, you're just talking all this talk about climate,
about inclusion, it's not getting us any more inclusive or sustainable, they said what would
a mission-oriented approach look like, and I wrote two reports on the back of which the
European Union now has five missions and a large chunk of the horizon program, which was 90 billion
euros, is now targeted through these missions instrument, so what's a mission at least in
my approach, as you begin with the challenge, we talked about the sustainable development goals,
but they're very broad, right, turning them into moonshots, so SDG Sustainable Development Goal
13, you can turn it into something much more clear that you can actually answer yes or no,
did you achieve it, similar to going to the moon and back in a short amount of time, very clear,
you can answer yes or no, so whether it's net zero in a particular region, whether it's getting all
the plastic out of the ocean if we're looking at SDG 14, but the main thing is to frame it,
so it actually requires investment and innovation across multiple sectors of the economy, because
the old industrial strategy in the UK was very similar to what we've seen globally, which is it
was just a list of sectors, so in the UK under Vince Cable, it was aerospace, automobiles,
the financial sector, the creative industry and finance, don't ask me how I remember that because
I don't remember what I did yesterday, anyway, so the idea of a mission-oriented approach
for industrial strategy would be to say why did you just make up those random five sectors,
did they just lobby their way up, why not think of actually challenges like clean growth,
healthy aging, sustainable mobility and so on, and they get all your different sectors to work
together towards particular missions underneath that, and then again change those tools on the
ground to foster that investment towards that, but that requires knowledge, capacity, implementation
ability to actually then change the current status of like procurement, which is just money
being given from the public sector, the private sector, to be outcomes-oriented,
something by the way that many countries rediscovered with COVID, outcomes-oriented procurement,
it's often a wartime tool, which is interesting, right, wars, people want to win wars, so they
take them seriously, if you look at the public-private partnership in a war, when I've learned this in
the US, when the Ministry of Defense, the Department of Defense funds health, sometimes they do,
because soldiers get sick in the war, they don't get messed about by the pharmaceutical industry
because they want to win the war, they want the soldiers to have access
to medicines that the Ministry of Defense funded. When it's the Ministry of Health,
in normal times, somehow we forget that the prices of the drugs should reflect that public
contribution, that the intellectual property rights should not be abused to just become
extraction tools by the sector and so on, so a missions approach has to lead to change,
it should be a source of discomfort, I often tell ministers and policy makers, if you're
getting really cozy with this idea, and it's just kind of a blah, blah, blah, you obviously don't
understand it, because it should actually create change in how you work with the private sector,
you need conditions attached, for example. In France under COVID, the Finance Minister Bruno
Lemaire put strong conditions on Renault and Air France to get access to the COVID-19
bailout program. Why? Because they had a very clear mission around, or challenge, actually around
clean growth, they had to commit to lowering their carbon emissions to get any public money.
In this country, where we're not used to having that conditionality, EZJet got $600 million,
no conditions attached. So Keir Starmer, if he's interested in missions, has to then immediately
talk about a new social contract with business. Let me stick a pin in this, I actually got a
question if you're about China now you've said all that, but these are the missions from Keir Starmer.
Secure the highest sustained growth in the G7, I mean at least that's measurable, right?
But then build an NHS fit for the future, make Britain's streets safe, break down the barriers
to opportunity at every stage, make Britain a clean energy superpower. Those last four just seem
so ambiguous and the line, you can only manage what you measure. How do you measure progress in
any of those things? Or am I being unfair? Are those the kinds of things that you would call
missions? I would call those mission areas. So I think it's actually, well, first of all,
we should congratulate him for actually even having a strategy for basically looking at those
areas as ways that we would redirect an economy. Because now we have a problem with growth, but
in general, the problem in the UK was not lack of growth, it was a problematic form of growth.
It's a form of growth that is led by consumption, not investment. That consumption is led by private
debt, not real incomes have not been rising very much in this country. So there's a lot of
credit and private debt in the system to the point that private debt to disposable income
in the UK is close to what it was just before the financial crisis. And that's what caused the
financial crisis. So you'd think people would be like, oh, problems. Very few people are talking
about this. Labor is not talking about it. Neither are the Tories. So the unsustainable level of
private debt, which is interesting if you think about it, because we always talk about public debt.
So it's very important, I think, to have those mission areas as a way to talk about
the need to have investment-led growth, because all those areas are going to require investment.
We've also had financialized growth in this country, where a lot of companies are making
profits, but not necessarily reinvesting those profits into the economy. So anyway,
so as soon as you talk about those bold areas, the question is, what does that then mean for
the design of policy? What does it mean for an industrial strategy? What does it mean for
procurement strategy? And I think the challenge is, so the first one I would say is not even a
mission area. That's just economic growth. And that's going to happen as a result if you get the
other stuff right. If you have an innovation policy and industrial strategy that catalyze and
excite a lot of different actors, that then invest, collaborate, do those moonshots across
different spaces, growth will hopefully result from that, because they all require investment
and innovation, which can lead to productivity increases, for example. But the other ones could
be mission areas. But the question is, what are they? So keeping streets safe. I mean,
this is something that I think is incredibly important, because I've seen how in London,
and I just happen to live in London, on the back of all the austerity that we had in this country,
the social fabric at the community level was really broken. And so the rise in knife crime,
for example. So you could have a mission at the city level, because a lot of these missions might be
talked about nationally, but then they have to resonate with communities, where you might have
citizen assemblies, you might have different types of democratic for also where
people think about those missions. I only say that because I've worked on missions also in Camden,
where I live, and we have the Camden Renewal Commission that I co-chair with Georgia Gould,
and one of our missions that we thought about for Camden actually did have to do with use safety.
And the idea there would be, how do we look at, for example, knife crime, not just from policing,
right? So that's the kind of result. But if knife crime is actually the symptom
of lots of other problems, think of all the social and economic determinants of crime,
where a lot of the both victims, but also the perpetrators often come from broken homes,
homes where there's a lot of problems, how can you really think of that problem in a way that
bring lots of different branches of government together to think holistically with an all-of-
government approach? That's a key factor in a mission-oriented approach. As I just mentioned
before, going to the moon was not just aerospace. Solving climate is surely not just for the department
of energy. Solving issues around well-being is definitely not just for the Department of Health.
So it's not just about intersectoral that I talked about before. It's really that
all-of-government approach. And that really then helps government become more dynamic,
and that comes back to the book, because what we say in the book is that we don't have dynamic
governments. We often have rigid, siloed governments, governments that have stopped
in sourcing the capacity and capability they need to govern modern-day complex challenges with
other actors. And if you have consulted that capacity, if you're asking Deloitte to do your
test and trace, where Deloitte had no expertise whatsoever on test and trace, so it's not surprising
it went belly up, then you have a problem, because you stop learning by doing. You've stopped the
doing. How do they get these jobs? Because like you say, Deloitte had no, I mean nobody had any
expertise in test and trace. Maybe a few countries in East Asia after the SARS epidemic.
But so they've got no technical expertise in whole swathes of what they make money from.
So what's their pitch? We've got no experience. Give us a multi-billion-pound contract.
Well, I mean it just, I'm going to answer that question, but just to almost play,
not devil's advocate, but just to put another thing on the table. At the same time that Deloitte
did test and trace, which went very badly in the UK, the NHS did the vaccine roll out through a
decentralized network of GP practices, and not only went well, it also became something
we talked about. The politicians talked about it successful. So then the real question is,
why didn't they invest more in this decentralized network of GP practices? Why did we not actually
wake up and say, wow, what a great success story, and let's actually increase the investments
within the NHS instead of doing what we're seeing today, which is that the real investments
are not only not increasing, but there's a lot of stress within the system. We have junior doctors
on strike, nurses on strike all over the UK. So this is also a very interesting question,
because it's the parallel of the question you've asked. Now, what we look at is, why are we hiring?
It's your question. Consultants in areas that they have no expertise in. We saw this also in
Australia, where they spent over six million on McKinsey to do their climate strategy, and it was
then reported to be a very faulty, problematic climate strategy. And the question there that we
posed in the book is, well, there was also expertise within the government. It wasn't
perfect expertise, but they have this organization called CSIRO, which actually has a lot of climate
capabilities. So what is this kind of almost allergy to using not only your internal expertise,
but not to actually invest in that expertise and just need that rubber stamp? Because that's what
ultimately it is, a rubber stamp of McKinsey or Deloitte that makes both governments and businesses,
one of the subtitles is weakens our businesses. Why is that? And we look at two different issues.
One is that this dismantling of state capacity has also led to gaps where sometimes literally
even just numbers of people don't exist. I experienced this with the COVID-19 recovery in
Italy, where the Treasury basically outsourced the recovery to, I keep talking about McKinsey,
but there's lots of these consulting companies. It's BCG, Bain, Pricewaterhouse, Cooper's and
so on. BCG's Boston Consulting Group. Yeah, Boston Consulting Group. And so one thing is that as a
consequence of not just the austerity, but the dismantling of state capacity, there often is
the need to bring in others to help you out. But when those others don't have the expertise,
that's the real kind of interesting challenge. Because of course, there's lots of expertise
in universities, for example. And I'm not just saying this because I'm an academic, but I know
some top climate experts around the world, like at the Potsdam Institute in Germany,
they have amazing climate science. That would be a more natural place to go to for climate
expertise. But the rubber stamp of the consulting companies is something that is looked upon as
justifying as making good a government that is fearful, especially on the back of so much
kind of government bashing, that somehow there isn't that expertise inside government.
And also sometimes to make uncomfortable decisions. So this is also something that we don't blame
consultants. We say that both with businesses and government, sometimes letting someone else,
not so much take the blame, but have their kind of brand on it, allows you to maybe do some
controversial activities in the private sector. We look, for example, at the downsizing trend,
the financialization trend, by saying, oh, it was recommended by or rubber stamped by a consulting
company, it might go down the throat easier. And so in that case, we say government, sorry,
businesses should actually own up to the decisions they're made, as opposed to just
requiring that rubber stamp of the consulting company. But also there's a risk averseness,
there's a fear of making mistakes. And what's interesting, I've talked about this in other
books, that whereas we celebrate risk taking and making mistakes in the private sector,
as soon as a civil servant makes a mistake, bang front page of the Daily Mail, in this country,
there's other, actually, there's not that many tabloids around the world, this country has a
tabloid industry. That's about it, right? Sorry? Built in Germany. Exactly. New York Posts.
Yeah, I mean, there are, but it's just incredible here, just the power they have. We've learned it
in the recent Harry and Meghan discussions. But it's not just the tabloids, it's public
servants, civil servants are not allowed to make mistakes, which is a problem. This is something
we talk about. Trial and error and error, you would not learn how to ride a bike if you did not
fall off. So the fact that governments, part of the consequence of outsourcing, privatizing,
of consultifying is, in fact, what Lord Agnew, the conservative Lord who made this accusation,
you know, that Whitehall was getting infantilized. Infantilized means you're kind of becoming a
baby, you're not learning, you're not growing up, you're still an infant. And this was a Tory Lord
saying Whitehall was being infantilized. And so, you know, this is one of the biggest problems that
even though you might be doing it out of fear, because you'd prefer someone else to be taking
the risk so you don't get blamed when things go wrong, you ultimately will get addicted.
You will require that help constantly, right? Because you're not growing up,
you're not building that capacity. And this is one of the things we talk about. We say that,
you know, the reason, the sector, because it's the consulting industry that we
kind of focus on, not just consultants, it's problematic is that the business model itself
kind of relies on that next contract following. Whereas if you're a really good therapist,
for example, you don't want your client to be in therapy their whole life, that probably means
you're a bad therapist. The principal agent problem. Exactly. Exactly. Could you explain
this quickly, the principal agent problem? Well, it's just about incentives. I mean,
if, you know, I mean, the principal agent problem can be applied to different types of
problems. But in this case, it's that if there is, we would call it asymmetric information in
terms of a market failure, then the agent that you are, if you want, you know, consulting for
doesn't necessarily have knowledge about, you know, the contract in this case. And in fact,
this is one of the things we talk about, which is that there is a veil of secrecy and lack of
transparency in the contract. So in South Africa, for example, you might have, what we have had,
consultants who the same consultant is advising SCOM, which is a state-owned energy company.
And it's also advising the Ministry of Finance, which in theory is regulating
SCOM, right? So you can't be on both sides of the street. And if you are, that better be very
transparent and known to the government. And so one of the, you know, this kind of conflict of
interest. Was that legal? Well, that's what's really striking, actually, that it's legal.
And we talk about all the different consultants who are both advising the fossil fuel industry,
while at the same time advising on ESG metrics, right? As though it's all fine and the same.
Of course, it's not. You can't be helping and actually in some ways fostering a fossil fuel
industry to be increasingly successful in making record-level profits today, while, you know,
on the other side of the street pretending that you're an expert around environmental and social
governance metrics, which is all about companies actually becoming greener or societal, you know,
more good for society. There's lots of amazing stories in the book. And like I said at the
top, that's why it's really riveting these case studies of failure. But one of the more dazzling
ones is the story of healthcare.gov, of course tied up with ObamaCare. Can you tell us a little
bit about healthcare.gov, why it failed, and what that has to do with consultants?
Sure. I mean, it's actually part of a much bigger problem because one of the capabilities we say
that has been decimated within governments is actually their ability to govern digital platforms.
And one of the areas by consequence that is increasingly consultified, so consultants are
being brought into, has to do with precisely that area, the kind of, let's just call it,
the digital area of government. Now, this is not a small problem in 21st century, 22nd century
soon. Capitalism, if you don't know how to govern digital platforms, you won't be able to have a
climate strategy, a health strategy. Think of the infodemic side of COVID-19. In fact, I did a
report on which countries globally did better in COVID-19. It actually was countries that actually
had invested in areas including digital platforms because of that very important information,
processing side of things, including by the way, Test and Trace, which we touched on before.
So healthcare.gov, of course, is famous because the U.S. government, as we know, doesn't really
have a public health program. A lot of people in the U.S. die actually not because they're sick,
but because they can't afford healthcare. This is one of the reasons I'm very proud to live in
Europe. The NHS in the U.K. is very important in terms of giving everyone access to healthcare.
Now, the problem is that what was also called Obamacare, so Obama finally gets through a program
which, by the way, Hillary Clinton had tried to get through when her husband was president,
it had a web site where people could access in order to sign up for healthcare in the U.S. from
the Obamacare program, and as soon as it opened up, it basically crashed and government was blamed,
but actually it wasn't government that had governed it, it had been outsourced, it had been
outsourced to private actors, and this is a huge problem, first of all, because it's central,
like how you actually govern the digital side of a program, whether it's health or climate,
so if you are outsourcing your core, that's a problem. If you're outsourcing something that's
peripheral, perhaps it doesn't matter, catering or something. This is actually not just around
health, as I just mentioned. If you look at the weakening of government, it's precisely around
those kind of areas, and so unless they're investing in their own digital capacity,
they won't be stronger and they will become increasingly needing to have others to come
in, but in that particular case, also, those that had been brought in to do the digital side
weren't very capable. It costs $1.7 billion. $1.7 billion for a website is just extraordinary,
and on the first day of opening, six people could use it. People, like you say, blamed the state,
but they should have been blaming management consultancies.
Yeah, I mean, that's again the irony, because I just mentioned before that part of the answer to why
governments are allowing consultants to have so much power is the risk, the kind of worry
of getting things wrong and thinking that somehow management consultant will not only bring in maybe
some expertise, which as I just mentioned often, we don't have, but also get the blame if things
go wrong, and yet things continue to go wrong and they're not actually held accountable.
So even how those contracts are designed, they've actually kind of become almost risk-free for the
consultants, and so it's not only costing government a lot of money. In theory, they're
sometimes pitching it as though it's going to help them cost less, so reduce deficits by letting
others undertake public programs. So we have kind of three different problems. It's costing a lot
of money. It's actually not delivering, and when things go belly up, the blame comes back to
government. So it's actually a toxic cocktail, and you'd think that it would be better known how
problematic this is. And I think one of the things we were kind of pleasantly surprised,
but not so surprised, is just how much the book has spoken to people both in the business community
and government communities at different level, city, local, regional, national, global, precisely
because it's almost scandalous at every level. I must say though that we're not there to blame
consultants. In fact, we spoke to many different consultants, especially young kind of 30-year-old
consultants who go into the industry also wanting to do good. This isn't a book about the bad guys
trying to do terrible things around the world, and they are disillusioned when you see that kind
of operating on both sides of the street or the not hypocrisy, but that kind of treating any of
the latest trends, whether it's ESG and climate or shareholder value maximization on kind of the
other extreme in terms of problematic tendencies and modern-day corporate governance is almost
equally available places to kind of leech onto to provide your consulting services,
you start to lose faith that this is actually really about making the world a better place.
We do make some specific recommendations at the end because it's not enough just to complain and
to kind of denounce, and we talk about the need to make contracts much more transparent, precisely
on all the different types of areas that you're consulting in so you can see those conflicts of
interest, making contracts so they actually embed learning precisely so you don't have those kind
of repeat contracts so that you actually show that you're cumulatively adding value so the
organization in question ultimately shouldn't need you. That example I gave from therapy before,
if you have someone in therapy their entire life, you're probably not doing your job very well,
and I think if you look at all the different problems we have globally, they do require
lots of different actors where the consultants might have a role, but first of all we need to
make sure they actually have expertise in that area so we should definitely become much more aware
where those areas of expertise lie, but also how do we make sure the ecosystem between these
different actors is truly kind of a symbiotic mutualistic one and not a parasitic one?
Consultancy is one of those things where I mean I I'd obviously heard of it before I graduated,
I'll start that again. Consultancy is a strange one because I'd heard of the term before I
graduated, I graduated in 2007, bad luck, so it was a really interesting year because at the
start of the year as an undergraduate everybody you know all you could hear at University College
London where you teach, McKinsey, Deloitte, Macquarie, HSBC, Banco Santander, everybody had an internship
with a bank or a consultancy and then within a year it dropped like a lead balloon so it was
really fascinating to see that, but if I said to my dad as a graduate, oh I've got a job as a
consultant, he would say what the hell is that? What do you do? I mean he thinks that anyway
actually with Navarra Media, but it's one of those things where I had a pet theory which is
particularly in Anglo-America since the late 1990s we have a massive overproduction of very clever
generalist graduate students, humanities in particular but also you know in the sciences
and they don't really know what they're going to do, they're sort of aimless, very ambitious,
very conscientious people and it seems to me lots of those people gravitated towards
consultancy as a job and it almost seems to me and obviously I don't think you've written that
in the book, it almost strikes me as a shame because having this concentration of people that
want to do problem solving, highly competent, it seems like a massive misallocation of human
resources basically. But we do talk about that in the book, we say wouldn't it be great if all this
desire to do good in the world actually also resulted in more of these young
people going into government and we also talk about this self-fulfilling prophecy that the
more we've had this kind of backlash against government, what Tony Jutt in his book, Ill
Ferris the Land, calls a discursive battle like literally just talking about administration instead
of kind of like a ministry out there trying to do really difficult things or what I've talked about
market fixing, not market shaping, de-risking, not taking risks, simply enabling, redistributing
and regulating instead of being a true value creator. It's not actually a coincidence that it
becomes much more sexy to go into the McKinsey's, the Macquarie's even though I have a whole
theory about Macquarie anyway, but the Goldman Sachs isn't the Googles, right? So there is that
self-fulfilling prophecy and it's not a surprise I've actually taken the time to set up a whole
institute for innovation and public purpose at UCL which is all about rethinking the state,
bringing purpose to the center of policy making, but also really having a theory of value creation
with the state at the center, not to say the state is more important than any other actor,
but it's very, it's important in terms of leading at least in democratically elected
societies and then using all the tools that has to bring together that kind of stakeholder value,
lots of different actors to solve really complex problems, drive collective intelligence,
the sexy word, but that needs to be embedded in the contracts. You can't have collective
intelligence if again intellectual property rights are abused. They're currently too wide,
too strong, too upstream and yet an intellectual property right is a contract that for 17 years,
the state has given to the private sector. So you need to govern that in the public interest
and the capacity to do so I think has withered away to govern those particular contracts,
but any contract whether it's a procurement contract or an intellectual property right
should have the public interest at the center because that's the point of government. It's not
just to help companies make profits. Do you think there's been a cultural shift as well,
which is the fault here? So I'm a materialist, you have a materialist explanation for all this
happening, but as an ancillary point, if you're an ambitious young person in the 50s, 60s and you
want to change the world, you'd go work for a big government ministry and you would say,
I want to go work for the department of X or I want to go work for NASA. And after the 60s,
there's this idea that actually particularly progressives thought, oh, if you want to change
the world, you need to be like Jane Jacobs or you need to be like Ralph Nader. You need to be on the
outside, right? You need to be lobbying. You need to be lobbying and you need to be this active
interest representation, but not institutional power. Do you think there was a kind of
a big social error? Actually, all of a sudden, tons of talented people stopped going into
precisely institutions when we need them to be? I don't know. I mean, first of all,
I don't want to exaggerate the point about the people who are working in government. I mean,
I work with governments globally, including in the UK, and it's full of incredibly,
not only smart, but people really with ethics at the center, they go into government because
they're interested in, you know, to put it simply, making the world a better place.
I think what's happened though is that there's so much backlash on government. There's such a
cartoon image, you know, I talk about this in the entrepreneurial state, like the kind of
Kafkaian bureaucrat and then the cool, you know, Steve Jobs and Elon Musk today, that actually,
what we've seen is also a hemorrhaging of that talent. I mean, so in other words, it's been a
much more explicit, intentional problem than sort of what you just described. Also, in the 1960s,
I learned this when I was running Mission Economy, the average age in the mission control room for
Apollo was 26. So crazy. Very, very young, average age. There was younger people. And yet,
at that time already, a lot of this outsourcing was happening to the consultants, literally,
actually to McKinsey. In that particular case, McKinsey began in the mid-20s. And the head of
procurement for NASA, this guy, Ernest Brackett, said, if we continue this, we won't even, you know,
not only won't we know how to get to the moon, but we won't even know how to write
the contracts with the private sector because they were working with lots of private sector
companies. And his quote was, we will get captured by brochuremanship. It's endearing because they
didn't really have PowerPoints at the time that these consultants have today. They had
sexy brochures. So the idea that you would get captured by the brochure was not to say, oh,
we don't want to work at the private sector. It was more like, we won't know which private
sector companies to work with. And I would actually argue that's what we have today.
We have, definitely, if you look at the contracts, we have a very unbalanced power in terms of even
the legal expertise. But the problem is not that there's not enough public or private investment,
is that partnership is not, it's not a dynamic one. It's not purpose-oriented. It's not fair.
It's not just. There's often, again, socialization of risk, privatization of rewards. And you can
fix that in the contracts. NASA actually had a clause in its contracts, no excess profits.
It's great. Not no profits. You don't get to the moon with philanthropy, charity. Of course,
you can make profits, but not excess. In excess of what? Of what you've done. So as soon as you
have a whole kind of narrative and discourse that all the value is getting created in the private
sector and the state is just there to facilitate, enable, work on the sides, then it's much easier
to get these very problematic contracts that socialize risks and privatize rewards and allow
excess profits to be earned by some who are doing good stuff, but not everything.
So somebody watching this from the left might think, oh, this is just social democracy, very
vanilla. I actually think you understate your radicalism. I think it's very radical.
Well, no, because that's why people don't like this, by the way. I got a lot of hate.
The whole thing about not private-public partnership, but public-private partnership,
and you might not agree with this, I think in some ways is reminiscent of the better
features of the Chinese system, because there was a great talk by Eric X. Lee, who talks about
the Chinese Communist Party. And he made a point on a separate interview, and he said,
China has a market economy. We have private firms that try and make profit. He says the
point is the interest of those firms, the interest of capital more generally to make profits,
does not supersede political authority. Political authority always supersede, and obviously that
has bad expressions of manifestations. But the point is political authority always supersedes
the private interests of businesses or capital. And that's basically what you're saying, isn't
it? This idea that political authority, democratically accountable.
Yeah, because it's a democratically accountable thing in terms of not being a China fan.
But the same theme is there, right? That political authority, with that accountability
from people and the mandate from people, sets the agenda around, like you say, particular missions.
And that supersedes the interest of capital. That's hugely radical, isn't it?
So I once gave an interview, actually. I can't remember. I think it was to the Financial Times
where I said that China is learning from the United States at the same time that the United
States is unlearning from itself. So again, everything that's smart in our smartphones
and not stupid was actually invested in by government, mission-oriented government,
the internet, GPS, touchscreen, and Siri, all fruits of government investments.
In some cases with private sector collaboration, but it was actually through a public sector
problem that was required. So the internet came about because we needed the satellites to communicate,
GPS, the Navy invested in it to know where all the ships were in the seas. So it's not actually,
I mean, today it feels more like maybe a Chinese or kind of a top-down planning system. But that's
actually how the United States developed. They talk Jefferson, but act Hamilton. People should
only understand that because now the Hamilton musical. But basically, Hamilton was a very
important US politician who at the time advocated for an industrial strategy whereas Jefferson was
more free marketeer. The US has always talked the talk of the free market, but acted actually on a
much more visible hand, not the invisible hand. Where I think, so the work on missions coming back
to here is a speech this morning is all about that. In other words, or it should be about that.
I mean, he's using the word. I'm very curious to know and perhaps work with them on actually
making this real, the how. The how is harder than just the word. It's all about actually having a
plan that's really difficult. Remember Kennedy said, we're going to the moon because it's hard,
not because it's easy. So this isn't about one side facilitating. I'm Italian, facilitating
means making something easier for someone else, like the word de-risking. So it's not about making
it easier de-risking someone else. It's about tackling those really difficult challenges
together. Now that requires a goal. That's going to be the end goal, but the how along the way
really matters. How you design the financial institution with conditionality. You're not just
giving out money. It's conditional on change happening within different sectors. You don't do
it top down and tell them what to do because that could hurt innovation, but you do it with a strong
direction. That's that public-private versus private-public bit that we talked about before.
It means learning how to do, again, outcomes-oriented budgeting. So you're not just giving a bit of
money here and there, but you actually have a goal where the budget itself, even at the city
level, zero knife crime requires its own budget. You can't just give a bit of money here, a bit of
money there, and then stir the soup and hope for the best. So I think what's interesting in China,
though, is that they obviously have very clear targets. They had such high poverty that they
really alleviated a lot of people out of poverty. They also are spending a huge amount on greening
their entire manufacturing base because they have a huge pollution problem. So they don't
have that myth of, oh, this is just going to happen through the free market. One of their
problems, though, is they don't really have what I talk about in the entrepreneurial state,
a decentralized network of different types of public actors. They have very large, for example,
the Chinese Development Bank, which gave huge amounts of money to Huawei. Huawei would not exist
without a guaranteed loan that was over $5 billion from the Chinese Development Bank.
By the way, Elon Musk got over $5 billion from the US government for his different companies,
including in the early stage of Tesla. It was a guaranteed loan from government.
But in China, you have just these big chunks of money from institutions like the Chinese
Development Bank. In the US, they had DARPA, the National Science Foundation, the Small
Business Innovation Research Program, the Venture Capital Arm of the CIA, Incutel. But it has,
at least in the US, been more around their military industrial complex. And what I've been arguing
for is, why do we only take things seriously when it's about war? And this is an important
question today, given that we have a terrible tragic war happening. But look what happened
even in Germany. After months saying there was no money and there was a lot of pressure in government
having to cut its budget, $100 billion was found overnight for the war effort. That happens all
the time with war, because we take it seriously. And I'm very anti-war, at any war, but isn't it
interesting that for war money comes out of the woodwork? Why doesn't it come out of the woodwork
when we have war on poverty, when we want to strengthen our health systems, when we want net
zero targets, when we have these social problems in our streets? So really, what I've been talking
about for a long time is the need to create a mission-oriented economy around our social
challenges, starting with the SDGs that we talked about. And with this book, the big con
talks about is that that requires capacity. And if we continue to consultify that capacity,
you won't know how to implement. You won't know how to work with others. And that's important,
because I sometimes get accused as being just kind of folklorically loving the state. I'm like,
no, I'm the state's kind of, I don't want to say biggest enemy, but biggest provocateur saying,
what are you doing? You can't become agile, flexible, capable, and creative unless you
actually invest internally in becoming a learning organization.
You said you have haters.
Well, who are they?
Oh, God. I find them very hard to believe.
If you're a woman, if you are progressive, if you're lucky enough to actually get media attention,
but especially, this is the big bit, have impact. So different governments or even businesses
start to implement some of your ideas. Are you dangerous? If you're just ranting and no one's
listening, you're less dangerous. So I think when your ideas start to have impact, and I feel very
honored because I'm not the only one who has some good ideas, I feel honored that I've had the
opportunity to work with governments carefully, because it's not just about going to lecture,
doing a TED Talk, and then leaving. Again, that's why I set up a whole institute to take care,
have teams that help governments implement new policies, but also train, because that's the
main thing we do. We have an educational program. You are much more dangerous to those who
would love to see the state less able, less, not so much large, because I've never been about large
versus small state, but a more capable state, a state that is truly purpose-oriented,
a state that knows how to get a good deal in a contract is not great news for those who are
making either a lot of money or having a lot of power by having a weak state.
So do you think that some of the people you take target on this book, and I know you've said
already, many good consultants, and you can see the role for certain services not being
within a firm or inside a public agency, Navarra Media has an accountant. We don't have an accountant
inside the organization. That's something that somebody else does, for instance.
Is accounting your core business?
Precisely, right. That's exactly why I would.
Yeah, exactly.
Is governing a digital platform, a core business of a government in order to make sure that the
next pandemic, it can actually deal with the infodemic side of the crisis, of course.
This is a trillion-dollar industry, though. So, like you say, you putting this in the
crosshairs, and you are an influential person, that must put a mark on your back a little bit
with some of these people. I mean, I've read the write-up in the Financial Times, for instance,
perfectly civilized and polite, but there was clearly an undercurrent, which is,
don't make too much noise about this industry.
Oh, really? I haven't read that. Have you not read it?
Have they made threats? They're going to come and knock on the door?
Not threats. Not threats, but there's huge vested interest, basically.
Of course.
Oh, no, of course.
Not having this conversation.
Yeah, I thought that was actually quite funny, to be honest. I mean,
the comments that were so defensive, and then all you had to read was the comments that came
afterwards by others. I mean, I almost didn't have to reply. I think the fact that we purposefully,
we say this several times in the book, that this is just as much a challenge to those that are
hiring and that have stopped investing within their own capacity as it is to those that are
making a lot of money by profiting from those that don't have that capacity.
It's really a wake-up call to everyone, because I truly believe that in the long run,
we all will benefit. The planet will benefit, the sustainability of the planet,
but also all these problems we have around inequality will benefit if we actually have
more capable actors all around.
Mariana, thank you so much for joining us this evening.
Thank you.
It's a great book.
Thanks so much.
Congratulations.
Thank you.
