Governments like the UK's but also elsewhere in the world are granting new oil and gas
exploration licenses willy-nilly.
So of course the BP's and the Shell's having been talking quite a good game a few years
ago about transitioning and now are like, why did we bother with that?
Governments aren't serious about this at all.
Over recent decades, the price of energy coming from wind or solar has collapsed.
The same is also true by the way for energy storage with lithium batteries, that's why
increasingly we see things like electric vehicles because the economics of these things add
up.
Now for the optimists out there, they say that these falls in price for renewable technologies
are brilliant, they're all we need and they are the panacea in terms of addressing the
climate crisis and yet at the very same time we have seen the percentage of energy coming
from non-fossil fuel sources remaining broadly the same.
So what explains this strange contradiction, falling prices and yet we're not decarbonising
particularly quickly?
Today's guest has a pretty interesting hypothesis regarding all of that, he says we should not
be focusing on prices but profits and simply put renewable energy isn't that profitable.
Welcome to Downstream.
Thanks for having me or thanks for having me back.
Well I'm glad you said that because I had a few colleagues in video, they were a bit
suspicious when I said we're going to talk to somebody about asset management, it's
going to do really well, everybody wants to hear about it and they just didn't believe
me but it ended up getting a quarter of a million views and counting.
Amazing, amazing.
Great book.
Thank you.
Asset management is also just something that I think people are picking up on.
They are, absolutely they are.
Yeah it's more and more in the news and it's not going to go away.
Sadly.
No, exactly.
But we're talking about a different book today.
We are but it's not unrelated.
It's not unrelated.
That's good.
It's a very technical book, don't know if I'll put you off.
The price is wrong why capitalism won't save the planet.
I find it interesting because there's a bit of a distance between like I said very technical
book which is very good because you're really getting to the heart of really important arguments
as we will over the next hour as well.
But then that is like a very populist broad statement why capitalism won't save the planet.
We will get onto that in a moment because lots of people say it can but I want to start
with the basics.
Yes.
Is net zero bullshit?
Wow, what a question to start with.
I don't know.
I think that we are heading in our kind of muddled, convoluted, messy, insufficient way
in that direction globally albeit at very, very different rates in different places and
with varying degrees of likelihood of getting somewhere close to it eventually but we'll
get close to it if not there eventually.
Of course the question is what is net zero?
What is because net zero is not absolute zero it means you reduce carbon and other greenhouse
gas emissions but you do other stuff to compensate for that in various ways and I think the best
answer I have to that question is that to me the most interesting thing about net zero
is how we are consistently moving away from aspirations of real zero and so if you look
for example-
So real zero and net zero not the same?
No, because real zero is no emissions essentially.
Net zero is you still have emissions but you do other things like sucking carbon out of
the atmosphere or whatever else it might be to offset that and the thing is if you look
at the reports that get produced by the IPCC the international panel on climate change
over time the reports that they produce on kind of their kind of core scenarios of where
they think we are heading and kind of hopefully should be heading they have gradually gravitated
away from essentially real zero aspirations and so with each iteration they basically
say if we are going to get to whatever is plus two degrees or whatever it is 1.5, 2.5
15 years ago they were saying we will get there just by through wind and solar for example
just by mitigating emissions with each new iteration they said we will get there mainly
with solar and wind but also we will have a bit of carbon capture and storage.
Next iteration we will have a bit more carbon capture and storage so I think the really
important criticism is the criticism that comes from people like Kevin Anderson who
are very outspoken on this, the climate scientist who say we are increasingly banking on the
efficacy of technologies which do not yet exist at any significant scale rather than
banking on technologies which we have and we know that they work we are increasing the
degree of our bet on technologies that we do not yet have in any meaningful shape or
form at scale and affordability and so on and obviously the next step will be geoengineering
and as I understand it that is the kind of that as many viewers will know the work of
Andreas Maum and I think that is what his next book with Wim Carton is going to be
focusing on is how we are heading towards a position of where we are essentially at
default position is going to be relying on geoengineering to get us out of the hole we
are increasingly digging. So fossil fuel combustion stays with us, the emissions stay
with us but there is how Mary do other shit to help us out of the hole. And we are doing
that already to an extent in so much as not geoengineering but the carbon sequestration
does not need to be technology that is not already here because of course you have this
ridiculous phrase I think of quote unquote nature based solutions which is basically
planting trees.
Essentially yeah.
Often it is trees that are not actually designed for the habitats where you are planting them
there is not the kind of biodiverse you would associate with wild habitats, it is the kind
of trees you would plant for timber and what not, they are effectively ecological dead
zones.
Exactly.
But you have had a load of money flood into this, people think they can make money off
of it so of course the good and the great are very enthusiastic about it.
Love it.
They do love it.
Yeah of course they do.
But you are not optimistic about nature based solutions?
Well I mean I think that the reality is that I am totally in agreement with the likes of
Kevin Anderson that just say you know minimize emissions, just focus on minimizing emissions.
You don't want the shit in the atmosphere, that is what you just don't want and anything
that provides you with the kind of cover to think that you can continue happily in that
merry way with emissions is not a good thing.
So yes we should be exploring those types of things and yes we should be exploring carbon
capture type technologies but we shouldn't be allowing that to serve as cover for not
doing the things that we should be doing.
And then there of course is the concern which kind of fits in with the Jevons paradox about
you know the more efficient you are at doing something the more you do it rather than the
less you do it.
So for instance Jevons notices this in the 19th century as an economist.
With regards to coal you know the more efficient steam engines became the more coal you use.
Yep.
Now that is a point we can put a pin in and that is very relevant for energy.
It is.
But also with regards to carbon sequestration obviously if that becomes incredibly efficient
then people will say well you know we can burn this shit forever.
It doesn't matter.
Yeah.
And you know and people living in people living here in the UK lovely we can just carry on
flying going out and fantastic we'll offset that and we can do it and we can bomb our
conscience and we don't have to worry about it.
So what's wrong with that?
Because I mean that will sound very appealing.
Oh nothing can change but we can bring down CO2 levels of CO2 in the atmosphere what's
wrong with that?
Well my understanding is that simply those technologies are very very limited in their
capacity to do what we hope they can do at scale and in an affordable way.
And so we are and when I say we I mean including here the IPCC forecast that I refer to we
are trusting that they are going to be able to do much more for us than we know that they
can do.
Essentially we are we're betting on something being able to happen and we have no proof
of the fact that it will be able to whereas we do have technologies that we know work
but we're just not doing enough of them and things like wind and so will be the classic
examples of that.
I suppose there's also the argument that you know nature is a good in itself and if you
look at things like biodiversity and the destruction of wild habitats to go you mentioned
Andres Malm you know his his perspective on COVID is amazing which is that actually this
is an outgrowth of our change relationship to the other species.
Yeah a great book that one.
Great book.
Yeah.
What's it?
War Communism and the Corona.
Yeah.
What was it?
Coronavirus, climate emergence or something like that.
It's a good book.
Which is to say that you know look all the pathogens that we presume as being here you know in perpetuity
you're actually not they're all quite recent humans are 300,000 years old we've had agriculture
for 12,000 years and it's in that phase that we've had all of these pathogens that we think
has never brought measles you know that's that's all stuff that's a result of species
crossover and.
Exactly.
Andres his point is that the more we destroy the natural world the more of these pathogens
are going to spill over into humans.
So there's a sort of holistic approach that I think underpins all that stuff anyway.
So let's just let's say that's right and let's say that like you say the technologies are
hail marrying it's a bad bet.
You would say let's electrify as much as possible now and let's get that from renewable energy.
So why is electrification so critical here?
Why do we want to electrify as much as we can?
Yeah.
So that's the way you put it I think I think I would phrase it differently.
I would say that the electrification is is is a if not the principal strategy that the
world currently has for climate mitigation to the extent that it's not relying on those
other things.
So to the extent that that we are attempting to mitigate existing emissions electrification
is at the heart of it and and it's really important to understand why electrification
and why electricity are so and why electricity are so important.
So if we step back a set because I think this is really useful for people to understand
and some of this is going to be really obvious to people but they'll some of it won't be
obvious at least not to everyone.
So if we think about just greenhouse gas emissions in general think about that.
The totality of greenhouse gas emissions about 75% of that is carbon dioxide.
If you then focus just on carbon dioxide about 75% of that again of that 75% is from the
combustion of fossil fuels so oil natural gas and coal.
And so as everyone knows the combustion of fossil fuels that's why that we talk about
that because it's the heart of the problem of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions
focus in on that 75% of 75% and the biggest part of it is the electricity sector.
So electricity generation is the biggest source of emissions from the burning of fossil fuels
principally natural gas and coal.
So that's why decarbonizing the power sector is so important.
That's why everyone talks about solar and wind and nuclear which we can talk about because
that's how you decarbonize the power sector is really important.
However it's because of what you refer to as electrification the electricity sector
is actually even more important than that and because the way the world is principally
approaching this is to say look we have those electricity sector emissions.
We also have emissions from things like transportation and industrial processes and things like that.
How are we going to decarbonize them?
And the way that we are typically thinking about doing that is to say so take vehicle
transportation as an example so cars and trucks which run on which historically run on internal
combustion engines by burning gasoline.
So in theory you could do two different things.
You could either switch to a different non-carboniferous fuel like a biofuel of something, ethanol
something like that or you switch to a motor which is basically a charged battery and charge
it through electricity and that's kind of what we're doing and it's the same thing with
industrial processes and buildings as much as possible.
The strategy is basically run as much as we can off electricity and then generate that
electricity through low carbon or zero carbon sources.
So that makes the electricity sector even more important to the climate problem than
it already is because it's going to get much bigger because we're electrifying everything
so electricity consumption is going to go to much higher levels than we currently have
which makes it doubly important that we decarbonize it.
So electricity really is the kind of the heart of the problem because if we don't decarbonize
it we're in even more trouble than we already are.
And I think the point here that I would make is that we're not doing anything, people will
look at charts for renewable energy growth worldwide and they'll think this looks awesome.
The charts are sharply upwards both in terms of the amount of new renewables capacity that's
being installed and the amount of electricity that we are generating from renewable sources.
However, the problem is that because overall electricity consumption is going up so sharply
that renewables growth is not proving enough.
So fossil fuel electricity generation is also still growing every year.
What I've been saying for a number of years now it's going to peak this year, it's going
to peak this year but it still hasn't peaked, it's still going up.
So our emissions from electricity generation are still going up despite the fact that we're
two or three decades into the so-called renewables revolution.
So that's kind of a snapshot of why electricity is so important I think.
I'm going to interrupt this interview with Brett Christopher's for just one moment.
I do hope you're enjoying it.
As you may know right now we are in the middle of a general election here in the UK.
That will happen on July 4th but of course there is a campaign before then.
My view is that Navarro Media is without peer when it comes to covering that election,
the policies, the personalities, the politics.
We have no equivalent in my view.
That is from our daily coverage on Navarro Live, that's weekdays, it's 6pm, it's our
articles, our podcasts, our social first content, our news and comment, it's all there and
my goodness for this general election we're really ramping things up.
Imagine if you will a Lamborghini Contash, the light is red, Ash Sarkar is at the wheel,
she's got her foot to the pedal, really getting it going and that's what we need to do.
We need our supporters to help us get our acceleration right up, come right out of the
blocks because as we've said since this project first started, you cannot have a different
kind of politics without a different kind of media, new media for a different politics.
Now that won't arrive on July 5th but we certainly think we're moving the dial left on a tonne
of issues and in elections that is especially true.
If you want to be a part of that, you know what to do.
Go to navarromedia.com forward slash support, the link is in the description below.
This is a momentous set of elections and I think it's a huge opportunity to shift the
political conversation in this country into a much better direction.
Be a part of it.
Go to navarromedia.com forward slash support.
You've got a statistic in the book which basically says, you know, global consumption of fossil
fuels for electricity is actually quite stagnant over the last 10 years, primarily because
of India, China and obviously demand going up and obviously, and it's something we don't
talk about enough, is Africa.
You know, Africa's population is set to double between 9 and 2050.
That's going to have extraordinary consequences to the rest of the world, particularly because
the rest of the world is getting older and looking at population decline.
It's going to change our fundamental notion of humanity and the global community in really
powerful ways but in terms of energy, obviously you're going to have more people in sub-Saharan
Africa and more people consuming more energy than they're presently do.
So we could be looking at maybe a doubling, or maybe just under, of energy globally between
now and say the mid 2050s, 2060.
Yeah.
I think the International Energy Agency, if I recall correctly, is somewhere between
two to three times where we are at at 2020 globally.
Yeah.
I mean, two times is the optimistic.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Let's try and be optimistic.
There's not much to be optimistic about.
And in that context, basically, I presume you would say, well, look the next two decades,
it's going to look like the last two decades, which is we'll decarbonise a ton of stuff
that will still be burning more fossil fuels.
Yeah.
I think that's, if I had to guess, that that would be where we're going.
And we can talk more about this because I think it's really, really important.
And the reason I'm, one of the main reasons I'm relatively pessimistic about this is that
it is simply stated, but it's quite complex to get one's head around.
And it's this, which is that the parts of the world, which is essentially the parts
of the world you've just been talking about, the parts of the world where the challenge
of decarbonising the electricity sector is economically greatest, are precisely the parts
of the world where it's most urgent, that decarbonisation proceeds rapidly.
Which is to say that it's those parts of the world where investment will have a disproportionately
important effect.
So, and what I mean by that, and it's important to spell this out, is that the reality is that
kind of what happens in Europe and North America is obviously important, but in terms of future
global greenhouse gas emissions trajectories, it's way more important what happens in China
and India and Africa and Vietnam than what happens here.
And that's for two reasons.
One of which you said is because that's where energy demand growth is concentrated.
So if you've got energy demand growing, then obviously if you're still fossil fuel intensive,
that's much more damaging than if your fossil fuel intensive in energy demand is not growing.
So that's one thing.
And then the other thing is that for very understandable reasons, it tends to be in those
parts of the world that the electricity sectors are still most fossil fuels intensive.
So here are some figures that just put a complexion on this that I think is important.
So I live in Sweden, it's almost fully decarbonised, it's power sector.
Something like 90% of electricity now is generated from non-carbon sources.
I think it's like roughly 30, 30, 30 nuclear wind hydro, about 10% is natural gas.
So Sweden's almost there on the power sector, at least.
UK, Germany, US, quite a way behind that.
Germany's pretty awful, lots of coal burning still.
US, lots of coal and natural gas.
UK, lots of natural gas.
Scotland very good though.
Yeah, we'll talk about Scotland because it's a big part of the story.
So they're a way behind, but they're still a long way ahead of other parts of the world.
China, 65% of electricity generation is coal.
India, 75%, South Africa, 90%, other countries 95% to 98%.
And so it's most urgent that investment in decarbonisation happens there.
A, because their fossil fuel intent, very fossil fuel intensive.
B, that's where energy demand growth is going to be concentrated.
But that's where the challenge is greatest economically for reasons that we can talk about.
And that's the real problem as I see it.
So let's take an, again, an optimistic slant on this.
Firstly, on China, I mean, China, again, we've got some great statistics.
I'm sure you can bring it off the top of your head.
For most of the last six, seven years, about 50% of sort of additional solar capacity
being added worldwide is in China.
It's a similar story with wind.
Yep.
It's blowing the United States out of the water.
100%.
Blowing the EU as well, but not quite as much.
I mean, it's making it, you know, the US is a clown show compared to China.
But obviously you have increasing demand, CO2 emissions per person still going up.
But the optimistic story is this, CO2 emissions per person in China may reach a peak.
Well, the plan was for 2030, but it's looking actually like the next couple of years,
potentially, according to Xi.
So that's one positive thing.
Absolutely.
Secondly, and this is probably where you're going to say that's completely wrong,
there's this optimistic account of Africa, which is like,
well, they didn't have landline connections, but they just, they skipped that bit
and they did the mobile telephony and they're going to do the same with energy.
They're going to skip, you know, national grids with fossil fuels.
They're going to go straight to distributed solar.
And on the one hand, that sounds absurd.
But on the other hand, actually within the tropics,
you do have an extraordinary amount of exposure to solar energy.
Absolutely.
It's a brilliant place to have it.
So what's wrong with that account?
An optimistic account of actually things are far better than the picture you're painting.
Yeah.
I mean, I think that both of those parts of the story have a strong degree of truth, actually.
I think that China is a, you know, China's hugely paradoxical and for all sorts of different reasons.
And right now, it's obviously the good news story on renewables,
but it's also the bad news story on kind of new coal-fired plants as well,
which is simply due to the fact, simply is probably the wrong word,
but it's due to the fact that energy demand is growing still so strongly there,
both from, you know, residential, commercial, industrial and so on.
And so renewables in and of themselves are not proving sufficient for that,
which is partly just a scale issue, but it's also partly about the different nature of the energy source.
But China's important to talk about.
And what I think is important is to understand the political economy of how it's doing things very differently to how we're doing it in the West.
There's some commonalities, but there's some big important differences as well.
I think on Africa, I think that is the big hope, actually.
And, you know, I see conflicting accounts about how credible that story is about
the extent to which it will be possible to build out a clean energy future there
that does kind of leapfrog the kind of historical problems that we've,
that are kind of almost a sunk cost here in the West,
where we have a very kind of centralized grid-based energy system,
which locks us into a certain kind of future that may not be necessary in Africa, as you say.
If it moves towards more distributed energy resources, then maybe it's possible to do that.
I mean, I think there are reasons to think both positively and negatively about that story.
I think right now it's too early to tell which direction it's going.
But possibly that's true, and I think that will be very, very important.
And let's not forget that, you know, just, I mean, I think there's a connection between those two stories, right, that we just talked about.
So if you look at what China did in 2023, when it was, you know, set all kinds of records for new renewable installation,
something like 30% of that renewable installation in China was rooftop solar.
So it wasn't commercial, large-scale, industrial power plants, wind and solar farms.
It was rooftop domestic solar, 30%.
Huge. All sorts of state subsidy necessary for that, but that's fine.
So part of the China story is precisely that distributed energy story,
which one would hope would be replicated in Africa as well.
And Vietnam as well, right?
Again, it's one of these stories in Europe and the West we don't really hear.
Like, there is a heroic effort going into solar right now in Vietnam.
There is.
And it's not on our radar, and we think in Europe we're doing everything.
You know, we've got, you go in Germany or Italy, you might see some solar cells.
Great.
But in Vietnam, they're doing what those countries did in 20 years.
They're doing it in three or four years.
Yeah, absolutely.
And obviously, I mean, to take, I mean, China is the best example of this.
But the reason that China can and is doing things at a much more rapid clip
and on a much, much greater scale than is happening in the West
is simply because it's essentially a state project, right?
I mean, to take wind, something like 95% of the wind deployment sector,
by which I mean the entities that are involved, not on the manufacturing side,
building the turbines and building the cells and modules,
although it's not hugely dissimilar there, but on the deployment side,
by which I mean developing the wind and solar farms,
owning and operating them and selling the electricity that they generate,
something like 95% of that is state-owned enterprises.
They are being financed by state-owned banks
who are themselves having their debts subsidized by the state-owned central bank.
And all of these entities are, at least if my understanding of this is correct,
and it's a second-hand understanding based on kind of the work of China experts,
you know, heck of a lot more about it than I do,
all of these entities are only, what's the best word to you,
modestly being driven by profit motives of one kind or another.
They are, to one degree or another, working at the behest of provincial
and or central government in China.
They are being directed very substantially in terms of what they're doing now.
And if you have the willpower and if you have the resources
and you have the determination and the political intent
to do that sort of thing on a huge scale and quickly,
well, you can do that.
But in the West, where we are essentially relying on the private sector to do this
and we are relying on the kind of quote-unquote
coordinating mechanisms of markets to do this,
it's an entirely different project.
You're expecting, you know, the independent decisions of thousands of different entities
to kind of add up to this very complicated thing that we call a transition.
And not surprisingly, it's not really happening in the same way
that it is where you have a top-down approach to this
that can be very, very coordinated and very, very joined up
because you have one entity that is overseeing all of it.
I mean, we had this debate recently on the Var Alive, Michael and I,
and he was saying China is a capitalist society.
And I said, it's not a capitalist society.
It's a market society.
But there's a huge difference in that in a capitalist society.
I mean, I totally agree.
And even then, is it a market society?
I mean, even this is the debate.
I mean, if you look at what's going on in the energy sector,
I would be quite reticent to call the mechanisms
whereby and the context within which electricity is bought and sold,
markets in anything like the shape of which we're used to.
The firms that are building, you know, the firms that are making the PV cells,
which would take over the world if we weren't imposing tariffs on them.
That is all being done by private actors in competition.
And I think this is something that Michael and I really discredent.
And I said, it's a market society.
But the point is, it's not capitalist because Eric E. Lee,
who's a political scientist, Chinese political scientist,
he said, we're not a capitalist society because, yes, we have markets,
but capital does not determine how our society allocates resources.
The interests of capital are not so enormous
with the interests of the ruling class.
Our ruling class has national political priorities, which sometimes...
100%.
Which is odds with capital.
And I think for people in the West, that's a really hard thing to engage with.
It is.
You have markets, but you don't allow capital to determine political priorities.
So I was on a panel recently and there was a sociologist,
a Chinese sociologist who works in the US called Karl Chan,
who's been doing a lot of really interesting research
about Chinese state-owned enterprises.
And I think the concept he uses to try to capture what it is they do,
I think he calls it managed competition.
What's the chap's name?
Kyle Chan, C-H-A-N.
And it's a really evocative and useful way of thinking about this,
that it's just not competition in the way we think about it.
It's a managed process towards a particular end
to which competition is being mobilized in some way,
but only in a very limited capacity to make sure that these things are happening.
It was quite interesting hearing basically Chinese automotive manufacturers,
they were being asked, are you gunning for the US?
Are you gunning for Tesla?
And they're like, we have enough problems with our own people back home,
like BYD are terrified of the next four or five companies beneath them.
And of course, if you look at that from a sort of classical,
a neoclassical sort of political economy perspective,
you'd be like, well, those are exactly the sorts of incentives
which are meant to be driving firms and industrialists.
And it's so strange that China and its firms are talking in that language.
And yet, the US is talking in a very protectionist language,
he's talking about national champions.
China is not talking about national champions.
No, no, no, no, no.
No, because they've already, they're already the champions.
They're the international champions.
Yeah, this is another one, this is a bit of an aside,
but again, you're going to be a lot more familiar with the reality of this
because you do all these academic panels and whatnot.
But we have a friend here at Navarro who sometimes works with us
on sort of helping us out, kind of like a consultant guy.
And they were recently in, I think, Vietnam.
And they kept on seeing all these brands they just never heard of.
And then they were like, what's that? Google that, Google that, Google that.
And then they said, look, after a while, I realized that like the world's number one,
two, three producer for dozens of, you know, commodities, which I've granted,
they're all East Asian, right?
You know, they're Chinese or if they're not Chinese,
they'll be Japanese or Taiwanese or and I was like, yeah.
We do live in a little closeted world in some respects.
But I think Europeans don't realize.
No, of course they don't. No, absolutely not.
Very stretch.
So you're optimistic, but also in a way pessimistic about China.
I suppose one good way of looking at China is
we would be really screwed if they weren't doing all the things.
They would be. I mean, the way, I mean, not least in terms of, I mean,
there's for one thing, there's the fact that they are making progress
domestically on renewables, right?
Fantastic.
But there's also the fact that let's not forget that it's unimaginable
that in places like Europe, that to the extent that it's happened so far,
that the energy transition, the decarbonization of power sector
would have gone as far, as fast and at such a low, relatively low cost as it has.
Were it not from the fact that it's China that drove down the cost of the technologies, right?
I mean, there's no, there's no way it would have gone as far as fast or at such low cost
without China doing what it's done.
We've, we collectively have been benefiting environmentally and economically
from what China's been doing for the last 15 to 20 years.
That is such a good point.
So people are saying, and we'll talk about obviously that the fallen price for renewables,
how it's competitive with fossil fuels, and a big part of that,
that disinflationary pressure is the fact that stuff is being manufactured in China.
Almost all about China.
And that's very rarely in the conversation.
No, no, no, no.
Because we talk about energy security, but we can have, we can have our cake and eat it.
It can be cheap and it can be energy secure.
Hold on a second.
It's cheap because it's not made here.
It's actually made outside of the planet.
Yeah, absolutely.
And obviously what's going on in the U.S. right now, and again,
there's a bit of a tangent, but it's important, is that the Biden administration
is trying to thread the needle between not wanting to entirely give up those economic gains
that have been delivered and continued to be delivered by China.
While at the same time benefiting domestic industry.
So they're trying to play this delicate game where they're like saying to the renewable energy developers,
look, if you, if you source your technology locally, rather than from China,
from local manufacturers, you get an extra 10% credit on your, on your renewables development.
And, but I, you know, based on the conversations I've had with people in the U.S.,
it's still entirely unclear whether that incremental benefit is proving sufficient
to persuade them to source locally or whether it still makes economic sense for them to source from China.
Yeah, they don't know yet.
Well, because you have these recent tariffs announced by Biden, right?
Yeah, that was, that was a lot.
They've changed it.
They've introduced some new tariffs last week.
So 100% on automotive, you know, so electric vehicles will have 100% tariffs.
So if I'm buying a BYD car and it's $30,000 in China, I'm going to have to pay $30,000 tariff on it.
Yep, exactly.
And I still think that car might be competitive.
Yeah, it could well be.
Which is the terrifying thing for the U.S. car industry.
Yeah, no, absolutely.
Yeah, so they're, they're playing a very challenging game over there, which, which, which, I mean, I understand that game politically.
I mean, it makes, it makes it's easy to understand where they're coming from.
Politically, yes.
But then you can't say climate change...
Oh, not necessarily economically, environmentally, no.
You can't say climate change is existential, but then put 50% tariffs on PV cells.
No.
Well, you don't believe that then, do you?
But then, but then the whole, I mean, let's be honest about this, but the whole, the whole climate policy,
thing in the U.S. perspective is entirely contradictory, by which I mean, you know, I think the Inflation Reduction Act is actually pretty good policy for the, for the most part.
And I think that given the, given the political conditions under which Biden has been operating, it was probably about as good as, as he could have got through at the time.
And yet, you know, one day Biden will be extolling the benefits of the Inflation Reduction Act.
And yet the very next day, he'll be like calling out OPEC for introducing new production quotas to dampen oil and gas production, because Biden is concerned that that, that constraint in global oil and gas supply will have, you know, will put the price of gasoline up 3 cents.
And it means that he won't, he won't get voted into power.
So he's telling OPEC to open the pumps.
So it's just like, it's the most contradictory thing imaginable.
And, and, and that's the thing I think we have to grapple with, is that the whole kind of U.S. political, economic, ecological complex is fundamentally driven with contradiction.
And you compare that to Europe, which for the most part has proportional representation.
At least you can build in a consensus around a certain policy direction.
That's true.
Whereas in the U.S., you have like, I mean, it's crazy, you have Biden saying, I'm a green champion.
And then, and then, but then, and it's, and you understand why they'll be saying, look, if inflation is 5% in November, we're out, we're gone.
100%.
Right.
And they know that.
And so you have these wildly diverging policies, messages.
And we, we in the West, but especially in America, live very carbon intensive lifestyles.
And so inflation is, is a carboniferous phenomenon in the U.S.
more than anywhere else.
And it's really important to remember that.
So the inflation discussion is a significant part of carbon discussion in the U.S.
And it's very, very important to remember that politically as well as economically.
Going back to Europe, you mentioned the Inflation Reduction Act, the IRA Act, IRA Act.
I can't say that without, yeah, having memories of growing up in Croydon in the 1970s.
And, you know, Biden's, Biden's famous Irish heritage, I do find it, I'm sure he probably finds it quite, you know, you know, interesting.
Yes.
You got the IRA Act, you got the CHIPS Act, that's not really related.
And at the same time as the IRA Act, which is this, you know, huge amount of money basically going into reshore lots of manufacturing in the UK, but also it's ostensibly about a decarbonisation agenda.
At the same time, you have, obviously, Russia, Ukraine.
And what you're seeing right now is that sort of amazing statistic in the FT recently.
I think it's like 45% of German manufacturing companies are looking at setting up shop in the U.S.
Because energy in Germany compared to the U.S. is six times more expensive, six times more.
Wow, I hadn't seen that statistic.
Yeah, industrial energy, I think it was five to six times more.
Wow.
But then on top of that, you have the IRA, you know, subsidies or whatever, tax, you know, breaks and what not.
All of a sudden, you know, these industrial firms that have been in Germany for like 800 years thinking, am I going to Texas?
Germany really isn't heading in a good direction in any sense, in any shape or form right now, is it?
So, yeah, okay, so explain that.
So what, and where does U.S. policies fit on this?
So is that, is that, is that an intentional effort by the United States government to basically say, you know what, we're going to reindustrialise on the back of deindustrialisation in Germany?
Or is it not that deep?
Am I being too conspiratorial?
I'm not sure it's that deep, but certainly on the manufacturing side, U.S. policymakers have been, have been making an active effort to woo European companies, for sure.
And not just on the manufacturing side, but also on the renewable energy development side.
They've, you know, they've been trying to get the Iberdrohlers and the Orstedts and so on, much more interested in the U.S. as a place for investment in new, in new wind and solar power, as well as the manufacturing side of the business.
But I'm not sure it's, I'm not sure it's that deep.
But, you know, the EU, sorry, has been through, you know, a very difficult few years on the energy front in a way that the U.S. largely avoided.
And I think there are, there are still lingering effects from that.
And it's important to think about what's going on in Germany in relation to what happened in 2021 to 2022, which, which didn't really happen in the U.S.
The energy crisis was a, was a phenomenon that was, it wasn't limited to the EU, but to the extent that it was significant outside the EU, it was, it was significant more to the East, not least in China than it was in the U.S.
So the, the EU occupies this kind of strange sort of third provisional position in the kind of game between China and the U.S.
The EU is in this uncertain position where it seems to be neither one thing or the other.
It doesn't seem to be in a position to be calling any shots, but it's also not reacting as far as I can tell in the kind of deeply protectionist way that the U.S. has reacted.
Yeah. So it's interesting.
There was a great quote a year or two ago, basically saying that the energy crisis of, you know, 2022-2023, was it 2022-2022?
21-22.
21-22.
Yeah.
It's, you know, post-Covid, but also, you know, in relation to Germany in particular, post-Ukraine war.
And they said, look, the last several years have basically brought into focus that there are two kinds of countries.
Those with energy and those without.
Yeah.
You know, go massive on nuclear renewables, coal.
The U.S. is where we have tons of energy anyway.
And Europe doesn't have any energy, but it's not adopted a sort of a strategy like you say.
No. I mean, Germany was the most extreme example of sort of essentially relying on Russia for energy.
And that was true to a lesser extent, but also not to an insignificant extent in other parts of Europe as well.
I mean, it just, I mean, it's, in that context, it is worth going back to China and the question of trying to understand its investment,
that kind of hybrid state capitalist investment that it's been undertaking in its renewables industry,
both the manufacturing side and the deployment side in the last couple of decades,
and to think, well, what kind of strategy is that?
And it's kind of a three-fold strategy by which I mean it's been partly a strategy that is about environmentalism.
It's been partly a strategy which is an industrial strategy, trying to build global champions,
global leadership in a particular sector, but it's also been a strategy about energy security.
And by my understanding, it's the reverse order, actually, that the energy security was the kind of the main strategy
and arguably still is the main strategy, then industrial strategy, and that the environmental part of it, I mean, it's become more important.
20 years ago, it wasn't a significant part of the strategy.
But even today, my suspicion is it's still not the first of those three and maybe not even the second of those three.
And it's been about energy security.
And so what happened in Europe, I mean, it's a different slant on the same question,
but what happened in 2022 was there was a bit of a fillip in renewables investment in Europe.
And a lot of people were saying, oh, this is further evidence of the fact that renewables are forging ahead
because they're very, very cheap and they're economically competitive.
And no, that wasn't really what happened.
It was about energy security, right?
If you have renewable and solar power, you're not reliant on importing fuel from overseas.
You're not reliant on a rush or whoever else it might be.
So I think it was an energy security issue that was driving that investment.
What you just said is the crux of the book.
And we'll get to that in a moment about the price.
Yeah, we haven't really got to the book yet.
No, it's critical because it's not about prices.
We're getting to a point of price parity with regards to fossil fuels and renewables, but that's not the point.
But particularly on Europe.
Yes.
I mean, that was the, you know, what we saw in 2022, 2023 was 101 think pieces about finally Europe is on the stage.
Not only was it meant to remilitarize.
Okay, what's happening there?
It was meant to be rebuilding its domestic industry.
It's doing the opposite, actually.
It was also meant to be getting serious about renewals and nuclear energy.
Yes.
Not just upticks.
And there has been much progress made and there is progress is being made.
But it's not decarbonizing as quickly as we were told.
No.
Why is that?
Russia?
Russia's gone.
Yeah.
For the near future.
And Germany's industrial prowess is literally, well, not entirely based on, but it was significantly based on cheap Russian energy.
That's now gone, but there doesn't seem to be the political leadership in places like Germany to say, you know what, we now need to build a ton of wind, solar, nuclear.
And you've got a green-red coalition there.
You think, well, this should be the perfect set of circumstances for Germany to become a world leader in renewable energy.
Yeah.
So it's not happening.
No, it's not.
Why?
So the narrative that you will typically hear about this, across the board actually politically and almost analytically as well, but certainly from both left and right, is that the problem is found in the realm of, for want of a better kind of label, politics and planning and bureaucracy.
You'll have seen a thousand think pieces saying, look, the problem is that there's all this money waiting to go into renewables, but it's being held up by, you know, obstructionist local planning authorities.
It's being held up by slow processes to get planning permission.
It's being held up by long queues to get grid connections.
It's being held up by nimbyism.
And you know what?
It is held up by all of those things.
Absolutely.
However, the other crucial part of that key of that main dominant narrative about this says what it's not being held up by is the economics.
The economics has been solved because the price of generating electricity from solar and wind has come down sharply historically.
And it has, over time, to a point of where, as you said, it's as cheap or often in many places even cheaper to generate solar and wind power than it is by burning natural gas or coal.
So that's the key narrative is that it's all these other things.
It's not the economics.
My argument in the book is that, yes, it's all those other things, but it's also the economics.
And the argument there is that the thinking specifically on the question of generating price, which is what all those think pieces do, and they reproduce the same charts showing the same cost curves coming down over time, is the wrong prism through which to think about it.
And that we can understand much more about the industry and about why things are going too slowly if we focus on the question of profitability rather than price.
So that's the argument I made.
And so it's a complex, as you said, right at the outset.
There's a lot of detail in it.
It's quite wonky.
It's quite complex.
But the actual main argument is really straightforward, which is this.
It's like, in profitability terms, renewables deployment is actually quite a problematic proposition.
And I'll explain what I mean by that in a second.
And that's a problem because we're relying on the private sector and the private sector is driven above all else by profitability expectations.
If its expectations are on profitability are not adequate, it will not invest or it will not invest on the sufficient sale.
So my argument is like, you need to understand that, A, we are relying mainly on solar and wind.
So yes, there are countries in which there's much more of a role being given to nuclear and even in some countries, geothermal and hydro and so on.
But for the most part, the world is kind of betting the house on solar and wind to a significant extent.
And second, the world is banking on the private sector, not China, but elsewhere in the world, government policy is not to do it itself.
It's to say, we expect you, the private sector, to do it.
We will nudge you in the right direction through various incentives and subsidy mechanisms on where you're not doing it quickly enough.
We'll provide you that help, but we're not going to do it.
You're going to do it. We're expecting you to do it.
That's fine if the private sector consistently sees sufficient profitability in that proposition to do it quickly and at scale.
But it doesn't.
And you talk to people in the industry and they're like, no, of course not.
But policymakers are completely deaf to this.
And I think for all sorts of reasons, but partly because they've been persuaded by those simplistic arguments about falling prices.
And to them, it's like, well, surely if the prices have fallen, the profits must be there.
The profits must be going up.
But it's just not true.
It's a problematic industry in terms of profitability expectations.
And that's the kind of core of the book as to why that is.
And it is a bit of a wonky book.
We like wonky books.
Oh, yeah.
Well, yeah, I hope so.
We love wonky books.
I mean, don't let that put you off.
I think particularly, look, for anybody who wants to know the subject well.
And the point is, like you say, the core proposition at the heart of the book is a very important one.
And, you know, it's like...
I think it's really important.
Yeah.
It's like the arrow that goes through, you know, Harold Goodwin's Anziah Hastings.
You know, it's...
That's it.
It's game over for that worldview of...
Well, actually, private firms, the private sector with the profit motive can solve the climate crisis.
Exactly.
They can't.
It's not about costs.
It's about...
It's not about prices or other.
It's about profit.
Yeah.
And obviously, profitability is shaped by generating prices.
That's part of the equation, but it's not the totality.
That's the issue.
Yeah.
And I actually feel like there are some similarities here with the debates I've had recently with
people in regards to, you know, privatised utilities of things like mail, rail, water.
And they're arguing for, you know, the private sector should control these.
And I go, look, best-case scenario, best-case scenario, they're very low margin.
You want it to be very competitive.
They're very physically hard to administer.
They're not very exciting.
No.
Like, why do you want the private sector here?
And they're also very important.
Go...
100%.
Go make, like, shirts.
I mean, it's true, right?
No.
Or glasses or mobile phones or...
Come up with a coffee machine.
Exactly.
Or like a scalable social network where you can 10X your...
Knock yourself out.
Do you see something different and better?
Yeah.
Yes.
Water can't do that.
No.
And I feel like renewables are in a similar situation.
100%.
It's just a low margin thing.
It's just electrons.
Yeah.
Just leave it alone.
I know.
I know.
Yeah.
It's bizarre.
And the thing is, right...
I think the other thing to...
You know, one of the ways I think it's useful to think about this is that governments,
for very understandable reasons, going back to what we were talking about inflation, they
want electricity to be affordable.
They want to be cheap.
Rightly so.
Well, in general, doing stuff at rock bottom prices to consumers isn't normally a recipe
for massive profitability.
I mean, I know that's a generalization, but it's worth keeping in mind.
And so what's happened is that governments have designed electricity markets and they
have designed the support mechanisms that they provide to renewables operators precisely
in such a way as to maximize the likelihood that the economic gains associated with kind
of falling production costs thanks to China are not captured by nasty capitalist firms,
but they're passed on to consumers.
So what does that mean in terms of capitalist incentives to invest in those things?
Well, if they're not able to capture it, then of course they're not going to do it at the
scale we want because they're being passed on to consumers, which is what we want.
But I mean, there's politicians that don't stay honestly, and it's something I just,
my mind is blown every time I think about it, but it's particularly a problem on the
center left.
But a problem in the center is they genuinely seem to think that private enterprises do
things out of the goodness of their heart.
Yeah.
I mean, it's...
It's just wild.
They want to make lots of money and they want to make as much money as possible.
And here's the other thing, right?
As quickly as possible.
And the other point I would make before we get, before if we want to get into the meat
of it is this, which is that profitability, economic returns are always a relative phenomenon
rather than an absolute phenomenon.
And what I mean by that is that for any capitalist actor, there is always a kind of palette of
different investment opportunities available to them.
And so it's much more, so I give some figures in the book around kind of the average profitability
of renewables deployment, which of course varies across time and space, but most studies
point to somewhere in a region of kind of five to 8% returns.
Now, in isolation, that number doesn't really mean anything.
It only really means anything if you think about the alternative returns that are available
to the relevant actors from doing different things.
Now, and I want to just give two sort of comparators that I think are really valuable
to think about.
The first of those is this, which is to say that five to 8% look pretty good when interest
rates were zero.
But when interest rates are like 5%, and you can get five, six, even 7% returns from sticking
your money in the bank or investing it in US risk-free US government bonds, why on earth
would you go to the hassle of building a wind farm with the major risk that investment entails
when there are risk-free opportunities available to make essentially the same returns?
That's the first comparator.
Really important to think about.
And that's one of the reasons why the industry is really struggling right now is because
of the macroeconomic environment has changed fundamentally in the last couple of years
with the uptick in inflation and interest rates.
So that's the first comparison.
Second comparison is to focus on, you know, perhaps the key constituency that governments
in their wisdom, let me use that word advisedly, have been kind of assuming would take the
lead on the renewable transition, which is the big oil and gas companies.
So they've been hoping that the BP's and the Shells and the Exxons would kind of magically
transition away from oil and gas to offshore wind.
They know how things work offshore, they'll switch their rigs for offshore wind farms.
Well, over the last 10 years or so, those companies have not got out of bed for oil
and gas projects that deliver anything less than 15% returns.
That's what they expect and that's what they get.
And the idea that companies that are used to 15% plus returns in their core business
are somehow going to make the decision to switch to businesses with returns like a third
of that level is absurd.
It's economically madness to think that that's going to happen.
And here's the kicker, as long as they think that those above average returns are going
to continue to be available, right?
If they thought that those 15% returns are going to disappear because of, for example,
meaningful government action on things like carbon taxes, then of course they would think
about alternative investment options.
But everything that's happened in the last five years or so has shown those companies
that governments are not serious about clamping down on their traditional business.
In fact, the opposite.
Governments like the UK's but also elsewhere in the world are granting new oil and gas
exploration licenses willy-nilly.
So of course the BP's and the Shells having been talking quite a good game a few years
ago about transitioning are now like, why did we bother with that?
Governments aren't serious about this at all.
They have no intention of stranding our oil and gas assets any time in the next 20 or
30 years.
So we're just going to carry on as we can because we know those returns are going to
continue to be available.
And it's not just why would they adopt a lower rate of return.
It's why would they spend a hell of a lot of money?
Why would they invest in a whole different cadre of employee?
Why would they dump a whole bunch of human capital value with regards to like engineering
know-how and whatnot, get rid of all that?
So we can earn less money.
Nobody's going to do that.
No, of course not.
Again, it goes back to some core ideological presumptions of our political class and our
media class, which is that businesses always write, markets always work, and they literally
cannot get their heads around businesses do things for profit.
It's not profitable.
It's not going to work.
And something that's, it's not there in the book.
It's kind of implicit or maybe it is, maybe I didn't see it.
It's something I thought about a lot.
It's in my book when I talk about for the automated luxury of communism, when I talk
about energy is that you have with wind, with solar, with storage, permanent price decline.
So you have deflation.
And again, if you want to make a profit, that's a real problem.
Permanently falling prices is a really bad thing.
If you want to make money, it's great for the consumer.
But again, there's this tension isn't really obvious to people who are making the policies.
No, no.
And you listen to, you listen to the, you know, the labor government in waiting talking
about this.
And they're, and it's a really strange thing.
They're kind of like, well, we'll, we'll develop a new renewable energy generator, great British
energy.
And, and, and the whole idea behind it as, as they seem to be articulating it is like,
because the renewables business is swimming in profits.
And so we'll have this public entity that will capture those profits while delivering
really cheap energy.
And it's like, what are you talking about?
So it's not swimming in profits?
No, no, it's absolutely not.
And that's why the investment isn't happening.
And actually one thing, one thing that you, that you mentioned just now is, is, is one
of the important explanations for why that is.
And so let's, let's talk about that.
So you were, you were saying, look, the prices have been consistently coming down and, and
they have the, that, that chart, that chart I talked about in terms of the cost of generating
electricity from wind and solar shows consistent price declines.
And so you would think, so let's imagine you are a wind energy generator and you've been
in business for like 20 years.
And as your, as your costs go down, you're generating costs go down over time.
Simple economics would say, well, my costs are going down the cost of genera, of actually
generating the power.
So my profits are going to be going up accordingly, fine, you know, lovely jubbly.
But that assumes that you have the capacity to capture and privatize those growing economic
efficiencies.
The reality of the, of the electricity sector is that you now in many, in many, if not most
parts of the world, but certainly in the UK, the electricity generation sector, which is
largely a self-standing sector, it's been cleaved off from transmission and distribution
and retail.
And in particular, the renewable energy generation sector is incredibly competitive.
There are thousands of entities in that market.
They compete purely on price, selling into really, really competitive wholesale markets.
So what happens when price, when, when costs decline, well, they compete those cost gains
away and those cost gains get passed downstream to transmission and distribution entities
and retailers and in large part all the way to consumers, precisely in the way governments
hope they do.
But if generators can't capture and privatize the upsides of those growing cost efficiencies,
why would they invest in their technologies in the first place?
Because they know that because of that competition, I mean, Mark's called it the coercive law
of competition, right?
They're coerced to engage in this activity, but competition forces them to pass those
things downstream.
And we have, you know, in the UK, many people will have heard of the subsidy scheme that
exists for, for wind, for offshore wind, in particular in the UK, which is the contracts
for different scheme.
And as I said earlier, you have this kind of, you have this intensification of competition
which is built into that system.
So it's worth just talking a little bit about how that happens.
So if the government says, okay, we're going to award these new offshore wind licenses
off for new renewables development, what happens is that different generating companies will,
there's an auction process where effectively what happened is they bid against each other
for this contract where the government will say, the government or a government backed
entity says, we will, we, we enter this contract to buy the electricity that you generate at
a fixed price, essentially a fixed price for the next 12 years or so.
And so one company will bid for, will bid and say, well, we'll bid, we'll, we'll enter
that contract with you at 50 pounds per megawatt hour for the next 12 years.
Another company will say 49, the next one will say 48.
And essentially what happens is they bid it down until it gets to the point where no one
can bid any lower because they won't make any money out of it.
So that's what I mean is that this price based competition is baked into the, is baked into
the process for good reasons on the consumer side, because that's what you want as a government
is keeping electricity prices down, but the profit, the potential profitability for generators
just gets, gets competed away.
I mean, what you're talking about there with regards to the auctions as well, I mean, it
applies to outsourcing companies too.
I mean, the reason why Carillion blasts from the past, you know, they collapse because
they kept on basically taking contracts, they couldn't make money because they were taking
all these jobs.
Everybody else was like,
I wouldn't touch them with a barge, but you're going to, you're going to bust if you carry
on like that.
And guess what happens?
They go bust and the, the people that are on the hook with a taxpayer and you don't have
to go bust for that to be a problem, whether it's Sodexo, Circa, Capita, whatever, G4S,
they get in these outsourced contracts with local councils and the price is so low.
They can only make money if they do an absolutely, guess what, shit job.
Exactly.
And if they destroy people's labor conditions, that's the only way they're going to make
money.
But you have the political class going, this is how we get value for money for the taxpayer.
No, it means they do a crap job.
People are laid off.
The firm might even go bankrupt and you socialise the risk anyway.
Yeah.
And in the renewable sector, again, you have to do something kind of clever to make profits
and so it becomes a question of like financial engineering, you know, what can you do with
on the debt side in terms of securitising it and that sort of thing.
And they kind of get forced into that because you can't make money just out of the, you
can't make good money out of the contract because the competition is so intense.
It was so interesting.
It was massively interesting.
Just how neoliberalism with regards to these low margin industries is just so stupid, so
destructive, so deeply destructive.
Yeah.
I mean, the other way I like to put it, that I like to put it is that, and it's like in
a one sentence is like, there's no OPEC in the electricity sector.
So I mean, OPEC in oil and gas exists in significant part to have price control, to keep prices
and profitability up, so if there's the danger of a kind of supply glut, they tell the members
of OPEC, you know, close the taps for a bit to keep prices and therefore profits up.
Well, there's nothing like that in the electricity sector.
Which is, again, kind of good from a consumer perspective, but in terms of incentivising
investment is a different question entirely.
The thing about, we were talking with regards to the falling costs of solar, I think it's
called Swanson's Law, isn't it?
Something like that.
Something like that, yeah.
And this is an all outgrowth of what's called the experience curve.
If you double the production of something, then the price of manufacturing falls by like
15.
Yeah, and solar has come down a huge amount, massive amount.
And so that trend is going to carry on, I mean, that's kind of inarguable, it might
slow down, but it's going to get cheaper.
I think it has slowed down a lot, but it should continue.
Yeah.
And just for people watching, it's not the same as Moore's Law, which is, you know,
exponential.
We're not talking about exponential price falls, we're talking about, you know, dramatic
falls, but not as dramatic as something like Moore's Law, you know, the halving or the
halving of costs every 18 months or the doubling of processing speed per dollar every 18 months.
No.
So, we've talked about Europe, we've talked about the US, we've talked about the failure
of markets to deliver with this stuff.
So what is the proposal then?
Because you've argued that competition makes sense from the perspective of the consumer,
but then you've also said that competition and falling prices are at odds with profitability.
And if we're having a private market system for this, then you need to have profits.
So, how do we administer electricity or energy, which is cheap?
Yeah, it's a great question.
But from renewable sources too.
Yeah, it's a great question.
And I think that, you know, I'll be completely honest about this and say that I don't have
the answer.
I think I have a perspective on the range of answers that exists, if that makes sense.
And so, I think what's useful potentially for viewers is to understand the kind of range
of main answers that are out there and then to judge for themselves based on some commentary
that I make on each of those answers.
And so, there are essentially three main answers out there.
But I'll caveat this or preface it by saying all of what I'm going to talk about here are
answers that are kind of on the supply side, by which I mean, they're all answers that
are oriented towards boosting investment in solar and wind capacity.
On the assumption that you continue to need to do that because there are those existing
profitability constraints.
And of course, there are other answers out there, you know, people who are of a kind
of degrowth persuasion would say, actually, we need to be thinking about the demand side
as well and curbing energy consumption.
And I think that there's a lot of truth in that argument as well.
But I'm not going to go there today, but clearly any answer that is going to be even close
to sufficient is going to have to address the supply side and the demand side.
Also, you know, the other argument will be, hang on a second, we historically globally,
not just in the West, but globally, in order to try to make renewables more competitive,
the way we have typically done that is by working on the renewable side, offering subsidy
mechanisms, support mechanisms on, rather than taxing the dirty side.
You know, that's essentially what we've done.
We've thought, OK, we'll do that.
And so economists, mainstream economists will say, well, actually, the answer is that,
you know, the externalities associated with fossil fuels are not being properly priced.
And so the answer is to price those externalities properly.
And again, I think that I understand that argument, but obviously that's a politically
very difficult argument because we live such carbon intensive lifestyle.
So if you start taxing that, it really hurts consumers in terms of inflation.
And I think that's the main reason why we haven't gone there is that politicians are
very, very, very concerned about that.
They don't want consumers to be hurt through higher inflation because of the carnivorous
nature of the consumer baskets that we all have in our lifestyles.
So with that said, the three main solutions that are out there in terms of boosting the
support, you know, boosting the speed of the energy transition on the renewable side are
and not surprisingly, they're associated with three different kind of interest groups
for want of a better term.
And they're all interesting and they all have their merits as well as their drawbacks,
I think.
So the first answer is the one that you hear from sort of mainstream energy economists.
So economists who are trained in orthodox economics and they're focused on energy markets.
Great people to talk to you because they at least, unlike a lot of my colleagues on the
left know the energy markets, they really know what they're talking about there, although
they look at them through certain in certain blinked ways, I would argue.
So what they argue is, look, the problem is not that we're relying on the private sector
and the profit motive and markets to do this, of course, they wouldn't, they don't say that.
That's fine.
What they argue is that the problem is that the market design is not right.
So what they would say is that, is that, and I have some sympathy with this argument because
they're right when they say that electricity markets as they exist worldwide today are market
mechanisms that were designed essentially in a fossil fuel world and they haven't really
been changed in the last 20, 30, and that's true.
They haven't.
They're pretty much the way they've always been.
And they argue and it's understandable, they say, look, we just need to redesign those
market mechanisms, rethink the way we price electricity and wholesale and retail markets,
and then everything will fall magically into place.
But of course, economists always say that, that's the answer to every problem, which
is that the problem with markets is not that we have markets, the problem is that we haven't
got them right yet.
We haven't perfected them.
We haven't optimised them.
And also there are lots of recommendations out there circulating in different forums
for how you might do that.
But all of them have distinctive drawbacks as well as potential advantages associated
with them.
That's that answer.
And as I said, I have some sympathy with that argument, but I'm definitely not convinced
by it.
The second answer is, again, is very, very interesting.
And that's the answer you typically hear from the energy industry itself.
And so what they say, obviously they agree with economists that the problem is not that
we're relying on the private sector markets, but where they disagree largely with economists
is they don't think the problem is in market design.
They say, no, that's fine as well.
Just keep existing markets as they are.
The problem is that the subsidies to renewables aren't big enough.
So they basically say, look, keep everything as it is, but just like double the support
mechanisms may provide more of it and make them more attractive.
And that's what the Inflation Reduction Act was in the renewable sector.
Industry had been saying to the US government, you have been attenuating the subsidies you
provide us with lowering the level of tax credit.
And it's stagnating.
That's what you get if you do that.
Lift it back up.
And so that's what the government did.
We get to see whether that will have the desired impact.
But that was, in my view, was all about re-inflating profitability in the renewables industry to
re-attract investment into that sector, very, very straightforward actually.
And I have some sympathy with that as well, because if the totality of our options is the
private sector, what else are you going to do?
That would work, is what you're saying, in your opinion.
I think it probably would.
If you essentially guarantee profits, and if those profits are attractive in relative
terms according to the different alternatives that are out there, then, yeah, money will
flow in.
Absolutely.
I mean, it would be really costly for the consumer and or the taxpayer in some combination.
But I think it would work if the government did that enough.
But obviously, there's huge reluctance to do that for all sorts of reasons.
Not just the cost to the consumer, you don't want to see it be seen to be lining the pockets
of nasty big capital.
That's the second option.
The third option is the one that those on the left will typically say, which is to say,
the problem is that we're relying on the private sector and markets to do this.
It doesn't work.
We've been doing it for 30 years, still isn't working, still going much too slowly.
Let's try something different by which they normally mean, or we, if I count myself in
this group, normally mean mass public sector ownership and investment in renewable energy.
The argument being that the private sector and markets isn't working, isn't being shown
not to be working, even though that all these subsidies continue to be available worldwide.
That's a really, in many ways, at least on the face of things, a very attractive option.
If you think about it like this, so go back to what I was saying earlier about five to
eight percent returns, well, if five percent, eight percent returns are not sufficiently
attractive to draw in mass private sector investment on a significant scale, you would
imagine that returns of five to eight percent would be perfectly attractive for the public
sector.
Presumably, if you are a government, you would just be happy with an investment that kind
of covers the cost of capital, and if it doesn't do any more than fine, why would you need
any more than that?
In principle, I think that that is a very attractive option, but of course, there are
obstacles of all sorts of different nature, of an ideological nature, clearly.
The fact that the idea that the private sector can't or shouldn't do this is anathema to
the political class in large parts, not just of the West, but of the world more generally.
Governments around the world, including in what, by global standards, are rich countries,
have persuaded themselves or allowed themselves to be persuaded that they don't have the fiscal
capacity to carry out that type of investment, they need to be fiscally conservative, it's
all about tightening belts, you can't grow the public balance sheet, even if it is to
invest in revenue-generating assets, and I don't really buy those arguments, but those
arguments are very, very powerful, and it seems right now, at least, that very few mainstream
parties at least are even willing to count on any departure from that kind of economic
orthodoxy.
So, while I think that it's a credible proposition for rich countries, it doesn't seem very likely
that it's going to be happening any time soon.
Any talk of public sector ownership of energy in places like the UK is, any propositions
along those lines are very, very limited, very, very small scale.
Stam has killed it, right?
Basically, yeah.
It means overtly saying, this will be the market, we're not the Tories, but it will be the market.
Which means that, as we were talking about earlier, great British energy such as it is,
or such as it might be, what's the point?
It's going to be a bit-part player in a private market that is completely unchanged, so it
will just be like another private sector player, basically, and it probably won't even do it
as well as those in the private sector.
What's the point of doing it on a small scale if you're not doing something fundamentally
different?
There's no point, in my view, there's literally no point in public sector ownership unless
you are enabling and incentivising that actor to do something fundamentally differently
from a private sector.
Otherwise, there's no point, just let the private sector do it.
It's going to be a private sector actor which pays shit wages to people.
Probably.
And does a shit job.
Yeah, that's what's going to happen.
Yeah, of course.
Best case scenario, it will be mediocre market actor and it will be privatised by the Tories
in 15 years.
That's what's going to happen.
Best case scenario.
100%.
Yeah.
There's no point.
Unless you're going to do it on a large scale with the ambition to do something fundamentally
differently, there's no point in doing it in my view.
The only argument for doing it would be that it's like a wedge in the door and that then
you can build on it potentially.
Maybe that's the grand plan that's not being talked about, but I'm doubtful anyway.
But the other thing about public sector ownership, I think, the only other thing I would like
to say about that is that even if it is theoretically, to my mind, quite credible and possible in
the relatively rich parts of the world, it's a different matter entirely in going back to
where we started our conversation.
In those parts of the world where investment is most vital, if you're talking about those
countries in the global south that we were talking about, the idea that governments in
those parts of the world, which are struggling under infinitely more severe fiscal constraints
than the governments of the US or Germany or the UK, are going to kind of borrow cheaply
on the capital markets for investment in public ownership of renewables, ain't going to happen.
You could say we're going to recalibrate the provider of the World Bank and so it's not
like implausible, but it's not going to happen right now.
No.
It's definitely not going to happen right now.
But you would need to give it insofar as the fact that, for example, many of those
countries are kind of staggering under huge existing debt servicing obligations from the
past, those would have to just be written off essentially in order to enable that kind
of new investment to take place.
So it's a big ask politically as well as economically.
Speaking of the kind of austerity arrangements, and I find this quite funny, it's a bit of
a tangent, but you have in Europe with the Eurozone and European monetary integration,
you've had since 1999, since there's been the Euro as a currency, the stability and
growth pact, which all the members of the European Union actually, I think, have to
adhere to, one of the major parts of that is to not run deficits of more than 3%.
Now of course, if your economy is growing at 3%, 4% and you've got inflation of 3%,
4%, a deficit of 3% forever is absolutely fine actually.
But what's really interesting is they suspended it in 2020, I don't know if you saw the story,
they suspended it in 2020, and it's only going to come back now, I think it was 2020 to 2023.
And over that time frame, Italy's GDP per capita grows quickly as the United States,
because there was loads of public sector investment in really important infrastructure.
And now the European Union is saying to Italy, you can't run deficits anymore, and if you
don't, we'll sanction you, and you think, fuck, they've just literally been growing
at their best clip in 25 years, but their stupid little brains can't get around it.
On the point you said about public ownership, and again, it's like an ideological default
now, which people do not understand.
The idea of public ownership making money.
Absolutely.
It's only going to be us sinking money, losing money.
You're talking about investing in revenue generating assets.
What's the problem with that?
I mean, if you look at, for instance, where I live, Portsmouth, I did an article about
this recently, you've got Portsmouth International Port, which was built in the early 1970s.
The idea of a city, a medium sized city like Portsmouth, building infrastructure like that
today in partnership with the private sector is just like implausible.
So they built Portsmouth International Port, I think it adds a couple of hundred million
to the national economy, it employs 5,000 people.
Last year it made eight million pound profit.
It's publicly owned, right?
And basically, since it's been built and it's not been privatized, that has basically
meant hundreds of millions of pounds going to local people in Portsmouth.
It means lower council tax and it's paid for a ton of services.
Up there in Southampton, where the airport's privatized, guess what, the city's busts.
But people were spending too much, or maybe actually it's about ownership and you're
not owning the things that make cash.
100%.
And there are two things I would add to that.
One of them is, you mentioned parenthetically, which is, you said it's built by the public
sector in collaboration with the private sector.
So lots of people, when you talk about public sector ownership of energy, they say, well,
the public sector can't do that, public sector doesn't have the capacity and the expertise.
You don't have to build it yourself, you just give a contract to someone to the private
sector to build it.
It's the ownership that matters, you don't have to build it, it's the capacity.
And then the second thing is, they're like, well, then the public sector will fuck up
the operation.
Or a wind and solar farm doesn't take much operation.
Once they're built, you don't have to do anything.
Occasionally a rotor will stop turning and you have to send an engineer out with a screwdriver
to get it going again.
But that's about it.
It doesn't take like a rocket scientist to run a wind or solar farm.
So the idea that the public sector can't do this is preposterous.
And I think about Southampton up the road.
Like I say, their bust, they're dimmed street lights in Southampton, like 20%.
They're going off an hour earlier and you think you've got the country's second biggest
commercial port after Felix, though, and it's in private hands and you're turning off the
fucking lights an hour earlier.
Like this is a madhouse.
Many people in Pompey would say Southampton's a madhouse, but for very different reasons.
They probably lose to their football team next year as well.
Well, Southampton might get promoted.
Oh yeah, they're in the final.
Good point.
They might get promoted.
I don't want them to get promoted for people who aren't aware, but Portsmouth has just been
promoted to the championship and thanks to our in that league as well.
So I mean, that to me is interesting, the idea of public ownership or something, which
is going to make money, which, you know, again, a lot of the public doesn't understand that.
It's not because the public are daft, it's because literally no politician other than
Jeremy Corbyn has actually even made tried to make the argument for 30 years, but it seems
to me like you're saying...
And Bernie Sanders in the US made the exact same argument.
We can have public ownership with a decent rate of return, really good social externalities
as they be called.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Decarbonizing.
What's the problem?
So what is the problem?
Well, I think it's ideological.
I mean, I think, I think that's, that's what it is.
But there's no special interest groups stopping them from doing that.
In the globe.
No, no, I don't think, I mean, except for the fact that, of course, behind the scenes,
the energy sector, the asset managers and so on, are telling them that they can't do
it for all those reasons that we've, that we've touched on already.
So it's not just, I mean, ideology is kind of created by interest groups to a significant
extent, but I don't think they, I don't think there are substantive economic arguments against
it in, in certain countries of the world.
And I think that it's much more challenging in parts of the world where, you know, absent
really significant transformations, but certainly in a place like the UK, it's completely, completely
credible.
Okay.
So it's public ownership, but it's public ownership without conflict.
It's not like you're saying, right, we're going to bring this stuff into public ownership.
It's literally saying, okay, well, we're going to build new capacity in the state.
It's going to do it in the state.
We'll own it.
Yeah.
You're not saying, okay, well, these water companies, they're, they're screwing up, they've
failed, screw them, because of course, their counter-argument is where your bills are going
to go up.
Right.
So it's, it's, it seems like a very low cost form of public ownership.
I think so.
Yeah.
No, I think so.
I think that, that's, that's where the kind of really interesting arguments are coming
from.
And, and, and there are some, some initiatives in that direction, not in the UK, but in, in,
in New York state, many people might have heard the, there's, there was a build public
renewables act that was passed last year, I think it was, which at least on paper looks
like it could be quite significant in terms of public ownership of electricity generation,
in New York state remains to be seen whether it will actually be actioned in significant
part.
You know, the, the, the, the degree to, you know, just because it's there on paper doesn't
necessarily mean it's actually going to, going to happen on the ground.
There are, there are lots of potential obstacles in the way of a political nature, but things
are happening on that front.
So there is reason, there is reason for hope, I think, on that front.
But I, you know, I think that of, of the three kind of options I outlined, that seems to
me at least, to be the one with the most potential, to get things, to get things going more quickly
than they currently are.
And that's the thing, that's the thing right is like every year matters on this, because
you know, every, every year with emissions that are higher than they need to be means
that extra little bit of carbon in the atmosphere or extra large bit of carbon in the atmosphere.
I just want to go back to something we were talking about earlier on.
I mentioned Scotland, which actually in terms of the percentage of electricity coming from
renewables is really impressive.
Yes.
And you said you want to talk about Scotland more.
Yes.
Please go ahead.
Good point.
I'd forgotten about that, but very, very good point.
So here's the interesting, here's the interesting thing and this, this, this point about the
geography of renewables, which is what I'm going to talk about, bears directly on that
question of profitability.
We were talking about earlier this, this kind of paradox of why renewables deployment
is not as profitable as people think it might be.
And part of the answer is the geography of this.
So in the UK, but not just in the UK, pretty much anywhere in the world you look, it's
the same in Sweden where I live, it's the same in China, it's the same in India and
also in Germany and the US, the, the, the recurring geographical feature that you see
about renewables is that wind and solar facilities tend to be located at the opposite ends of
the country to where most people live and most industry is located.
So in the, in, in Sweden, for example, the population is disproportionately located
in the south and all the wind power is up in the north, exactly the same in the UK.
Now there are two important things to, to understand about that.
Firstly is, is, is why that happens.
And then the second thing is what the implications are there, are there of that for the profitability
of renewables generators.
So why it happens, it happens for all sorts of different reasons.
And in the UK case, there are certain physical reasons about wind speeds and stuff like that.
But the main reason that happens everywhere is, is, is precisely because that's where
people don't live.
And if you are developing a wind or solar farm, one of your biggest costs is likely
to be land, is likely to be land costs, right?
Unlike conventional power plants, wind and solar facilities take up a huge amount of
land.
If you're going to be generating a lot of power, it's a huge amount of land.
And so all other things being equal, developers of renewables projects always will try to
cite their facilities where land is cheapest.
So take the, take the US case, for example, you know, the cost of land in, in, you know,
the northwest in, in, in, in Montana or something like that is like 1% of the cost in the east
coast.
So of course you're going to put your facility there because your land cost is cheaper.
And land costs, the cost of leasing or buy it, a part of that generating costs we talked
about earlier, that's, that's factored into that generating costs.
So the fact, those generating costs that come down so much, that includes land costs.
So that's why you get this geographical pattern.
Now what does that mean in terms of profitability?
Well, the thing is, is that if, if your facilities are located a very, very far away on average
from where the demand for that electricity is concentrated, then your facility is, is,
is, is, is exerting a disproportionate burden on the grid, on the, on the transmission and
distribution grid, because it's much more, you are, you are basically, it's much more
expensive to maintain a grid over long distances, obviously, than over short distances.
And the way that this works is that, is that grid operators, those that run the grid in
any case of the national grid in the UK, it, for the cost, that for all the costs of maintaining
that grid and upgrading it and improving it and adding to it, those costs are borne by
everyone who's part of, of the system, both on the consumption side and on the demand
side.
So on the consumption side, you at home and you pay your electricity bill, you are paying
for electricity to be generated, but you're also paying for it to be transported.
So your share of the grid costs, essentially, to where you live.
But generators are also charged for that.
And while they're not necessarily charged perfectly based on where they, where they
are based, but in general, they are charged much more the further they are away from where
demand for electricity is located.
So, renewables developers are essentially, because they're much more further away on
average in conventional power plants from where their electricity demand is located,
they have much higher transportation costs.
So the thing is, right, when, when those, those people focus on, when, when the analysts
focus on generating costs, low cost of renewables, it's actually a completely artificial cost
because it excludes those transportation costs.
And you can even say it better than that.
You can say the generating costs are only low because the transportation costs are high.
Do you see what I mean?
It's like you only have low generating costs because you have low land costs and you only
have low land costs because you're a million miles away from where the demand is located.
So you're going to have a huge burden on their transmission system and high transmission
charges.
So you may think that you're going to be really profitable because you're, because you're
generating costs are very low, but your transportation costs, which no one ever talks about, are
really, really high.
So the geography of this, the economic geography of electricity is unbelievably important.
That seems to have big implications for things like municipally owned renewable capacity.
So if I'm Andy Burnham and I'm the mayor of, you know, Greater Manchester, you know, great
Andy Burnham, great guy, he loves public ownership, you know, he's, well, he does now anyway.
He's all in favor of it, but obviously the land values of Manchester are relatively
high.
They're going up.
Yes.
And so all of a sudden, actually, it doesn't really make sense for him to be saying, I'm
going to use X amount of square kilometers to build.
Yeah.
Solar or wind.
No, two, two things to say about that.
So one is, and so a lot of the kind of hope that people have is for, is for kind of distributed
renewable energy generation that is not sort of one large scale facility that requires
lots of land, but is kind of rooftop solar, things like that, that is attached to households
because it doesn't have those land costs associated.
And so, and so, and so I, and I think that that, as I was mentioning earlier, like 30%
of the Chinese additions in 2023 were rooftop solar that don't have those land implications
attached in.
But in so far as you do need those large scale renewables facilities to kind of really bend
the curve on emissions, land is obviously a big issue precisely, as you say.
And so there are, there are countries in the world where precisely one of the things that
state authorities are doing in terms of enabling renew, private sector renewables development
is exactly on the land question is, is, for example, aggregating land ownership through
powers of expropriation, for example, to enable renewables developers to get their hands on
the land more readily and more cheaply than might otherwise be possible.
So I think that that's the way to think about it in the UK context would be that that's
the sort of thing that municipal authorities would have to be thinking about.
And of course, 40 years ago, it would have been much easier because the state owned much
more land than but it's privatized all of it.
But also suppose if you're if you're a big manufacturing region, so if you're, you know,
that belt in in Germany where you've got so much heavy industry or historically in this
country, you might say the West Midlands, you want, you've got these big factories,
you want to make lots of stuff and you want really cheap energy inputs, you're not going
to want, you know, a wind turbine next to Birmingham, or a or a or a set of solar cells
in Solihull, you're going to want the wind coming from the outer Hebrides, maybe the
sun coming from further to your south.
So that kind of quite progressive.
It sounds lovely.
We all love community ownership and, you know, small scale distributed fine.
And sometimes it's great, you know, my mother-in-law shares solar cells on her house that their
energy bills have collapsed.
Yeah.
But actually in terms of if you want to have a vibrant industrial sector, we want to manufacture
stuff.
So that's a big deal.
It is.
Yeah, absolutely.
No, you're absolutely right.
And I think that and I think that, you know, where where big commercial consumers of electricity,
the Amazons and the Microsofts and so on are investing in supporting the development
of large, large renewable facilities.
It tends to be a long, long way away from where people are living.
So they're building data centers in nor in parts of Norway, for example, where you can
have these huge server farms because land is precisely because land is relatively cheap
and they can build these huge renewables facilities that can be built at a relatively low cost.
And that's obviously very, very different in manufacturing regions of the world.
You mentioned Amazon.
Yes.
Microsoft.
Yes.
We're seeing apparently something of a revival of nuclear in the United States.
Yeah, I've been reading about that.
Obviously because Big Tech, Amazon, Meta as well, potentially, if they go into AI are
saying, look, we need lots of cheap energy and we've done the numbers and we think nuclear
makes the most of it.
Yeah.
And I think part and exactly part of that is the land cost.
You know, nuclear takes much less land than wind than wind and solar.
And again, it says partly it's the land cost issue, partly it's the nature of the energy
resources they want.
Right.
Wind and solar are intermittent renewable sources and so they can do certain things,
but you also, whether you are a company or a country, you also want a source of kind
of what's often called base load power, which is the source of power that you can always
turn on when you need to.
And nuclear is a very, very consistent, reliable, carbon-free source of base load power.
Should we have a nuclear in the UK?
I mean, it's kind of implicit at the start of the book because you talk about the percentage
of energy globally, which is coming from carbon and non-carbon sources, energy coming
from non-carbon sources when solar has gone up, but at the same time it's gone down from
nuclear and hydro-hydroelectricity, so actually the shares about the same.
Yeah.
I mean, I think that, I think that, you know, my view, I don't have a very strong view on
nuclear one way or another, you know, I think that, what do I think?
I think that governments, unless they're going to build this, all of this stuff themselves,
which I think they should be, to a significant extent.
But if they're not, they should be doing everything they can to incentivize the private
sector development of as much carbon-free stuff as possible.
And I think nuclear should absolutely be a significant part of that, as well as solar
wind, not instead of it, but as well as it.
Brett, such an informative conversation.
As ever, our first conversation was brilliant.
So was this.
Maybe we'll get you back on again sometime soon.
I hope so.
We'll do that.
Thanks for having me again.
Hugely enlightening.
Thank you.
Awesome.
Thanks for having me.
