We will need each other, and we, you know, I do believe that every, you know, victory
for the fascist right is also a story of division, sectarianism, failure to make strategic alliances
on the anti-fascist left, and we're on the, we are on the knife edge, we are just on the
knife edge.
We can't afford to destroy each other.
When we were all locked down and isolating, conspiracy theorists went on the march.
The emergence of anti-vaccine scaremongering coupled with virulent antisemitism was disconcerting
for all of us.
But it was even more nuts for Naomi Klein, journalist and author of The Shock Doctrine,
who found herself constantly getting mixed up with Naomi Wolfe, another author and academic.
Naomi found herself being drawn into a strange mirror world as she tracked her doppelganger's
journey from feminist, academic and liberal darling to gun-toting anti-vaxxer, palling
around with Steve Bannon.
What was it about COVID that strengthened the far right and how did all of us create doppelgangers
of ourselves online?
Stay tuned to find out as I talk to Naomi Klein for Downstream.
So when did it stop being funny that you were being confused for Naomi Wolfe?
I mean, I still find it funny sometimes to be honest, especially because it still happens.
In fact, I was doing a TV interview in the States last week and the host had to do a
retake.
No.
And he didn't realize that he'd done it.
And I was like, you have to stop now and redo that because you just called me Naomi Wolfe.
Oh my God, you should have kept it in.
I'm not going to name him, but he knows who he is.
Yeah, I think, I mean, to be honest, it's always been a little cringy, you know, starting
from the very beginning, you know, I start the book with this story about being at Occupy
Wall Street and being in a public loo and hearing a couple of demonstrators talking
about an article that Naomi Klein had written and, oh my God, she doesn't understand our
demands or our movement.
And obviously that was lower stakes.
I mean, that was, they were talking about an article by Naomi Wolfe.
Did you call from inside the store like, sorry, you've got the wrong?
No, I mean, I froze, you know, like flashbacks to high school, mean girls, like, what have
I written?
You know?
And then as I listened more, I recognized the article that they were discussing and knew
that I had not written it.
And so I just very casually came out and made eye contact in the mirror and said, I think
you're talking about Naomi Wolfe.
Words I have had to say many times since then, so that was 2011.
But even then, I mean, it was funny and I would entertain my friends, you know, overdrinks
with these sorts of stories, they couldn't get enough of it.
But I mean, I would also get, you know, I'm going to be talking to Andrew Marr later today.
And I'm going to remind him that the last time he interviewed me, it was on the BBC
and he referred to me as Naomi Campbell.
Naomi Campbell.
I was like, I'm sorry to disappoint you.
You broke so many barriers in fashion, you know.
That one is harder because then I feel like, you know, the audience is really quite disappointed
when I come out, you know.
How do you feel about your feud with tower banks?
Yeah, the whole blood diamond thing.
Yeah, you really, I mean, in hindsight, except for most blood diamonds, really poor form
for the author of No Logo.
So there's something about the name Naomi that people do have trouble with.
But no.
So I mean, even back to Occupy Wall Street, it was, the stakes were lower, but it still
bothered me just for sort of niche reasons because that particular context, she had written
an article where just, you know, if you, I'm sure you remember from Occupy Wall Street,
there was a very, you know, there was a decision not to have a list of demands that politicians
could just meet and everyone would go home.
It was much, you know, it had a deeper critique of the system than that.
And what Wolf had done in the article that they were upset about was claim that she had
divined the demands of Occupy Wall Street and she came up with a list based, yes, based
on a random assortment of online communications that she'd had.
So even though that was like pretty low stakes, for me, it was quite a cringe because I do
try to be pretty careful not to do that sort of thing.
I mean, it was one of the things that really struck me about the book, which is that one
of the early chapters, when you're talking about being mixed up for Naomi Wolf.
Do you sort of really strive to talk about the rigor of your journalistic work and the
depth of the research and the scrutiny that you apply to your own writing?
Do you feel a bit defensive about this mix up and that you feel that you've got to put
all this distance between the two of you?
Well, I mean, if anything, I think I've put less distance between the two of us.
Like I've probably cemented the connection forever, I'll never be able to escape it.
And I do think that it is important to make a distinction between what investigative journalism
does, what rigorous research is, how we make sure that we don't go to press with speculation.
Because honestly, I think a lot of people are confused about that.
And part of what she does, and she's just a case study of a broader movement, which is
this conspiracy culture.
And I don't call it conspiracy theory because there really isn't a coherent theory.
It's just jumping around.
She's more of a conspiracy influencer than she is a theorist.
I don't think it's really fair to theory to call her a theorist because the theories
are constantly contradicting each other, right?
One minute COVID is a bio weapon cooked up by the Chinese to depopulate the West and
the next minute it's nothing, don't worry about it, don't even put on a mask.
So like you presumably would have to choose, yeah, between the two.
But there is something about the fact that there are people who consume these things interchangeably,
right?
And I describe this as a doppelganger of journalism because it uses a bunch of the conventions,
breaking scoop, like, I've got the papers, smoking gun, all of this.
But because it's within the attention economy and the need to be first out of the gate to
get the clicks to get the cloud, you leap over all the guardrails.
So yeah, I spend some time in the book just sort of explaining what we try to do and whether
it's investigative journalism or academic research to check our facts based on the idea
that facts don't matter.
But it isn't so much about me putting distance between her because it's a doppelganger.
And doppelganger books are, you know, you have to see yourself in the mirror of your
doppelganger or you have failed.
Do you ever wonder who the mad woman in the attic is?
Like is it her or is it me?
Absolutely.
There's been uncomfortable winces of recognition throughout this journey.
I mean, the moment when Naomi Wolfe is on BBC Radio and her book Outrageous just gets a
tractor driven through it.
So it turns out that she made this reading error and it meant that what was supposed to
be spectacular revelation was exactly wrong.
I felt such a pang of empathy when that happened because I thought, oh, my God, that could be
me one day.
And it was this horrible fear of seeing something that you've always had nightmares about
happening to someone else.
And then you want to put distance between them and you by going, how could you be so
stupid?
How could this happen to you?
I mean, did you ever have those moments of like empathetic recognition with her where
you go, oh, God, that could have been me.
I mean, it's every writer's worst nightmare.
I mean, it's a little hard for me to just feel straight empathy because a lot of people
thought it was me who made that mistake.
So like, you know, I only found out that it happened because my feed was filled with people
going thoughts and prayers to Naomi.
I was like, oh, no, what has she done now?
And I'm always having to kind of reverse engineer whatever the scandal is based on.
People either literally thinking it's me or sort of sending mock sympathy.
But, you know, I like, as you know, in the book, I have a little maybe a little sort
of half-jokey equation about not only her, but many figures who who, you know, we've
many of us have had conversations like, whatever happened to that person, I thought,
I thought I knew who they were.
I thought I could trust them.
And now suddenly they're palling around with Tucker Carlson or Elon Musk or, you know,
whatever happened to Phil in the blanks.
And so I had this equation that might not be perfect for every person, but it is narcissism,
bracket grandiosity times social media addiction, which you and I have discussed.
I don't want that mirror being held up to me.
I don't want to see the faces in this.
Plus midlife crisis, which you don't have to worry about for a while.
I got 10 years.
Divided by public shaming equals right wing meltdown.
So I think that that, you know, I think that she should have been held accountable for those
for those major errors in outrageous.
And in general, book publishing, you know, doesn't fact check as much as they should.
I always, you know, I'm lucky to be one of the few writers who can afford to pay my own
fact checkers, but I pay my fact checkers out of out of my book advance, you know,
I pay my research assistants and then a whole separate process of going back over every single
fact because, because my first book made me a target, right?
I couldn't afford it for my first book.
But after that book, I, you know, I've, I've, I've had the fear of God
to not be in that situation where, where a reporter discovers that you have a huge
error in the middle of your book and the whole thing gets discredited.
So, but so I think accountability is good.
But what happened after that was just a disgusting pile on online where people were,
I mean, I think as you say, like putting that distance between them and her,
because everybody, it's everybody's worst nightmare and just having a lot of fun
shaming her and turning her into a spectacle.
And I think that that probably nudged her a little bit in the direction.
I mean, and I think she should be held accountable for these terrible decisions
she's made to align herself with some of the most dangerous men on the planet.
But, you know, I don't think it's great that people, you know, are so cruel to each other
online. That's my radical position today.
I mean, you're talking about the word accountability in some ways it's easier
to talk about accountability for Naomi Wolfe because she's this individual and we've seen
this descent into fact free conspiracism.
But the responsibility for cruelty online is a lot more diffuse and we can more easily dodge it.
Yeah. And, you know, the reason why I thought this might be a fun idea for a book and it got
less fun, you know, there's I have a quote early on in the book from Philip Roth about
from his really quite wonderful doppelganger novel Operation Shylock, which is about Philip Roth,
a character called Philip Roth who has a doppelganger called Philip Roth creating all kinds of mayhem.
And he says it's it's it's too ridiculous to take seriously and too serious to be ridiculous.
And when I started this, it was more on the ridiculous side of the ledger.
And then as things went on and she got closer and closer to Steve Bannon started
engaging in election denial, started taking pictures of herself with her guns, started
taking posting pictures of her new one, not so new anymore, but her husband is a
private detective slash mercenary who likes to post pictures of himself doing target practice
and so on. So it's gotten more serious than ridiculous just because it is part of a broader
fascist surge globally. So, yeah.
So you talked about that that seriousness and that kind of quite scary descent into fascism.
How can you stop people laughing? You know, when does when does the comedy stop and the sense of
urgency kick in? Well, you know, this is why I think that that sentence is really resonant,
because I feel like people have that same feeling about Trump a lot of the time, or at least they
did before where it was just like unclear and Boris Johnson and Duterte. I mean, these sort of
buffoonish figures. Berlusconi, I think was the. Oh, absolutely. The original, you know.
Bolsonaro is the only one who's not at all funny. I know. I mean, he is funny in that he just kept
getting COVID. That was it was like sideshow Bob stepping on the rakes. Like it wasn't a comedy
of his making. It was kind of God's comedy. Exactly. But he didn't seem to be playing
playing up the character. But yeah, I think, yeah, at what point do we stop? I think we're still
trying to figure out how to how to respond to the weight of our historical moment and,
frankly, failing most days, right? I think there are flashes. I don't know about you where I feel
like, okay, we're we're getting close to touching just how consequential the decisions we're making
are in these in these in these years of, you know, climate breakdown, surging, fascism,
border violence, just oligarchic concentration of I mean, wealth, it's a lot. It's a lot. And so
I mean, this, I think the through line of the book and the reason why I thought that doppelganger
doubles like the book, the through line of the book is less her than it is the way in which we
create doubles of ourselves. And our groups, you know, respond to each other in these in these
sorts of mirror world ways, we react to one another rather than behave based on legible
principles a lot of the time. And my analysis is that all of it is about not looking at what we
need to look at, right? That that, you know, the third section of the book is called the Shadowlands.
And I think that, you know, whether we're staring into our phones looking at our digital doubles,
you know, the way we create these little doppelgangers of ourselves to represent us,
which is, you know, why I thought it was interesting that I lost control over my digital
identity during COVID. And I thought, well, this is an interesting way in, you know, or the way we
sort of project all that we want to distance ourselves from onto the other as if we are the
ones who are really, you know, married to truth and facts and, you know, facing the weight of our
moment when we all know that we are distracting ourselves endlessly and looking away endlessly.
And, you know, it's, you know, there's more than one way to look away. Conspiracy culture
plays that role for a lot of people. It's, you know, just a decision to divorce from
any recognizable shared reality and just make up your own facts, make up your own reality. But,
you know. I mean, one of the things that I was reflecting on as I was reading this book was
my own career in the media, because when I started out, I was always paired up against
really old white guys. And that allowed me to have a sort of brand identity as young,
female, brown, left wing, disruptor. Oh my God, what is she going to do next? And then over time,
I started getting partnered with young, right wing women of color. So it was like they were
putting me up against my own Wario. And I then suddenly felt the sense of nausea where I was
like, have I contributed to creating this category of right wing talking head where they want the
one of color to play against type? And I've participated in the commodification of identity
to the extent that it becomes very powerful for the right. I mean, I felt quite kind of,
you know, disoriented by it. And I guess I was wondering, when you're looking at your
conspiratorial doppelganger, do you ever feel this little sense of responsibility going,
did I make this in some way? Like it's not just a mirror, did I create this mirror somehow?
You know, I think it is always worth interrogating, right? And looking at, you know, and sometimes
those winces can be really productive, because it pushes you to think about what is it that you're
doing and what, you know, what parts of it are most important to you, right? And if it's an easy
to doppelgang part of you, then you might want to lean into some of the other, because you aren't
just playing an identity game. You know, that's not the way I perceive your role in the media.
You're making arguments, and you're representing a set of values and beliefs. And
they can doppelgang your identity. But, you know, I think it's a lot harder to do that when you're,
you know, when you're making arguments that are genuine, challenged power.
And so I did interrogate, you know, it wasn't only Wolf who was doing a kind of fact, like,
you know, describing the book as a kind of fact-free remix of the shock doctrine specifically.
And here I'm not saying it was deliberate, but there was a way in which, I mean, I still,
like, every tour stop, every time I log on, I hear people who are furious that I
wrote the shock doctrine and have failed to recognize that the vaccines are the biggest
shock doctrine in world history, not for the reasons that I believe they are, because there
should never have been patents, and this was an opportunity for massive illegitimate enrichment,
and we should have, you know, they should have never been patented in the first place,
but because they were violating bodily sovereignty, and, you know, they believe that there has been
a genocide that has been covered up by the quote-unquote elites. There's some graffiti near my house,
where it says anti-vaxxer, and then next to it, I love my sperm, and then like a big picture of
sperm, and I was like... Yeah, so that's the shock doctrine I missed. Yeah, you're really low on
sperm, you really... But no, I think I did feel that, you know, when I started to hear people
using the shock doctrine to sell, you know, what I considered to be largely made-up theories about
how public health measures were an attempt by the CCP and Fauci and Gates to bring in
Chinese social credit, or whatever it was. I mean, the great reset, all of that.
Like, to be clear, I think there have been real examples of what I would call the shock doctrine
in disaster capitalism under cover of COVID. I'm very concerned about them. The NHS has been
attacked, you know, under cover of COVID. I live in Canada, the same thing has happened to our
public health care system. A lot of the attacks on the schools about COVID measures are really
just attacks on public schools by the same people who always attack public schools under cover of
emergency. But there is this kind of doppelganger of the shock doctrine out there, and I think for
a while it made me less willing to talk about that, because I couldn't figure out how to talk about
the shock doctrine, how to talk about my concerns about Bill Gates, which were not fantastical,
but very provable about what he was doing, providing cover for the drug companies to keep
their patents in place, and so on. Because it was just getting all, it was just a swirl of Bill Gates
tracking, you know, implants. And, you know, I was just getting like the algorithms were
starting to confuse me with Wolf. And I was just like, we're just a mess of Naomi is talking about
Bill Gates. So, but I think the worst thing you can do is let that doppelganger experience
silence you. You know, I regret not talking more about the patents during this period.
I regret any way in which the left has ceded territory to the fake populist right by not going
after corporate power and not making the connections with the logics of capitalism,
because that's just such a gift to the Steve Bannon's of the world who just suck it all up,
or Giorgio Malone, and then twist it and turn it into transphobia and xenophobia,
and, you know, an incredibly malevolent agenda. I mean, is there a way to sort of
reclaim the integrity of left-wing ideas without it being about insisting on your
intellectual property rights? Because the strength of the left has always come from the
dissemination of ideas in a very open way. The communist manifesto was meant to be passed
hand to hand from worker to worker. And then, you know, in some ways, shock doctrine being
appropriated by conspiracy theorists is testament to its success and its its meaning and its
power as an idea. So how do you how do you navigate that as someone who's on the left?
I mean, I agree. I mean, I think the left should be taking popular education as seriously as,
you know, it originally was with the original pamphleteers and the idea of
doing this kind of popular education in part because the alternative was conspiracy theory,
right? I mean, I have a section in the book that looks at anti-Semitism as the socialism of fools
and, you know, in part, you know, looks at the history of Marxist thought as in part being
a history of a whole bunch of Jews banging their head against the brick wall of history,
saying it's not the Jews that are the result of your pain or causing your pain, but it's
actually this system. So I don't think we should any of us should embrace our ideas being distorted
and turned into like a warped mirror of themselves. But is there a way to do that without going,
it's mine, like this is my idea? I don't think it's about intellectual property. I think it's
about having a robust left that is doing system analysis. And, you know, and I think that when
that doesn't happen, conspiracy culture swirls because the center isn't holding, because there's
so much suffering and because all of the promises that capitalism has made about the meritocracy
and if you work hard, you're going to succeed and you'll be able to climb this ladder,
it's falling apart and people know that. And our education system doesn't explain what capitalism
is. It says it's all about sunshine and big max and freedom and getting the rewards that you
deserve. And so when the system fails, people are really, really vulnerable to somebody pulling
them aside and going, it's actually the Jews, or it's actually the CCP or it's this meeting
once a year. And so the need for that robust system analysis is urgent because I think it's the only
force that can drain power from this surging authoritarianism. You know, if they were just
taking the ideas and putting them to good use, then fine. Yes, always. It doesn't matter if you
get credit or not, you want them to disseminate. The problem is this, you know, I listened to
hundreds of hours of Steve Bannon to do, to write this book, unfortunately, and the most chilling
moments were when I was when I would hear him sounding like what the left used to sound like
and doesn't really sound like anymore because there is not as much of a anti-corporate left as
there used to be, let alone an anti-capitalist left. It's much more partisan and reactive.
It's part of the appeal of the likes of Steve Bannon and the very reactionary authoritarian
right is that they're saying, here's how to live and it will make you a better person, a stronger
person, a smarter person, a more worthy person. Whereas the left, we've retreated a lot into like,
you do what you want to do, except there is no you do what you want to do because if you
are perceived in the wrong way, particularly online, people jump down your throat.
Yeah, yeah. Well, you know, Bannon is different than some of the other people who are more like,
this is how to live. Like, he's less of a lifestyle guy. Like, he's not Jordan Peterson or...
I don't think anyone goes, how do I get the Steve Bannon look?
Exactly. No, he is more of an organizer. I mean, he is the guy who is organizing,
the takeover of your local Republican Party, your local school board, get those books banned.
He's very deliberately building a political coalition that he calls MAGA Plus, which is,
the plus is women who they haven't been able to really lock down enough to win the last couple
of elections. And so, in the same way that he peeled away some democratic voting working class
guys who were pissed off about having voted for Democrats three, four times, who promised that
they were going to renegotiate trade deals and then voted for Trump because he said he was going
to do it. And it wasn't the only reason why people voted for Trump, but it doesn't need to be that
many people who you peel away with these messages. He now sees that opportunity with who he calls
the warrior moms. So, it's interesting because I definitely think that there is an appeal around,
I'm going to help you learn how to live that certain people are offering on the right.
But I think with Bannon, what he's offering is a political program. He's offering a plan.
It's an activist space. His slogan is action, action, action. And he doesn't, he refers to
his listeners as the war room posse. And he makes them feel like they're not just listening or
watching, they are part of his army. But it's that thing which is, I want David from accounts to
feel like Ajax the conqueror. And maybe it is difficult to draw the line between political
organizing, lapping and entertainment. Andrew Tate, there's a Andrew Tate group chat called
the war room, which is again, very similar trying to say like, we're going to build you up and empower
you if you just do these things. Yeah. And I think that this is where
the left is at something of a disadvantage because it takes more time and it's more complicated to
build the kind of mass power that has any kind of chance of standing up to the sort of consolidated
wealth that we're talking about. Whereas Bannon is perfectly happy to just have a plan to get back
into the White House. And so there is a plan and it is take over politics at every level,
peel off part of your opposition by using all of this COVID residual anger and pivoting it
in the way that we've been talking about. So what is the left plan? Like, I mean, we can
diagnose, we can do systems analysis, but that's just going to make people feel helpless for the
most part because then they're going to better understand that as an individual, there's nothing
that they can do. They can only stand up to these systems in mass collective action. If there is a
conspiracy and there's just five guys who are responsible for all of the suffering in the world,
then like the bumper sticker says, make the Nuremberg code great again. Let's bring them up on
war crimes trials. I mean, that's part of their plan is a sort of a fantasy of justice. That's
also at the heart of QAnon is like there's going to be a great storm and all of the bad people
are going to get arrested and they're going to be brought up on charges and there will be
justice because we will replace them with the good people. The observation that January 6th
was people dressing up and storming the capital. It was like a sort of Comic-Con element of it
as well. You get to live this fantasy for a day, except it's real. Yeah. This is the Bannon playbook.
He wants people to inhabit their avatars and so many of these figures are very, very skilled from
the world of entertainment and reality television. Bannon has worked in Hollywood. He's worked in
video games. Trump obviously, reality television, Tate as well, former reality show star.
The only one who doesn't really have this history is Peterson. Joe Rogan also, former reality show.
Didn't he voice come at the frog? What? Didn't he voice come at the frog?
He's the only one who's just a natural at this. I always feel as a Canadian, I need to apologize
when I'm abroad. If I stop all this for everybody out there, we'd be here all day.
The left proposition is not just we're out here making a better argument about what is really
driving mass misery. We also have to connect that analysis with a credible organizing strategy
that shatters the sense that there's nothing you can do about these huge systems because it's a
hell of a lot easier to take on a cabal than it is to take on a system. That's why, if anything
has made me feel a little bit optimistic in recent days, it's been the UAW going out on strike,
the United Auto Workers in the States and the fact that there's a great new leader of that union,
Sean Fain, who was an insurgent candidate. He's on the news because he's taken on the big three
automakers and he's doing real left populism. He is saying these companies have recorded record
profits and they've given themselves massive wages and our workers haven't been able to keep up with
the cost of living increases and we're going to get them. Just having somebody out there who has
a clear left analysis and a plan about what to do about it, we are going to disrupt your assembly
lines. I feel like it makes the bannons of the world sort of shrivel up and die because they are
not died, but they can only sell the counterfeit if the real thing is an on offer or even in the
public sphere. When words and action momentarily are married in these moments of mass worker action
or the debt collective or tenant organizing or any of the ways that people are finding collective
power, that's going to do more to drain the power of right wing conspiracy culture than an army of
fact checkers and content moderators. I was thinking about one of the advantages that the
right has, which is they've got this screen-based ecosystem, whether it's YouTube or accounts on
Twitter, where they're bringing together a community and making it lonelier all the time.
So I was reminded of that bit where Anthony says of Cleopatra, she makes hungry where most she
satisfies. So it's satisfying this need for social connection because it's not the real thing,
you're getting hungry and hungry all the time. How does the left draw a balance between contesting
these spaces in a legacy media or social media ecology, but also just being in flesh space
where we can touch each other and make eye contact and engage with each other as human beings and not
digital avatars? That quote is so interesting because I feel like back to my first book,
No Logo, which I wrote before the explosion of personal branding and some of the things that
I revisit here, a lot of what I did in that book was track the way in which the first mega lifestyle
brands like Nike and Apple and Starbucks were co-opting revolutionary rhetoric, putting Martin
Luther King on Apple ads. Yes, this is for your time. It was weird. There was all of this
unease, all of the iconography of the 1960s, the anti-Vietnam War movement was suddenly a
Nike ad and Gandhi was from the grave shilling for Apple. On the one hand, you could say,
nothing means anything anymore, but that wasn't my feeling. My feeling was like in the 90s where
we had been told that nobody liked left ideas. I thought it was really exciting that these
companies with all of their market research had found that what people actually wanted was revolution
and obviously they weren't going to get it from their running shoes or their laptops,
so there would be that constant hunger cycle that you're using much more literary references for.
But so for capitalism, that's great because you'll just have to keep shopping. You'll get
like a little hit and then you'll crash again and you'll have to shop again in order to get
that feeling. I hate myself for the way in which I instinctively scroll through clothing when I
feel sad and it makes me feel worse and like, why am I doing this? It's just like my classic
depression activities. Yeah, exactly. Horrible. Well, and it's helpful to just be aware that
you're doing it because you're sad or you're doing it because you're insecure and that people shop
one of the times when you have the highest spike in consumption is when people are becoming
parents for the first time because they're panicked and they don't have people who
will help them figure out how to be parents anymore because if we don't live in communities,
we tend to be isolated and so you just think, if I were to just get this $1,000 bouncy chair,
everything would be fine. But I remember that from when I just, I mean, never have I been more of a
consumer drone than in those days. I mean, was it a fear that like bypassed your
and critical awareness of the thing you were doing? It was just... Well, it was really useful
to me to see that statistic, like that this is the time when consumption is higher than at any
point in our lives and not just because you need a whole bunch of new things. It's because
it's well beyond what you need and it's just fear. Yeah, it's just fear.
I know it keeps it in check a little bit. It doesn't keep it completely in check, obviously,
but it's still helpful to know. I mean, you were talking about the
symbols of revolution, language of revolution being co-opted. Yeah, let's come back to that.
90s capitalism. I didn't know that Nike had used Martin Luther King, but the thing...
Apple used Martin Luther King and Nike used a whole bunch of Vietnam War anthems.
Oh my God. Because then the thing that it made me think of was in this very direct way,
Nike revealing that it partnered with Colin Kaepernick all that time when he was being black
listed by the NFL. Because I remember the conversations going on at that time, which
for lots of people on the anti-racist level, lots of black people was a feeling of like,
well, at least someone's standing with us during this time because also this queasiness of going,
but you're doing it to sell your shoes. I mean, how did you make sense of moments like that?
Yeah. I mean, I was teaching a course at the time, so it was helpful. I was teaching a course
called the Corporate Self, an undergraduate course, so we were sort of processing all of that
Nike ads in real time. I mean, it's interesting because it's not unlike the people's reaction
to the Barbie movie, right? I don't know. Where it's like, oh, wow, all these feminist critiques
are in here and they keep talking about patriarchy, but ultimately...
I thought it, I really fucking hated the self-consciously woke dialogue. There's this
one moment where the teenage girl was like, white savior Barbie, and I was like, it's like they took
Tumblr from 2015 and chicken upside down all over the script. It was just so focus-grouped
and calculated to get everybody. Turned me off. It really turned me off.
And ultimately, just to be a boring lefty eco-feminist, it is an advertisement. It's an
extraordinarily historically good advertisement for a plastic doll. And even if you love the movie,
maybe especially if you love the movie, you should know that that will lead to materially,
this selling of many, many, many more plastic dolls. And so its success is a huge failure for
the earth. But at any rate, we were talking about them doing their market research for us
and the co-optation. Well, so yeah, I think you can get really down about the ways that
these ideas are being co-opted by the right, or you can be like, wow, these really are popular
ideas. We should be making more of them. And that the, you know, one of the things that's been,
I think, nice for me about the last few weeks of touring, I've been in the U.S. touring with the
book, just got here to the U.K. There haven't been that many posts, well, we're not post pandemic,
but since the beginning of the pandemic, there haven't been that many spaces for people to
gather as leftists collectively. And one of the things that's been helpful to name is the
particular experience that a lot of us had of going from the highs of the Bernie Sanders campaign
to lockdown, Biden, you know, Democratic Party rallying and just that, like the combination
of that extreme political disappointment and being isolated from each other, so not being able to
process it, re-strategize, think about what we want to do next. And instead, in that isolation
and in our disappointment, a lot of what we did was just attack each other. And sort of,
you know, I write in the book, we went from this, you know, this surfing this wave of not me, us,
and this kind of real joy of kind of a release from individualism and ego. I mean, that was what
was so powerful about being on the road with Bernie was, you know, the slogan, not me, us.
Originally, I think a lot of people just thought it was Bernie saying, this is not about me, this
is about us. But when you were out on the campaign, it took on this whole other life and meaning,
which was much more about, you know, what what Astro Taylor talks about with the debt collective,
where with something like medical debt or student debt, it's this private shame that people are
carrying. And it's just all me in the sense of my fault and my burden. But when you meet lots of
other people who are who have that same burden, you find it us and that us has power, like you
organize into a debtors union, then you're a problem for the creditors. And if you and in the
same way that when workers organize their problem for their bosses. So to go from those highs,
you know, of, you know, being in Las Vegas when Bernie won the strip, which was like,
I mean, I'm just, it was the happiest moment of my political life just because it's Vegas,
right? And it's shiny and gold and Trump. I mean, was it one of the moments of politics where you
feel like the boundaries of the self dissolve a bit? And it's like, well, just absolutely yes,
because you've got the nurses and you've got teachers and you have just so many different
movements coming together and just reaching towards each other. And and then the coinciding
of lockdown, I mean, we were so vividly remember being on my couch, I was still living in the
States at the time, and, and watching the whole Democratic Party just coalesce around Biden.
And, and then almost instantly, the Bernie movement just fractured and everybody started
starting their own podcasts and attacking each other. And hey, not too much about podcasts.
Listen, I mean, I got a cat to feed, right? But it was, you know, we were, we were sudden,
we went from not me, us to just being dropped in this ocean of me, me, me, me, me. And that's all
we knew how to do. And it was just heartbreaking. I really, I really want to talk about this,
because I think it's something where I feel, again, really personally conflicted about my own work,
because Novara came out of the student movement, we all met through occupying our university,
which was UCL, or, you know, the plate glass windows of Milbank, which was the Tory party HQ
being smashed. That was cool. That was my first year of university. And I just remember it was
me and my friend who were like, in Milbank. And she's, she looks like me. She's like my
doppelganger, but blonde and Irish, like we're just like same height, same face, but like two
different colorways. Like that was how we all met. And that was where the organization came from.
And we've always felt like we're part of a movement movement, but journalism is different
from being a propagandist for the movement. And there are all kinds of tensions
that come with it. And I think that I often bulk at the constraints of what I feel are
unfair expectations from parasocial relationships where I'm like, why is someone on Twitter yelling
at me like they know me or like they own me? But the fact is, is that it's not unreasonable to have
political expectations or editorial expectations of someone whose
public career is the result of coming from this movement. So I was wondering like,
how do you navigate that the sort of, you know, the rigors and the demands of journalism,
that you've got to go where the facts are leading you, the fact you've got political aims,
the fact that you want to think critically and independently, but you also want to be
accountable to people. How do you square all of these circles?
Yeah. Yeah. Well, I think there's a lot going on there. You know, I think left media should not
be propaganda. And we, you know, I like coming back to what we were talking about earlier about
facts do matter, research does matter. It's part of the reason why I always hated the idea that
you have are supposed to be a brand. Because what I know about being a brand is that
you repeat yourself endlessly. If you're a good brand, you've identified your core meaning and
you're just repeating and reinforcing. And you have message discipline, which is pretty much
the opposite of being a good journalist, a good investigator, which requires that you
follow your research wherever it leads. You have to be able to be changed by what you're learning.
And so I think these projects are really antithetical. That doesn't mean that you
don't have like an image in the world, but branding is a very particular thing. Branding is
chasing your own tail at infinitum. And that might be okay to sell running shoes, but it really is
not a good model for being a public intellectual or a journalist. And I think we should push back
on it. And I think also part of the cruelty that we've been talking about online is that
there's a cost to performing a thing version of yourself, which is what it means to be a brand.
You're out there saying, this is thing me. This is commodity version of me. People will believe
you and they will think that they can throw very hard things at you and that you won't bleed
because things don't bleed. And so I don't think we quite believe each other are real online.
And that's a problem. It's not the only reason why people are cruel. They're also racist. They're
also misogynist. But I think there is also this factor that is driving it. So we should try to
dething ourselves if we can. I mean, just to play devil's advocate on the difference between a
journalist and a propagandist, I was talking about this with my partner. And one of the things that
he was saying is, well, doesn't this keep you locked into very bourgeois norms? So if you say,
well, this is what a journalist does. And there are certain things that journalists does,
which cannot be subordinated to your political aims. Doesn't that make you a worse communist?
Doesn't this make you a worse socialist? Doesn't this make you worse at bringing
the world you want to see into existence? I think you need to be transparent about what
values you're holding yourself to, what standards you're holding yourself to.
And I don't think you do subscribe to the idea that you're objective, that you don't have politics.
No, you wear your politics on your sleeve, you're in it because you want to change the world.
But you're still accountable for what you say, and you're still going to hold yourself to standards
of accuracy and truth and probing. And why? Why does that matter? You also have to say why that
matters and why it makes for stronger movements and why movements always have strong movements,
always have powerful art, powerful journalism. It's an ecosystem, and this is a piece of the
ecosystem. I think where we get into trouble is when the rest of the ecosystem is not healthy.
I'm interested in the history of what Navarra came out of, of the movements Navarra came out of.
I probably became aware of you around the Corbyn movement and saw you as a kind of
the media arm of the Corbyn project. Maybe that's wrong, but that's the way I saw you.
Not that you were propagandist, I know it's always a little tinge, but you also have to be able to
do critique because if movements can't do critique and that it's going to be through the media,
that's how we're going to hear each other, then you're just going to keep making the same mistakes
over and over again. But what I'm describing around the burning moment, all of those podcasts
were relatively healthy when there was a political project that was healthy. It was when the political
project collapsed that it just seemed like the left was a bunch of podcasts. And I don't think
that that is a left. And I think that if people are, they're always going to be cruel online,
but I think these parasocial relationships take on an overinflated and unhealthy role
when they're subbing in for collective organizing that isn't in a healthy state.
And is that happening here? Well, I think that since the demise of the Corbyn movement, and
again, it was straight from Corbyn into lockdown and that was a grim six months. It was really
like a bereavement because not only was this central force of your life gone, you're also being
piled on with humiliation by everyone crowing and saying they were right about you all along.
And then you were separate from your comrades because you couldn't see each other and you could
only communicate online. Like it was a very grim time. And I think that just anecdotally,
there are lots of people trying different things and there's kind of like embryonic
experimentation going on. But certainly, I think with with Navarra, it is this
ongoing discussion about what does it mean to be a socialist media outlet, which takes
journalistic standards very seriously and take socialism very seriously. And there are conflicts
there, there are tensions there. But the more robust the socialist project is outside of Navarra,
I think that the clear your role is going to be. It's just it's when it isn't clear that there
you said it. I mean, I kind of want to talk a little bit about this thing of turning
oneself into a brand because we all do it. We all do it now that social media exists. Anyone who
has Instagram or TikTok or Twitter is doing brand them to some extent. What does it mean for
the left to be contesting so much of its politics through these digital avatars? I mean,
you know, one is that it stops people seeing each other as human beings. But what does it do
to the politics? Yeah, I don't think it's been great. I mean, in general, understatement of
the century. And I do want to say that these these political campaigns that we've both referenced,
I think that we should we should strive for more in terms of I think we should
expect from these political campaigns that when there are losses, they're not just abruptly
end and they're not be a process for trying to hold on to all of that organizing energy and to
think strategically about what the next stage was. I mean, I was a Bernie surrogate and
you know, I think there was like one email that we all got that was just like
I mean, I love the guy. I'm not blaming him. But you know, social relations have never been
his strength. But you know, I think we you know, if we are going to ask people to go all in for
these campaigns and these moments when we sent some opening, you know, they're not all going to win.
Most of them are going to fail. And there should be a strategy for holding that space so that we
don't all turn on each other afterwards. But the the branding piece of it and this is, you know,
a big part of the reason why I wanted to come back to these themes. And it's something that I talk
about with a lot of my comrades in the movement about the way the logic of personal branding
and even collective branding, because it isn't just the individual brands. It's also the movement
as brand that I think is part of why we've had these like peaks, peak peaks and big valleys where
it seems like everybody is talking about whatever the thing is. And and we have, you know, historic
numbers of people on the streets, you know, whether we're talking about climate strikes,
Black Lives Matter, me too, you know, it just seems like everybody is with the program. And then
and then and then the crash and then the internal divisions. And part of it, you know,
Keyanga Amada Taylor, who I quote in the book of Fairbitt is a, you know, wonderful colleague and
friend. She's written a fair bit about how why movements need more democracy so that it isn't
just, you know, I think it's important that we have ways of talking about this that deep
personalize it. I think people are trying to build movements with really inadequate tools.
And so we're on these corporate platforms and people get, you know, lifted up to leadership
positions because they are persuasive, because they're, you know, they're, they're, they're
great at messaging. There's whatever it is. Sometimes it's a little bit random, but they
aren't elected and there aren't mechanisms in place to hold them accountable. So, you know,
in the book, I talk about how that, you know, that happened to me with no logo. Like there was a
move that, that, that book predicted that there was going to be a large anti-corporate uprising.
There wasn't yet. There were just like, you know, you were talking about these sort of embryonic,
like little things that was like reclaim the streets. And there was like an anti-switch
shot movement, but there wasn't a big movement. And then when that book was at the press,
these huge protests started popping off all over the place in Seattle and then Genoa and so on.
And because I had written a book, I suddenly was, according to the media, the face of this
movement. And it was bullshit because I had just written a book. Nobody elected me.
Nobody could hold me accountable. And suddenly, because this is what corporate media wants,
they want like two or three people who are going to be the face of this thing. And, you know,
I suddenly was like, no logo was a brand. And the whole thing got completely out of my control.
And Vogue asked you to do shopping with the enemy.
Yes, I didn't do it. They asked me, there were all kinds of like, there was a,
there was advertising that got offers to do designer ad campaigns. And people did go create
no logo products. I think there's still a no logo craft beer. People send me pictures of it.
I don't know if it's any good. But, you know, I wanted to write about this from the inside and
not have it be like a call out, like, oh, that person, you know, wasn't accountable. I really
just think we need to have democratic movements. And in the absence of democratic movements,
people are still trying to build movements. And it's not work. These tools are failing us.
So we should try some new ones. And I think we are trying new ones. This is part of why
we're seeing a wave of union organizing. I mean, isn't it also about shifting
the kinds of political relationships we have with one another? Because if all of us are brands,
brands are always competing, and they're always competing for attention, and they're competing
for money. And if we turn ourselves into things, and we're having relationships as things, you
can't, you can't build a movement based on solidarity with that. But the relationship
between comrades, which is a word that you just used, is so different. And it's so rich and
layered. And you want, as you were saying before, you want your ideas to spread. Whereas the,
whereas the logic of capitalism and branding is, I want the credit. This is mine. It's an ownership
model, which is exactly the opposite of what you want. This is my most cancelable opinion.
Oh, dear. This is my most cancelable opinion, which is that...
You're going to get me canceled by property. Yeah, you're going to get canceled by property.
I'm so sorry. It's time somebody brought down Naomi Klein, and there's going to be this podcast.
My most cancelable opinion is that the anti-racist movement has become so concerned with
intellectual property. Whether that's, you know, having beef with POC, because, oh,
that lumps us all in together. Or whether that's saying, okay, well, if we use the slogan,
you can't use the slogan. And how different that was to the ethos of the Black Panther movement.
Black Panther movement is like, you want to call yourself the Yellow Panthers? Amazing.
Like you want to call yourself the White Panthers? Amazing. Whereas we're so concerned with drawing
these lines of separation in between, it's fundamentally liberal. It's liberal in the
sense that liberalism perceives other people always as a threat and an incursion rather than
what are the generative, creative relationships that occur between people.
And obviously, it comes from real injustices, right? I mean, it comes from real examples of
intellectual theft of Black women not being credited for intellectual contributions to
movements for many, many decades. So I don't think it's just liberalism. I think it's also
a needed corrective. It has been a needed corrective. And I think it is also a needed
corrective to talk about how we want ideas to spread. But I think even this idea of
credit is a tricky one because credit matters when you have a commodity and it's either about
your place within an attention economy or a literal economy where people make money from
doing these things. And of course, the appropriation of this stuff is wrong and it's bad. But to simply
receive credit is not the same as what is the basis of a movement which can really build.
And I'm not just talking about Black Lives Matter. I've also very much seen it with the
relentless focus on cultural appropriation from South Asian radicals in this country. And I go,
yes, I get it. I do get it. But okay, everyone recognizes that Henna comes from us. What next?
Like, why is recognition the thing we're striving for?
Well, you know, I think it comes down to people just trying to make a really screwed up system
work for them. And I think that if there is a genuine revolutionary project that has any
prospect of transforming this system to a more egalitarian one, there might be more openness
to challenging these ideas around intellectual credit and so on. But within capitalism,
someone's going to make money off of it. Somebody's going to get the credit. Somebody is going to be
on the cover of the magazine. And I think a lot of people feel like if they're not fighting for
it to be them, it's going to be somebody else. And they're right. They're absolutely right.
So I guess it all comes down to building that revolutionary project because without it,
I think we're just going to be fighting for our scraps.
I know this is a really big gear shift. But so Jewishness is really central to this book. It's
one of the threads which connects you and the other Naomi. It's central to the anti-Semitic
conspiracism of the globalists are doing this, that and the other. But then you also talk about
this doubleness of being both victim and perpetrator within the context of Israel. So
I guess can you talk me through how doubleness and the motif of the doppelganger brought you into
this sort of analysis of Jewishness, Zionism and Israel? Yeah. I came across a paper by
Caroline Rooney who's here in the UK who talked about Israel as a country with doppelganger politics
by which she meant that it was a nation that had like a fundamental split where the Israeli Jews
projected all of everything that they could not bear about themselves onto the Palestinian
and other. And then there's also like this sort of doppelganger at the heart of
the Zionist project, which is that of the new Jew versus the old Jew. So this is something,
you know, I quote Philip Roth, as I mentioned, with all apologies to my 20-year-old self who
hurled a Philip Roth book across my dorm room and vowed never ever to read another book by Philip
Roth. We will say things at least. But, you know, every, I was reading so much doppelganger
literature and I just kept seeing references to Operation Shiloh because 1993 doppelganger
masterpiece and I ended up finding it to be really, really useful because, you know, in part because of
that ridiculous seriousness thread, but also the ways in which it really engages with this sort of
the unshakable ethnic double, right, which is the double that is projected onto
people who are not white and Christian around the world, which is the double that isn't the
brand that you create that you think you have in the world. It's the one that other people create
and project onto you. So for Roth, it's Shiloh, who is the doppelganger of all Jews projected onto
them. But then it becomes, you know, a book about Zionism, limited in its critique, but
still interesting and he's very fascinated with the figure of the new Jew as a doppelganger of
the old Jew, of the diasporic Jew. So what's the new Jew and the old Jew? Well, the new, yeah. So
this is a project, a Zionism is to create a new Jew who is the, you know, muscle-bound, gun-toting,
strong Jew. Knows Krav Maga. I mean, there's, you know, there's, there's, there's, and I, you know,
I think that the critique from somebody like Roth, who is like a little, you know, it's an anti,
it's a kind of an, like an anti-literary, you know, you with your books who couldn't save
yourselves from, from the Holocaust, we new Jews will protect you. And so it's this, there's,
there's, there's that doppelganger in Israeli culture, old Jew, new Jew. And there's a way
that it blames the victims of the Holocaust for the Holocaust, mostly unspoken, sometimes spoken.
And, and then there, and this is what Rooney was writing about, the way
Israel settler colonialism is a doppelganger, becomes a doppelganger of the ways Jews were
treated in Europe, not, she's not talking about the Nazis and neither am I, but she is talking
about the pogroms, the ghettoization, all the enclosures, the second-class citizenship,
the apartheid system that, that is in Israel. You know, this has been some of the more
controversial parts of the book. It's a little bit of a twist for people who thought that the
book was just going to be about, you know, feeling superior to Naomi Wolfe and Steve Bannon.
Yeah, suddenly we're in Gaza.
So what happened when you were in Gaza?
Oh, that's a story. Yeah. So that's what I mean. So I was in Gaza,
shock doctrine had come out. And, you know, my previous books had been published in Hebrew.
And I'd been approached by some Israeli publishers to publish the shock doctrine.
It had, the shock doctrine has a chapter on Israel and its role in what I call the disaster
capitalism complex. And it looks at the export of all of these Israeli spy and surveillance
and military tools. So I wanted the book to come out in Hebrew, but I also had written in
support of BDS and was in contact with the BDS committee. And so we tried to figure out a way
for shock doctrine to come out in Hebrew and Arabic at the same time with an activist publisher
called Andalus that doesn't exist anymore, that up to that point had only published Arabic writing
and translation. So, you know, I launched the book on the West Bank. You know, we did a lot of
things to make, you know, to as much as possible have a book come out in Hebrew that did not
support the Israeli state. It's complicated because most arts organizations get money and so on. But
anyway, we did our best. It was blessed by the BDS committee. But before I went on the book tour,
I wanted to go to Gaza to do some reporting. And yeah, so there's a scene in the book about
coming back from Gaza through the era's checkpoint. We had no trouble getting into Gaza because at
that point, they didn't know who I was at the checkpoint going in. But coming back because
I had done a press conference in Gaza and talked about BDS and talked about, I mean, there had
just been a huge assault on Gaza a few months earlier. When we came back through the checkpoint,
they were waiting for us. And there was this really bizarre experience that we had where first
they kept us waiting for about three hours. It's very strange because there's no way to
communicate. There's just the wall. You're on the other side of the wall and there's surveillance
cameras everywhere. They see us. We're the only ones there and they won't open the gate to let us
through. But if you are there past curfew, then you can't get through and you're in this sort of
weird zone where there's nothing there. So finally, the door opens. We go through the
security check and then they take my husband, Avi, and there's a guy who introduces himself as
Ares from Ares. So you've got another doppelganger. Another doppelganger. They just follow me
everywhere. So Ares from Ares takes Avi upstairs and he meets General at his corner office.
And he gets this huge speech where they tell him that look out the window and there's a bunch of
like tanks doing a security exercise. And they say, do you know how close we were to sending
in ground troops to Gaza? Which at that point, there had never been ground troops sent into Gaza
since the blockade. And we were going to send them in to rescue you. You have no idea how much
danger you were in. We were in no danger. I mean, we were hosted by Palestinians,
like we were invited. And they said, we see everything, we hear everything,
and we were going to reinvade Gaza to rescue you and get your woman under control. Literally,
they said that to Avi about me, like we know what she's been saying. And we don't care what you say.
Because you're Jewish and we will rescue you. So they were saying, you have a doppelganger.
Just as the rest of the world only sees you as Shylock, we only see you as Jews. We don't care
about your politics or what you say. We will rescue you from the Palestinian enemy, even though you
think that they're your friends. It was just the biggest mindfuck you could possibly imagine.
And it's also deeply manipulative. It's like there'll be a ground invasion of Gaza.
Because of you and your supposed solidarity with these people, we're going to invade them
even more than we ordinarily do. I never told that story. I mean, I wrote about what we saw in
Gaza and reported on the aftermath of that invasion. There have been so many since. But I
never told the story of that particular gaslighting mission that they did with eras from eras.
And but to me, it's so, you know, I shared the story in the book and thanks for asking,
nobody's asked about it. Because we've got, we've got, I call it zionism
derangement syndrome in the UK, where if you try and make any arguments critical of zionism,
it gets pulled into Corbin and Semitism, the left. And it's just.
Well, there's something about the offer that they were saying, you know, that is really the,
you know, it's the, it's, it's, it's not just Israel that's making that offer. I think the UK
is making that offer with its militarized borders. It's, it's, you know, it's take the guns, take
the walls, take the prisons. We will keep you safe from the hordes. And, you know, when I look at
my doppelganger, you know, she seems to have thrown in with that ideology. She's got the guns and
she's, you know, talking about the wars on the border. And, you know, I think as the climate
crisis accelerates and the wars never end and poverty deepens, I mean, this is going to be the
offer to all of us. And we have to, we have to decide if we want to take the offer.
Yeah. I mean, I've got one, one last question, which is when so many different aspects of your
identity are attached to fucked up things. And in your case, it was, you know, your Jewishness
being invoked by this general to commit an appalling act of violence. But, you know, in my case, it
might be my womanhood being invoked to stomp on trans people or being a Westerner and what that means
for all of the, you know, extractive exploitative activities of, you know, Western corporations
and the things which fuel my own consumption. Yeah. When we're so tied to all of these things,
is it possible to have a stable identity? And is it even desirable to have one?
I think we are in a moment that we simply cannot bear as individuals. It's just too hard. I mean,
we are in this simultaneous unearthing, unveiling of, you know, unbearable networks of suffering
that sustain the lives of the privileged outside of the Shadowlands. You know, and I think COVID
acted as a unearthing and as a revealer of all the people who hold up our world and allowed
those of us who were able to be locked down to be locked down and bore all of the risk. And I think
that generated a certain kind of derangement that is part of what I'm tracking in the book
of a lot of privileged people claiming that they were victims of genocide and apartheid
and Jim Crow and slavery and all the crimes of the last 500 years were projected onto a vaccine app
or, you know, being made to wear masks. But I don't think any of us are really looking,
are really able to look at the, just the unbearability of our complicity in these,
these past, future and present networks of suffering, extinction,
dispossession, we can only bear it together. You know, we can only bear it in the sturdiest,
widest possible coalitions. Like I quote Ariel Angel, the editor of Jewish Courants at the end
of the book saying, you know, we're going to need each other. And part of recognizing that we will
need each other in the face of surging fascism and climate breakdown means that we are going to have
to get over ourselves a little bit, you know, whether it's our individual brands or our individual
identity groups, which does not mean erasure, which does not mean annihilate the ego,
or dissolve into some mush of no difference that pretends that we are all coming into coalition with
the same risks, debts and needs. No, but we will need each other. And we, you know, I do believe
that every, you know, victory for the fascist right is also a story of division, sectarianism,
failure to make a strategic alliances on the anti-fascist left. And we're on the,
we are on the knife edge. We are just on the knife edge. We can't afford to destroy each other.
Just a little sprinkle of ego death, just a tiny, like a little salt bay sprinkle.
Yeah, find your doppelganger and just, just get humble if you can.
Yeah, snog your doppelganger if you can. Naomi Klein, thank you so much for joining us.
Thank you, Ash. This was really, really deep. Thanks.
Well, have fun at the BBC.
This is a good way to start.
I'm Naomi Klein, and I am at Navar Media right now, having just done a wonderful in-depth interview.
And this is why I love Navar Media. And I listen regularly and watch to find out what the hell is
going on in the UK. It is so critical to have independent media that we can trust that goes
deep on the issues and also lets people stay up on the day-to-day twists and turns. It's going to
be especially important for your next election. So I'm incredibly grateful that Navar Media exists,
and it exists because people support it. So make sure to support Navar Media. We need
left institutions, and that means that we have to support them when they're doing such great work
as Navar Media is. Thanks.
