The conservative view is just that like the winners of the winners and the losers of the losers
and that's fair because that's based on competition and competition is its own
process of fairness. For those on the left it's like well we should make sure that if people do
lose they're protected in some way and that actually they have more opportunities to become
winners and that the winners pay a little bit more to make sure that society works a little bit
better. Whereas the Marxist or the socialist view should be there shouldn't be winners and losers
and people that make the rules. It should be we all make the rules together. It's a completely
different way of organising society. The game is rigged. That's something that people on the
left have been saying for a decade obviously a lot longer but that particular phrase really goes back
to the mid-2010s and for a long time it felt like if you said it you were shouting in to avoid nobody
was listening. Fast forward to 2023 and virtually everyone in politics on the left or the right
accepts that the game is rigged. That a tiny elite benefits while the rest of us lose from the status
quo. The establishment does so well at the cost of everyone else if you will. But even though
there's agreement about the game being rigged that doesn't mean there's agreement on what to do next.
Clearly people on the left and on the right have very different proposals going forward.
And I think the reason why there is a gap between those two sides is basically because
there's a different reading on what power is, who has it and how things change. Now for people on
the left financial and economic power is directly translated into political, social and cultural
power. It might be comforting to think we live in a meritocracy or that political representatives
are there on merit and they represent the will of the people but fundamentally they're there to
reflect vested powerful economic interests. And that is exactly why we got Grace Blakely on for
today's show. Grace is an economist, she's a writer, she also does loads of media stuff from
talk TV to the BBC and Jeremy Vine. She's a fantastic young economist and her interests have
always focused on finance and the kinds of power which emerges from it. Grace, welcome to downstream.
Thank you so much for having me. I have been waiting for this conversation for so long.
I have missed you very, very much too. It's been a while.
It's been a really long time. It's been a really long time.
I feel like I haven't really seen that much since Covid.
Yeah, well I mean I went away. You went away, you've been writing a book?
Yeah, I wrote a book. I went away to write a book partly although I didn't spend that much time
writing my book. I spent a lot of time just wandering around Central America, surfing,
making trouble. And yeah, I got back like two months ago and now here I am, back in the Malay.
And you were obviously my first priority. Yeah, number one call.
Of course.
Navarro Media first. Exactly.
The Today program, second. You're obviously very left-wing.
Obviously. So I've been told.
Yeah, you're obviously very left-wing in terms of your economic commitments.
But you're a well-spoken Oxford graduate from Basingstoke, from the home counties.
What happened between you being a fresh-faced Oxford graduate who went on to work at KPMG
and then having the kinds of political economic commitments you have now?
Was it something you had as a young person?
Yeah.
Did they intensify when you entered the labour market?
Was there a moment of intellectual revelation?
How does this trajectory look?
I think it's a combination of a lot of different things.
So it does kind of go back to when, it definitely goes back to when I was growing up
because I'm obviously from a posh, well-off background.
But my mum grew up on the council estate in Basingstoke and her dad was a hardcore communist
trade union organiser for the TGWU.
He was going over to Russia.
We had little busts of Lenin in the house.
My uncles are called Karl and Keir, both with a K,
properly into the whole interleftism from a very young age.
And my mum kind of took those values definitely along with her.
She had also like, she was the first in her family to go to university,
went to Cambridge, had a terrible experience of Cambridge because everyone was like,
you know, treated her terribly because they were all, she was like,
I arrived and everyone was like, oh, what school did you go to?
And she was like, I went to a comprehensive in Winklebury and they were like, what?
So kind of that, I think consolidated her left wing values and my dad ended up just kind of
falling into that sort of sort of field as well.
They ended up doing things like, you know, they traveled around the world
and did the Nicaragua solidarity campaign and eventually ended up doing very boring
kind of professional things.
No offense mum dad, I love you, doing kind of boring professional executive coaching
and that sort of stuff, but retained those like left wing values
and always raised me along those lines.
I mean, if they hadn't, my granddad was still there all the time and he would have been like,
what are you doing?
Like, what are you talking about?
So I was always like really into politics.
We had a very political household.
I did things like, you know, I wrote for the new statesman, right?
That was something that I did like three or four years ago, maybe a bit more than that
five years ago.
And when I was like 14, I had a letter published in the new statesman talking about like,
I can't remember something to do with, you know, the transition from brown to Blair
and like what needed to be done.
And that was like, my granddad had that framed and put on the wall.
So there are all these like political values that there were in our household.
But I think the second thing was that I was always in trouble.
So like, I was like, you know, I went to all these fancy schools, but I was expelled from
two of them, suspended like constantly, just was constantly in trouble, like with everyone.
And I mean, it was relatively easy to get into trouble if you go to private school.
I'm not saying that I was like, you know, there's tear away, but like,
I did some pretty crazy stuff.
And like, I never really, never really kind of understood the boundaries of what I
should and shouldn't do always kind of felt like, you know, rules are stupid.
And that gave me that kind of rebellious spirit, I think that went with like the
left wing values.
But I was never like, I was always like, oh, I'm going to, I don't know,
go and like work for the UN or like, I don't know, maybe like be a politician
or something that was fairly like middle of the road.
It was only after I think, you know, so I did this PPE degree at Oxford and it was very like,
you know, I think I learned more in my African studies masters
about like the way the world actually works.
And I did my PPE degree.
So PPE degree was very liberal, very down the line.
Just for people watching, PPE is the, is the degree that all the sort of opinion makers
and politicians in the UK do, from David Cameron to pretty much every major BBC
broadcast journalist, Nick Robinson and whatnot.
Politics, philosophy and economics.
It was created to educate the kind of the people who would be going on to govern the
British Empire, basically, it's supposed to have everything that you need to be inculcated
into the values of like the elite, basically, and all of the kind of reference points that
you would need to be able to kind of converse with, with those people.
So it's, you know, not particularly, it's obviously not radical at all.
It's like very mainstream and other education.
And as I said, I wanted to kind of go work for the UN or doing something in the kind of
international sphere, liberal do goodery stuff.
So I went to do an African studies degree.
So you were a Lib?
Yeah, basically.
Yeah, I would have said I was like a left Lib.
I was like, you know, like, I want to like do things to change the system and make things
work slightly better for, you know, those who don't come out.
Like make poverty history.
Oh, 100%.
I was totally into that sort of stuff.
Yeah, that was like totally my identity.
Yeah, did my African studies masters realized how utterly screwed up that entire world is.
So like I did a bunch of research and like, you know, traveled quite a lot and met lots of
people in the UN and in NGOs and whatever and realized how dark things really are there and
quite how, you know, how when you are in a job that is working to kind of pick up the pieces
from a system that is fundamentally messed up at like the very highest levels, it can only
create kind of disillusionment.
So then I was like, right, okay, well, we need to change the system.
I started thinking about politics.
I initially was like, I'm going to go organize for the greens.
And I did a little bit of that when I was in my masters.
Then the 2015 election came around.
And I think that was when a lot of stuff started changing for me.
I remember like sitting in an Oxford college when Ed Miliband lost.
I hadn't even voted for Ed Miliband.
I had voted green and just being like, what is going on?
Like how can we be, how can this happen?
Like how can we be going down this road of just like more and more austerity when it's
just so obviously wrong?
And, you know, the whole ideology that it's built on is so obviously kind of corrupt.
And then Corbinism happened.
It was actually my boyfriend at the time who was like, oh, have you heard about this Corbin guy?
He'd be, he seems quite cool.
Wow. So this guy is actually a pivotal figure in your career, personal, political trajectory.
Who knows, maybe it would have happened anyway, but he was like, you should look into this.
I looked into it and then I was like, this is amazing.
Started going on to all the events and like getting much more involved in the Labour Party.
And then that was kind of when I was like, right, okay, this is what I want to do.
Like I want to get involved in this world, see, you know, how I can be useful.
And that started by doing policy.
So after I'd left university, I had this stint at KPMG.
And yeah, that was working in their like management consulting,
arm doing kind of public sector work.
And what was that?
What was that like?
It was interesting, right?
Because like the projects I was working on at the time, it was in Greater Manchester
and they were kind of doing like loss leading work.
So the idea was that you would, you know, not make huge amount of profit.
You would work with these new combined authorities and try and like develop to product,
develop product that you would sell elsewhere.
So at the time it felt quite interesting.
I was like learning a lot about it was all to do with service delivery.
So it was, you know, like everything, you know, there was a lot of work on like people with
complex needs and combined dependency and how people who interact with lots of different services,
like, you know, children's services, social care, the criminal justice system,
all these different sorts of things, like how you needed early intervention to kind of deal
with those those sorts of issues.
And obviously it was all couched in the language of like how you could save money.
But me coming into this is like completely green.
I was like, wow, this is fascinating.
Like this is how things actually work.
Eventually I kind of realized, oh no, we are literally developing a product that we are
going to be selling to, to other combined authorities as a way of making money.
And it just kind of started feeling more and more alienating.
Also, I wasn't very good at it.
I was good at the research, like all the kind of looking into like what works and how we
should be designing these things.
But I wasn't very good at selling.
And I wasn't very good at client interactions or any of that sort of stuff.
I don't really know why probably for the same reasons I kept getting expelled.
But anyway, I then left, decided I wanted to go do think tanky work so I could go into policy,
maybe from their politics.
Started, I had a great time.
That was when, you know, I met you guys and started, yeah, like doing more media,
doing more writing, like getting much more involved in like actual organizing.
And it was just kind of like, you know, all uphill with a lot of downs as well from there.
Did you ever subscribe to Tatler?
I never subscribed to Tatler.
No, never.
You've never, have you ever read an issue of Tatler?
I don't think so.
I'm not saying that I've never read like a fancy magazine.
I'm pretty sure I've read like Vogue or whatever, but I was never really that, that into it.
Calls and hounds.
No, I'm not that posh.
But are there any people in your sort of, you know, your ambit, like your, your parents' friends?
Oh, I mean, at Oxford.
Yeah, I met some of the like poshest people that you could imagine at Oxford.
Like just unimaginable amounts of not just like wealth, but also privilege.
And, you know, when I went to Oxford, I was like, because, you know, I went to these private schools,
but ended up going to City Farm College, like, you know, obviously had friends who
went to state school, that sort of stuff.
I was like, oh yeah, I'm really posh.
And then I went to Oxford and I was like, oh my God, I am like a commoner to these people.
They're all being like, where did you, like, where did you go to school?
Eaton, Cheltenham Ladies, Dullich, like all, they all knew each other.
That was like this massive group of people that all knew each other.
He was some of the people that go to those schools.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly.
Family was the first in their family or whatever.
It is amazing.
It's crazy.
I remember once I was reading something in the FT, this was,
it was just, no, it was the Telegraph in fact.
And it was like a, it was like an etiquette guide for Christmas.
And you shouldn't cheers and tap glasses.
And the author of the article said that was
LBC, little bit common.
So you said it like, especially with champagne glass, you shouldn't tap, right?
What you should do is when you say cheers, you just lift the glass, cheers.
Yeah.
And then, but the idea of like touching is just like very vulgar.
That's hilarious.
And I'm like, these people live in a dearful world.
So true.
I once heard someone say at Oxford, I think they were discussing like,
someone got a new boyfriend and they were asking lots of questions.
And one of the responses was, oh, don't worry, darling.
He's PLU, which was people like us.
Very, very concerning.
Yeah.
I mean, it's, it's weird.
Like it was funny because I spoke to my mom about this, about the same experience that
she'd had.
She actually came overtly from like a really working class background going to Cambridge
and just found the whole experience so utterly alienating that it was like
outside of her comprehension.
Whereas for me, I was kind of like, oh no, I see where I fit in, in this hierarchy.
And I'm like here.
And then there's all these people who know each other who are like here.
And there's this like, I mean, I remember at the time reading all of these like novels,
like, you know, like Fitzgerald and Evelyn Moore and stuff about like class systems in
the US and the UK.
And being like, oh my God, I suddenly understand this, this like from the outside looking in
at this world of like glitz and glamour and everyone seems so like put together and very
aware about how to play with power, like in friendship groups and like, you know, in
the world more generally.
And it's really like, it really hooks you.
It's really interesting to notice that happen.
So yeah, I definitely kind of, you know, experienced that when I was Oxford, but never
kind of never really fully inside, never really fully outside, I guess.
Do you think the left struggles to explain that?
Like, I feel for much of the public, you know, I say I'm middle class because I like
John Lewis and drink M&S gold brand tea.
And I think most of the public was, you know, I joke with my wife and I say, you know,
if the waitrose near us closes, we're moving.
Right.
And I say it mockingly and I, but I view those as like benchmarks of middle class,
like the nice things.
But I think for most of the public, that's the case.
They, they, they can't comprehend there is this quite big layer of people who
culturally, economically, socially, just in every single aspect of their lives,
they inhabit a different thought world.
Yeah.
Do you think the leftist fails to communicate that a bit?
The way I think about this, and this is actually potentially going to be something
I'm going to be writing about in the future, is that, you know, we,
we think of ourselves as living in this society, right?
That is characterized by, you know, winners and losers.
And we debate the boundaries of that game and how, you know,
the winners should be taxed and how the losers should be supported.
And everyone has a sense of where they sit in that game, you know, whether or not
they're like doing well, whether or not successful, attractive, whatever.
And we're all kind of competing on with one another to, to succeed.
And we have a view as to who's above us and who's below us.
But there's actually a set of people who are outside of the game altogether,
because they're basically the ones that make the rules.
And they are neither winners nor losers.
They are in a very real sense, kind of much more in control of actually the game itself
and how it works.
And a lot of our educational and cultural systems, a lot of the educational and cultural
systems that these people come through are designed to make them comfortable
with the idea that they are the ones that are in control and that set the rules.
So you'll often hear, and I have heard this from, from these people,
this idea that they are the kind of, you know, by default, the benevolent rulers of society,
whether that is just because they are genetically better or it's just because they happen to have
been, you know, inculturated into this, this particular way of being that allows them to
be the kind of guardians of society.
They do see society as divided into between people who kind of make the rules
and those who just play the game.
And I think that's probably something that maybe most people have an,
like some sort of intuitive sense of, you know, the idea that we can, you know,
vote different people into power, but nothing's ever going to change.
But I don't really think it's something that we talk about overtly.
And I don't want it to sound kind of conspiratorial because I'm not saying that,
like, you know, we live in a world that's kind of governed by a few people sitting in a room
deciding who gets what.
But obviously, the institutions in which we, that kind of govern most of the interactions
that structure our lives, whether that's kind of corporations or political institutions,
public services, educational institutions, there are people in positions of power and
authority. And as our societies become more concentrated, as larger institutions have come
to govern much greater areas of social life, the people in positions of authority within
those powerful institutions have gained more control over what happens for everyone else.
So it's all about power.
Let's get into the nuts and bolts.
Sure.
And this is a talking point which the left hasn't really focused on.
I feel like we've left a lot of it to the right.
And often, you know, there's this thing which is, oh, if something's right-coded and the left
has to think and say and do the opposite.
I love that because it's always really fun, like, going on TV and people will be like,
right, we've brought you on to have this perspective on this subject.
And you come in and you're like, well, actually, the entire way that you've structured this
dichotomy is completely wrong.
The short circuit, don't they?
Yeah.
So I want to talk about ESG.
ESG, for those who don't know, stands for environmental, social and governance.
It's meant to represent the standard for investors to monitor how socially conscious
a business is.
For some, that has made it a kind of awoken a scorecard for investors.
You know, ESG is like woke top Trumps for various companies.
What's your read on ESG?
Maybe we should actually, maybe it would be helpful to kind of go back to that kind of
trichotomy I set up a second ago, which was like winners and losers and people who make the rules.
I think left and right often divide themselves based on different ideas about how we should
treat winners and losers.
Right.
So, you know, the right wing view would be like, we live in a free market society and
the only thing that should matter is which company makes the most profits.
So we shouldn't be forcing them to consider things like environmental, social,
governance, objectives, whatever the market decides who wins.
Or as the left would say, well, that's fine.
But actually the market kind of doesn't account for all the different factors that we do want
to account for.
We need to change the rules a bit to make sure that, you know, if you win, you don't do it at
the expense of other people or if you lose, then you're not kind of just left to starve or die or
whatever.
So we need to make the game, you know, played a slightly different way.
And, you know, that's basically the difference, I suppose, between kind of neoliberalism and
more progressive liberalism.
The thing I think that socialists should come in and say, or maybe we don't often, we always do
this, is actually to point out that the entire game is being played based on rules that have been,
you know, developed by someone else and in which, you know, working people are always going to be
designed to lose.
So ESG, the right will say, no, you want competitive markets.
This makes markets as competitive.
The left would say it helps us to deal with, you know, negative externalities that actually
make society more progressive.
And Marxists would come in and look at this and say, well, this is a way of shoring up the
legitimacy of a capitalist system that is fundamentally not based on free markets, is
actually based on the governance of society and control over society by huge corporations that
are able to exploit their workers and wreck the planet without any, really, any kind of pushback
from the state whatsoever, because the state itself is also largely influenced by those
corporate interests.
So ESG comes in as this kind of auto critique by the people who govern the system as a way of
saying, look, we know what we're doing and we're responsible and you can trust us to be able to
look after this system in your interests.
But there is absolutely no way that we will cede any of that control to you.
We will look after the system maybe in a more enlightened way.
We will consider some of the things you're talking about, but you're not ever going to
be able to actually be in the rooms where we make the rules.
And I think that's like what should differentiate a Marxist and a socialist from a progressive,
liberal or whatever, is actually saying, we don't just want to make the system a bit fairer,
we want to give people power.
Just on ESG as well, it's a huge money making opportunity.
So BlackRock's ESG Aware Fund charges fees five times higher than its core S&P 500 fund.
And ESG investment funds have 43% higher fees than conventional investment funds.
So they make more money, we'll talk about the kinds of companies involved in this,
they make more money around these products.
And like you say, it also fulfills a really important political role.
But it also means there's tremendous power that's now being
concentrated amongst the financial elite.
And like you say, before that was a concentration of economic and political power
based upon the idea that greed is good.
Gordon Gekko is the kind of main character archetype of the 1980s.
That was what our society was.
It does feel like in the last, well, citizens of the global financial crisis,
as Anglophone elites are trying to resurrect political legitimacy, consent,
they're having to change that archetype a bit more to caring enlightened characters.
Now, do you think they've been compelled to do that?
Is it just them trying to exploit an opportunity from, you know,
do good in liberals who would like them to be like that?
Where's it coming from?
Because it does get that criticism from the right as well.
And they would say, I don't agree with it.
I don't agree with the point behind it.
But it's coherent, which is, well, look,
private enterprise is designed to first look after customers,
secondly, look after shareholders, thirdly, look after workers,
forget the rest of this crap.
So where has it come from?
And why has it become so prominent in the last, say, 10 years?
So to understand where it comes from, you know, I think we need to look,
we've been talking kind of, well, I've been talking kind of
quite abstractly in terms of structures and like, you know, and classes and that sort of thing.
We need to think about how the people in positions of power, you know,
who have the capacity to kind of make decisions that will affect everyone else,
what they're thinking about when, you know,
developing and implementing things like ESG.
Now, it is obviously very clear to anyone with eyes that capitalism has,
at least since the global financial crisis, if not really since 1980s,
been suffering from both a crisis of kind of legitimacy and really kind of a crisis
which is pitting capitalism against democracy on the one hand,
and also a crisis of kind of reproduction of accumulation, basically,
in which it is becoming harder and harder to produce the stuff that we rely on to survive.
And that, you know, capitalism relies on for constant growth,
either because of, you know, climate imperatives, or because of collapse in productivity,
or because of, you know, escalating inequality,
all these sorts of reasons that play into the kind of long-term
productivity crisis that we've had and the associated financial
breakdowns that have come alongside that.
So there's this kind of legitimacy crisis and a kind of, you know,
a crisis of the reproduction of capitalist productive relations and social relations.
And if you are a member of, you know, the ruling class, let's say you are, I don't know,
Larry Fink, and you're the head of BlackRock, one of the world's largest asset managers,
and you, as, you know, the head of one of the world's largest asset managers,
have a portfolio, well, you don't have a portfolio, you will have a portfolio yourself,
but you govern a company that has lots of portfolios that invests in asset classes across the whole
economy that has a stake in pretty much every, you know, large firm in, say, the S&P 500,
just by virtue of the fact that you're so big, you have to be that diversified.
And it is almost all of them, right?
Yeah, yeah, totally, yeah. You're thinking, right, well, if my business is going to continue to grow,
I need not just, not the kind of, you know, the dynamics that you might want if you're a hedge fund,
which is lots of, you know, massive up and down, ups and downs, lots of crises that can be exploited
to, you know, make use of arbitrage strategies and make clever quick trades that are going to
make you money in the short term. You want really kind of long-term stable growth, you want
corporations to grow, you want corporate profits to grow, and you want people to be able to accumulate
savings that they can invest in your assets. And more generally speaking, you know, you want
a society that is characterized by relative stability. And that is true across a whole range
of industries, it's true across, you know, the political class in general, who if you were to
look at it from a kind of Marxist perspective would see their role as not just like maintaining
individual capitalist enterprises, but actually maintaining the broad conditions that allow
capitalist social relations, capitalist reproductive relations to reproduce themselves.
Then, yeah, you know, you are going to be worried about things like climate breakdown,
because that threatens, you want all of those levels, it threatens the legitimacy of the system
because people are going to get scared, people are going to die, it threatens the,
the relations of production, it threatens, you know, the relationships between
different social classes. I mean, if you look at the global economy and the way in which
climate breakdown is like to affect different parts of it, we're going to see breakdowns in
global supply chains of the kind that we saw during the pandemic much more frequently.
And it threatens the kind of very foundations of accumulation, just because like it's going to
be harder to get things out of the ground and like create the crops that people need to survive and
all those different sorts of things. So that's one argument, which is that ESG is about like a
long-term rational self-interest on the behalf of the capitalist class. But the companies with
the best ESG scores in America, and I find this fascinating, and right now it's a right-wing
talking point, but on this, they're correct. The companies with the best ESG scores in America
are Google, Microsoft and the Bank of America. Meanwhile, Tesla, which produces literally,
you know, electric vehicles, and you might agree, I disagree obviously with their labor standards,
and we need to have a conversation about using recycled lithium for EVs, but whatever.
EVs are clearly better. We want more public transport. EVs are clearly better than the cars
that people were producing, you know, 20 years ago and for the century preceding that. And the idea
that the Bank of America has a much better ESG score than Tesla. And that's a right-wing talking
point. And I'm just like, yeah, but they're kind of right. Even if you don't like Tesla,
Tesla has accelerated the adoption of electric vehicles by 10, 15, maybe 20 years. And it's
really accelerated the process for Detroit, car manufacturers all around the world, China.
So the idea that that somehow gets like middling ESG scores, I think it's quite fair to say
something's not quite right here. It's not just about the rational self-interest thing, you know?
Well, I think there's two things, again, going on, which is the rationale behind it. And the rationale
behind any climate policy that a government will implement will come from this, we need to protect
capitalism. Basically, you know, it's kind of the Keynesian idea. Jeff Mann wrote that book that was
like, you know, the Keynesian philosophy is basically like protecting capitalism means
protecting civilization. And there is an argument, you know, that these people will view themselves
as these enlightened, you know, platonic rulers whose job it is to basically make sure that
they have this view over society as a whole and can put in place the, like, the conditions that
give rise to the continuation of capitalism itself. But, and this is the interesting thing,
this is where things actually get interesting. If you're looking at, say, the state as a set of
institutions or, you know, a mechanism of organizing power, it is not staffed by enlightened technocrats
or platonic rulers who can just make policy based on what they consider to be the interests of
society as a whole. They say it is, you know, you ask a politician why they're doing what they're
doing, they say they govern in the general interest. This was Ralph Miliband's famous critique of the
capitalist state and the way that the Labour Party got sucked into it. It was because there's
this idea of state elites as governing the general interest, which is very hypnotic. It's like,
yes, of course, we'll give these people power because they're doing what's good for the rest of us.
But actually, the state isn't that. It's, you know, broadly speaking, as we think of capital,
it's a social relation in the sense that what goes on within the state and the way that state power
is exercised reflects social struggles that take place within society as a whole. That's kind of
abstract. But, you know, you can broadly think of it as like battles that are taking place within
state institutions, whether that's within, you know, the Treasury or any government department.
The players in that battle will be linked to wider groups that will have support from
different, you know, corporate institutions, historically unions, think tanks, basically
different groups that make up constellations of class interests that structure all capitalist
societies. And they will influence state policy, not just in a way that is meant to kind of
protect the interests of their class as a whole, but in a way that is meant to protect and promote
specific interests. So like look at like Biden's climate policies, for example, he comes in and
says, we need to save the planet for all these very good reasons. He's backed by capitalists
like Larry Fink who say, yes, actually, we do need to save the planet for the sake of capital.
And yet, because of the power of these different groups, these different specific interests,
as opposed to the general interests of capital as a whole, you end up getting this hodgepodge of
climate policies, which actively undermine each other in some senses, even though the narrative
is we're doing something about climate change, everyone can see that ExxonMobil still has a
huge amount of power, can still see that, you know, all these like these banks that are funding
climate change still have a huge amount of power. And so you have this weird like, not only like
the weird fact of policies that go against each other, but the weird show of politicians saying
we're doing something in your interest when it's very clear that they're actually acting on
behalf of a very specific interest. Yeah, I think it and it leads to really messy policy. Yeah,
which neither the left nor the right can really understand. So a really good recent example
is this recent house building announcement by Michael Gove. What does it look like? Well,
they're saying that legislative changes, which result really from an EU dictate, of course,
in 2017 have led to fewer housing starts and completions. First of all, that's not true. We
completed more houses in 2018 and 2016, but park that for a moment. The solution, therefore, is to
basically allow people building homes to to have those homes put more crap into local waterways.
That's fine. You know, it's called sediment, but they basically mean effluent and garbage and rubbish
that we flush down our toilets. Now, okay, you would think that's bad if you care about clean
waterways. You might think it's good if you think we're actually building houses are more important.
But here's where it gets really interesting, because it isn't just a regulatory change. They
like to say, we're not going to step back and we're cutting red tape. No, 700 million pounds of
taxpayer money is being spent. How hundreds of millions of pounds are being given to house builders
by the taxpayer, by the state. Hundreds of millions of pounds are being given to private
water companies. Apparently they're private. They pay dividends to their shareholders. And
yet the taxpayers having to pay for stuff here. So what we're doing is we're paying 700 million
pounds to allow some people to stop polluting, some people to start polluting, and apparently
it's so we can build more homes. And you think, hold on, couldn't we just use the 700 million
pounds to build to build the homes? Do you know what I mean? Yeah. But it's just this like, and
it's really messy, chaotic and like screwed up. Yeah. And I think that's a big part of the political
debate right now is why the left and the right struggle to get a handle on anything. And it's
why everybody says, look, nobody could minister anything. And I think like you say, it's because
you have these competing interests and also competing ideas, which because they're not governed
in a coherent, structured way, which they were, let's say until 2008, or if you're being really,
you know, skeptical, you know, maybe the 1990s, it's just a mess. Well, I mean, I think this is
the point, right? Because we've been stuck in politics for such a long time in this
sterile debate between left progressives or liberal progressives and neoliberals or right
wingers. And the debate is basically like, the state needs to do stuff on the left, you know,
the state needs to do stuff, we need to protect people from the markets, the free market is fine,
but it needs to have some regulation over it. And the right saying the free market is good,
state intervention leads to corruption, you know, we need to get rid of like, you know,
nanny state and bureaucrats and all these different sorts of things. And we have the same
debate we've been having for 100 years, and no one's any the wiser. And of course, that's because
we've lost what should be the socialist or Marxist critique of all this, which is that we don't live
in free markets. Not only are the markets that, you know, do exist under capitalism, not free,
but most of our lives are structured by decisions that are made by big corporations, financial
institutions, states, politicians, who are insulated from democratic accountability precisely
because they're in the pockets of big businesses. And what is really missing there is just an
understanding of the way that power actually works. We have these big ideological debates and
that people who do PPP like to have about freedom versus competition versus, you know,
protection. And actually, none of that matters when it's just the brute fact of power that is
being exercised by people who are in positions of authority over everyone else, who basically
like live in a game that has been designed so that they lose. No wonder you get people, you know,
going for these kind of conspiracy theories, which are like, you know, the world is being run
in this one room by like the World Economic Forum. It's like, that isn't true. You can
understand why they think that because there is this like fairly coherent network of institutions
and actors that govern those institutions that whenever a crisis happens, do seem to get together
in a room and say, right, this bank gets bailed out, that one gets to collapse in the pandemic,
this company gets a bailout, that one gets to gets to collapse. And at the same time,
you're being told, oh, we live in a free market. And if you go out and work really hard and
compete in that market and do really well, then you'll come out on top. But also, if the company
that has been exploiting you for 10 years gets, you know, extremely over indebted and needs a
bailout, we'll give them one. But if you get extremely over indebted and need a bailout,
then you're out on the street. Like, of course, it sounds like the system is rigged. You're told
you're living in a free market system. And actually, you live in this, you know, it's like
the iron fist of the powerful versus like the invisible hand of Adam Smith.
Yeah, this was really brought home to me though that I was watching GB News with Darren Grimes.
My regular Saturday viewing. And I was watching because I was about to go on, actually. And I
was preceded by a guy called John Rental, who's this sort of new labor, you know, the Russian
Soviets had a great word for this, ideologist. Yeah, not an ideologue, an ideologist. And PPE,
PPE, the job of PPE, by the way, is to train ideologists of market capital. And he was on
there. And Darren Grimes, and this is what worries me, because Darren Grimes is talking
more sense than John Rental. Darren Grimes says, well, look, there's this massive difference
right now between savings rates and, and things like mortgage rates or credit card debt. So
the base rate of interest 5.25% of the moment, we all know it's been going up for 18 months.
What's the base rate of interest? It's the, it's the, it's the, it's the rate of interest at which
the bank of in and gives money to private banks. Obviously they have to make profits because they're
private enterprises. So they have rates slightly higher right now, their savings rates, I think
the average is about 2.6, 2.7%. The average mortgage is almost 6%, 5.75, 5.8%. So there's
this huge difference, right? So they're basically skimming profits. They're charging far more than
they should be with regards to, you know, if you want to take out debt from them, but if you're
depositing savings, they're not really giving you enough. So it's clearly unfair. Darren Grimes
said that in his own way. And John Rental goes, no, no. And he said, should politicians be doing
anything about this? And by the way, Jeremy Hunt called this a problem. Jeremy Hunt and John Rental,
this Blair ideologist says, oh, there's no problem with this. It's the free market. We
shouldn't be getting involved. Oh, bless him. It's the free market. That's so stupid. It's so
stupid. Like the UK financial system is so far from a free market. It's been like accused of
oligopolistic behavior in like loads of reports going back like years. It's the free market. So
first of all, first of all, first of all, we're talking about monetary policy. So that's set by
the Bank of England is set by like a bunch of people in a room. There's no invisible hand.
They arbitrarily determine what it is. They would say, this is the interesting because
historically they would say, oh, they are just setting the current interest rate to align with
the long-term natural rate of interest, which is set by the market. And actually QE and the
policies surrounding that have kind of done away even with that idea. So it's now become obvious
that actually central banks just set interest rates. There's no natural rate of interest.
But then Darren Grimes says something really interesting. He says, but hold on, you're saying
it's the free market. We bailed out the banks in 2009. That wasn't the free market. And I'm thinking,
oh, God, he's gone in. And John Rental was, no, no, no, no, that wasn't, we made money from that.
It wasn't a bailout. Of course it was a bailout. And it wouldn't fucking exist anymore if we hadn't
used taxpayer money to guarantee their liabilities. They were insolvent. And you know, that's where
I get, and we're talking, and it's really important to disaggregate. Let's say progressive liberalism
from the left, what John Rental is presenting there is progressive liberalism. And it makes no
fucking sense. And the right take from Darren Grimes makes him measureably more sense.
And that's where, as you say, people like yourself come in with something a little bit different.
Well, I mean, this is the point, right? Because there's two ways of responding to that. Once you
kind of, once you peek past the veil of capitalist ideology, once you take, what is it, the red pill,
the blue pill? Are you supposed to take? I can't remember. What is it? They say they've been red
pills. I just know black pill is the really bad one. Okay, whatever. Once you take the pill,
that lets you see how everything works. There's two ways of dealing with that, right? The way that I
think most people learn to deal with that is by just being forced to deal with this deep sense
of powerlessness, right? You peek past the curtain, you see that there are basically structures in
place that mean that even though you're told from when you are very, very young, if you just work
hard and do well, your life will be good, actually, you are playing in a game that has been designed
so that you lose. And you come out of that with disillusionment, with anger, with a sense of,
you know, righteous indignation, basically, which lends itself to the right and it lends
itself to that kind of fascist ideology, that kind of, you know, this is a bit nerdy, but like the
Nietzschean raison-t-amant that feeds fascist movement. Google that. Pause, Google that.
Which basically says like, okay, well, I'm in this system, the powerful control it, I can't touch
the powerful, I'm just an individual. So all I can do is elbow all these people around me out the way
with this knowledge that I have about how the system works in order to get myself on top.
And a step further than that, actually, which you're seeing in some really right-wing movements in
Europe particularly, is just burn the whole thing down. It's like climate change is coming,
immigrants are coming, the end of the world is coming, basically, like let the whole thing burn,
let the elites burn, let the system come crashing down, and let's just build this little island
for the worthy, for, you know, the way we consider our group to be able to stay alive on.
And that is where we're going, because that's the way that individualism responds to that
realization of powerlessness, basically. The other way is the way that we would have historically
is that you would organize as part of a movement of other people who share your interests to change
the system, and actually not even just to change the system, but to bring down the system as it is,
and in the process of bringing down that system, not just allowing everything to crash to the ground,
but constructing new institutions in the process of revolution, really, that are based on different
values, that are based on community, that are based on, you know, collective struggle, that are
based on social solidarity and support, and that allow you to survive whilst challenging
the interests of the powerful. Now, because we live in such a brainwashed, individualistic society,
it's basically impossible for people to imagine what that would look like. Like if you ask someone,
how are you going to, you know, like react against injustice, they'll say, oh, I'll buy a tote bag,
or like, I'll tweet something. Like there's no sense of how you might get involved in a collective
project to actually challenge the structures of the system as a whole. And that's the legacy of
neoliberalism and individualism, that was the very aim of, like, thatcherism, was to destroy our
sense of social solidarity. So I think for the left, the biggest challenge is, yes, firstly,
exposing the fact that the system is rigged, but I think most people know that the system is rigged,
right? Like, this is basically what my forthcoming book is about, it's about all the ways in which
the system is rigged. It's called Vulture Capitalism. Vulture Capitalism, corporate crimes,
backdoor bailouts, and the death of freedom. The death of freedom? Yes, I know. Well, that's
going to really go down one in the universe. I know, I know. I can see Tucker Carlson saying,
the death of freedom? By a Marxist. And yeah, so that's kind of what that book is about. It's
basically about all the ways the system is rigged and the beginnings of kind of how we could think
about building something new. But I think the real challenge is actually speaking to this nihilistic,
individualistic, conspiratorial, like, resentful response to that realization with a politics
of hope rather than basically like a politics of death. So true. Like, I think one of the,
I thought in the second half of the 2010s, it was a huge win for the left that, you know, we would,
you know, we'd go on the radio waves and on TV, 2017 election. And we'd said, the system is rigged.
And, you know, we were like, wow, so powerful, Bernie kind of vibes. It was working, you know,
Labour increased their vote by 10%. You think there is momentum here towards a different kind
of politics. And I remember talking to Jake Berry, who's a Tory MP, and he talked about, you know,
what was the line they had for Theresa May? Strong and steady. Strong and stable. And then I said,
she's not a strong woman. I said, she's strong against the weak and she's weak against the
strong. You exploit, you exploit the weak and you get on your knees in front of the powerful.
So that ain't strength, my friend. And he was like, you know, inverting that little thing.
Anyway, so we thought that was like a moment where we were really cutting through with it.
And like you say, that's now the common sense of everyone. Everyone says the system is rigged.
It's only like these 5% of like, Libs, but like, who are all in the media. And like,
they're the only ones who don't say the system's rigged. Everybody, everybody says the system is
absolute. They might not be, you know, angry, but they might be saying like, look, for now,
I'm doing okay. You know, I'm managing, which is many people, right? I'm not saying they're all
ready for revolution. This is for like, everything was fine before Brexit or everything was fine
before whatever. Like if we could just go back to normal, sensible politics, I don't want to
have to think about politics anymore. I'm politically homeless, that sort of thing.
Yeah, the sort of, you know, your new balance, the rest is politics, listen to the kind of person.
But what I mean, what I want to say is here that you're right, we thought in the latter half of
the 2010s that like, wow, there's this huge political progress for the left to say the system
rigged, people are buying it. There's an elite, an avaricious elite who are screwing the rest of
society. That is now the music coming from everywhere. That was also what Trump said,
right? Frankly, in many ways. And you're seeing it a lot, a lot with the right who have obviously
a very different political message. And like you say, for me, you've got like two archetypes here,
which is like mid 20th century, Nibevan. Okay, you, your, your, your loved one or your sibling,
they have tuberculosis, or they have some, you know, horrendous disease. That's why we need
a national health service, right? Okay, well, something similar in the, in the 2020s in the
United States. Oh, you know, a family member can't afford insulin in the US. Who are they
watching? Andrew Tate. And he's saying it's the matrix out to get you the establishments out to
get you. But what's he saying is the answer. He's saying, get rich, you know, screw lots of women,
work out, you know, get good at fighting. And that's in the absence of alternatives.
That's really alluring for lots of young men. Yeah. No, I totally see that because you're
basically, you know, again, and this is the massive ideological success of neoliberalism,
also, than anything to do with convincing us that, you know, we live in free markets,
is to convince us that we are individual competitors in this big old game. And that
everyone has, broadly speaking, the same chances to win the game, or if they don't,
then they at least have the chance to better their lot in life if they just, you know,
work hard and get to know the rules of the game and exploit their competitive advantage against
the people around them. And that is the natural result of putting market ideology onto every
area of social life, because you come to look at yourself as like a commodity. So you're like,
why, how can I win the game better? I need to, you know, understand the rules and the rules are
hidden. So someone like Andrew, take and show me what the rules are. And then I need to get strong
and powerful so I can beat everyone around me. And then I'll be at the top. And maybe, you know,
half the people are thinking, well, when I'm at the top, then I can do nice things for my family
or like make the system better. Maybe they're thinking, then I can take control. Maybe they're
thinking that I can burn the whole thing down. But everything is structured around the idea that
you need to get to the top, you need to win, you need to beat everyone around you. And only then
can you start to think about social change, which is actually the absolute opposite of how any
social change will happen. It is how you make yourself easy to control basically is by buying
this ideology that you can be a winner in this system, where there are other people who will
set the rules and always shift the goalposts. And where there will always be losers. And where
those losers will largely speaking always be the same people. And probably you are part of that
group that will always be trapped in this constant struggle and that will never really escape. The
only way out of that is to recognize that you are part of a group and that your interests are not
in beating everyone else around you, which is ultimately impossible and you're never going
to be able to do anyway. Your interests lie in kind of creating communities that can work together
to firstly protect each other and support each other, and then actually start to rebel against
the people who are actually in charge. We're going to clip that, put it on TikTok, like
Sigma male music, the real Grace Blakely on the real matrix. It does sound like the matrix.
On the real matrix. Are liberals our people? Are they part of our movement? And I mentioned,
you know, John Rental earlier on saying that, you know, the remark alone, and of course the banks
are doing nothing wrong. We bailed them out. It wasn't a bailout, blah, blah, blah. And the sort
of the formulae political strategy that you hear time after time after time is that the left needs
him to do anything. Right? He's one of our people, you know, the left and people, I don't even think
he's a liberal or whatever, you know, the center, which is very few people numerically, but obviously
has tremendous agenda setting power, inserting more generally. Are they part of our movement?
Are they part of our coalition? Or does the inclusion of establishment liberals within our
coalition actually foreclose the possibility of broader class based politics? You know,
I've got this question here. Do you know, do you think it's weird that the Ford Foundation and
the Rockefeller Foundation have used as somehow advancing progressive courses? You know, I saw
that think tank recently, what's it called? More in common. More in common. We've got more in common.
And they wrote this piece, they had this poll rather, and it showed that if Jeremy Corbyn was
leader of the Labour Party, he would only be, Labour would be one point ahead of the Tories.
And obviously this was being raised showing people, I was like, but hold on, this is a poll
brought to you by like the Rockefeller Foundation and the Ford Foundation. Why do you think people
funded by people like that would ask that question? Ask yourself. And, and it's precisely those kinds
of groups, the sort of liberal NGOs that we have been told, I believed it for a long time. I mean,
you said earlier, you wanted to work in that kind of world. They were part of our coalition. Do you
think that's true or not? I think that there are two questions, one of which relates to do we need
to build a coalition in which the average person who is maybe not that politically engaged, but
probably falls somewhere around the inadvertent commerce centre of the political like spectrum
needs to be involved? Yes. And then what we do with the hangover of Blairism and neoliberalism and,
you know, years of this kind of warped style of public debate that we have had, which is all
of these people who think they're very important, and in some ways are very important and don't
like us. And there are a number of different answers to that. And I think it varies from
person to person. Broadly speaking, I think these people are rudderless. And that's why they are
coming out and saying all of these wild things. You know, they were thrust to power on the back
of a movement that didn't threaten the status quo, which still was kind of covered in this
image of progressiveness and change and hope. And they still see themselves in that sense,
they see themselves as kind of, you know, vanguards of sensible, compassionate politics
who are protecting the centre ground against extremes on all sides, of course, without
realising that the very reason that the extremes have grown more powerful is precisely because
they are in control. But that's, you know, besides the point. The question then is, I suppose,
you know, how can they either be engaged or neutralised? And that rudderlessness is in some
ways an asset, because if we are able to kind of basically build our own movement, which we're
still very much in the process of doing, that can provide the fulcrum around which political debate
is organised, then they have to pick a side. We don't have that power at the moment. We don't
have that agenda setting power at the moment. We are, as the left, as socialists, still in this
kind of confused position with regards to like mainstream political debates, like sometimes
people like me are on TV, but most of the time the issues that we're talking about aren't the
issues that we'd like to be talking about. We have a limited amount of power to actually shape
the way that that process continues. And it is actually those centrists who are in these positions
of authority who are able to kind of set the terms of the debate. If we're going to be thinking about
neutralising or engaging those people in a positive way, basically we would need to have more power
ourselves. And that is the challenge. I think if we're able to kind of build this project back
out, fight back against the narratives that are being pushed by the far right, build institutions
like Navarra that gain some level of agenda setting power, those people then have to start
talking about the things that we want them to talk about. And as soon as they're starting to
talk about the things that we want them to talk about, they then have to pick a side and the
sides are defined by us. Whereas at the moment we're going into their institutions and we are
put into one of these two sides which are defined by them. This is what I was saying at the beginning
about how they'll bring me in and say, you're taking this side of the debate and then be shocked
when I don't argue the line that they want me to argue. So yeah, I think, as I say, co-opt or
neutralise them. There has to be a position from which we can exert authority. And at the moment
we don't massively have that, although it is changing slightly. I think actually the slow
implosion of mainstream media and the growth of online platforms and problems like Navarra,
they are paying attention to that. Whenever I go into mainstream media studios, there's all
panic about how are they going to adapt to the digital age and the BBC, I don't know if you saw
that BBC feedback thing where it's like Radio 4 is losing listeners, what do we do?
That's crazy.
Yeah. So I think there is a sense of they know that they're kind of rudeless,
they know that the questions they're asking don't really attach to conversations that are
taking place in society more generally. But they're still in control of the way that those debates
happen and that's not going to change until they aren't. So I don't really know if that answers
the question. Grace just mentioned organisations like Navarra Media. Yes.
And I want to take this opportunity to say that you can help us grow and you can help us
change the political debate in this country and change politics by supporting our work.
So if you go to navarramedia.com forward slash support, you can make a one-off payment,
you can become a supporter. I think we have 12, 13,000 supporters these days.
You know, I'm from Bournemouth. You could fill the vitality stadium and more with the people
that support Navarra Media. That's great. Why don't you join them and go to navarramedia.com
forward slash support and make a ideally a monthly payment or whatever you can.
You know, our catchphrase back in the day used to be new media for different politics.
And I was thinking about this recently, I didn't come up with it so I can say this,
it's brilliant, right? Okay. Because it's showing a problem and it's showing a solution
and it's showing how to get there in one simple sentence. What's the problem? Politics.
What's the instrument to improving it? Media. How do we get better media to inflect politics?
Us. Yes. And obviously not just Navarra Media, Tribune, Jacobin, innumerable outlets out there,
but I think you're right to say it's probably the lowest hanging fruit in terms of pushing politics
this country left is taking on MSM. And like it's, it's happening whether we like it or not,
that crumbling, it's about, you know, how's it going to fall? How the piece is going to land?
So like I said, if you want it to land in a good way, go to navarramedia.com forward slash support.
I endorse this message. I'm very, I'm very glad you do. You know,
you said earlier on your IPPR. Yeah. I was doing some work with them.
I remember. Good times. I remember. And I remember, we did, I made a video with you.
Some people might not know this, but I don't, I don't just write stuff. I'm also a very bad
videographer. No. I used to sort of dabble in it. And I made a video with you. And I remember
that somebody had like 5,000 followers on Twitter and I was like, what is going on, Grace?
And now how many do you have? Like 180,000 or something.
Still not good enough, but still. I just, I hate, I hate it.
No, but you're such an eloquent voice and you're so informative on, on finance stuff,
which obviously is, you know, is quite hard to penetrate for most people. I think it's obscured
intentionally. Of course. You know, they don't want it to be easy to understand for most people.
And I think, you know, it's great you're finding an audience. Why quickly? Why do you hate Twitter?
You said, don't you hate it? Really, like, you know, all of what I've been talking about so far
has been to do with these ideologies that keep us subjected to control
and that we reproduce inside our heads all the time, right? And so being
on social media and having lots of followers and being on TV and being like successful in
publishing books, it like, we are supposed to be, we are talking often to people who are losing out
as a result of the systems that, which they have no control. And you are speaking from the
perspective of someone who's winning as part of all of those systems. And I see this now.
Do you see yourself as winning?
Yeah, I think so. And I see this now, you know, like the, the, the most kind of
aggressively neoliberal, marketized way that you can look at this, you're gonna get like the
value you have as a human being is to do online dating, right? Because that is a market in a sense.
You know, historically, you wouldn't have a market for partners, you'd have a community,
you'd meet X amount of people over the course of your life, you pick one, you, you know,
you go with them. Now we have this hugely liquid market, which has got loads and loads of people
in it. And the more liquid a market, the better the price mechanism works. So the better you're
able to see, you know, based on the force of supply and demand, what your price, what your value
is in the market. And even though they don't tell you where exactly you sit in that hierarchy,
you can tell by the number of matches you get, or like, you know, the way people respond to you
in that game. And if you are attractive, if you have lots of social media followers, people
are obsessed with social media followers and fame and influence. And if you like have a good job
and you're successful, then you have a high price in that market for human beings for partners.
And I find myself in that position, whilst also, and you know, benefiting from that position,
whilst also really disliking the idea that it is possible to assign a price value to a person
based on these metrics of success over which we have no control. And also having to accept that,
like, according to all of those metrics of success over which we have no control, I'm winning.
Because like, I was born into a relatively well off family in a rich country in a rich part of
the world and went to Oxford and like, played this game well. And it just is, I think,
basically, it poisons you if you identify with it. It poisons you because you start thinking,
I'm a winner. I've come out on top. I'm better in one way or another. And it's not even conscious
half the time. It's kind of unavoidable. It's like the adoption of an attitude that you take
towards what you're doing and the people who are around you. And if you can't take off that identity
and like leave it at the door and be like, that's something that has happened because of the screwed
up way that our society exists and I have it and that's great. And I'm going to try and use it the
best way I can. But then say, I am just a person. I don't have a value that you can correlate with
the number of social media followers I have or the number of matches I get on Ninja. I have,
you know, friends that see me who I am. I have like hobbies and things that I do that have
absolutely nothing to do with that stuff. I am not playing this game most of the time. I'm just
being myself. Unless you can do that, you become your brain melts quickly. What hobbies do you have?
I really like surfing. Okay, so I wanted something more like warhammer or something.
No, I think weightlifting. I think there's,
you know, you were saying about how producers expect you to have formulae,
sort of, because you're on the left, liberal values. I actually have a major critique of
dating apps. Like I genuinely think there's a huge downside to how we're socializing young people
who've never known anything else. So maybe people are a bit younger than you. And I think we need a
proper conversation about it. Yeah. And I'm considering doing an article about this.
You should. Yeah. I mean, I, and I've had this conversation many, many times I've gone on TV
and they expect you as the lefty, you know, oh, should we have our phones be banned in schools?
And I go, of course I should. We should have limits on social media for young people. What are
you talking about? We're literally incentivizing addiction to fund, to fund the world's largest,
wealthiest companies. Of course we should. But like they don't view that as a left-wing position
because they think the left-wing position on everything is, let everybody do everything
that they want. Well, some government too. So like maybe, yeah, we should have, you know,
the government should oversee like, there should be like an inquirer. No, like, no,
I think that there shouldn't really be, I fundamentally think kids below 11,
12 shouldn't have a smartphone. And they certainly shouldn't be allowed in schools. You know,
it's interesting that Bill Gates and Steve Jobs didn't let their children have smartphones
precisely these reasons. But I think dating apps is a really similar thing where, you know, maybe
there's an authoritarian impulse there. I am actually, I am really, and look,
we'll find out in 2030 years time, right? It's like smoking. It's like smoking in the 1950s.
What are the long-term impacts of this stuff? And I think there might be some really big ones
actually. Oh yeah, totally. I think, yeah, unless you can actually, you know, learn to
disaggregate yourself from these, all of these systems that surround our lives. And it's so
prevalent now with the way that we use social media, and with the way that the labor market
is constructed based on, you know, the gig economy and like mini entrepreneurs and stuff.
If you cannot like, learn to take your identity out of these settings where you are being told
that you as a person have a value based on the things that you do, then you will make yourself
miserable and mentally ill. And even if you win, even if you're at the top, you're going to make
yourself miserable. And especially if you lose. This is why I love having an Iranian dad.
Why? Because he, well, maybe it's the same with your parents. He has no idea what I do.
No, my parents know what I do. So he goes, why do you go on TV? Like what you have on YouTube?
How the hell does that work? Don't you have to like, don't you have to work in TV to go on TV?
And I'm like, no, it's like, Christ, he has no idea. He has no, he's not, bless him. He has no idea
what Navarra is. He's like, you're employed. I was like, yeah, there's about 25 of us. We have
like a place in Leeds. No way, no, but it's really grounding. It's great. Because sometimes my wife
goes, oh, it's so impressive. We don't write myself. You know what? My dad literally hasn't got the
first fucking book. It's really useful, like you say, like, so you don't go like, you don't believe
the smoke that, you know, might be blown up around us on the, on the liberal thing. Are they part of
our coalition? So this was a, this was an issue which I thought was really key within that,
which was the Farage debanking saga. Oh, yeah. So this was really fun, actually, because I got to
have the, the only kind of different line, which was, so obviously it was like, he should have
access to a bank account, or, you know, he shouldn't because he's a bad person, liberals versus
progressives, whatever. I was like, Farage says that we live in a free market capitalist economy,
and in a free market capitalist economy, a private bank has every right to make decisions based on
what it considers to be its interests and its profits, and therefore he should have no problem
with a bank deciding whether or not to give a bank account. I personally believe that firstly,
we do not largely live in a free market economy. We live in an economy in which the heads of
private institutions have an immense amount of power to make decisions without any democratic
accountability whatsoever. That isn't very good. And that we should be moving towards an economy
in which we have collective democratic public control over all of our institutions, including
banks, so that everyone gets a bank account, and we all collectively get to make the rules as to how
those bank accounts are administered. And everyone was just like, that doesn't make any sense.
Oh, they just ignored me and kind of carried on talking around the issue.
Well, he, I mean, it was interesting with him was he was saying, because for people watching this
archfake news, he didn't get, he didn't have, he wasn't given a business account where he was,
which was Coots, which is a subsidiary of NatWest, and he wasn't offered a business
account, a bunch of other banks. He was offered a regular, you know, current account, but presumably
Nigel, for our big shot, Nigel, you know, he probably wants to use it in the US when he goes
to support Trump later this year and whatnot. And that wouldn't have been, wouldn't have been
sufficient. And he himself said, you know, until quite recently, we had post office,
and everybody had a right to get a post office bank account. I'm thinking, what, you support,
you support a nationally owned bank, which is going to be the banker of last resort for people
in this country who can't get bank accounts anywhere else. But what I mean, what I suppose
what they would say is, it's an issue of, it's a matter of law. So whether or not somebody should
be able to access banking, should be, should be a matter of civil rights and law, rather than policy.
And it's, this is a big difference now, I think, between like some parts of the left and others.
I think as a civil right, that should be in tried and law. Lots of people liberals think, no, well,
it's, you know, these should be very flexible and one policy can apply here and another policy
can apply there. So what Farage would say is, well, it should be illegal to debank people
below a certain threshold, right? That's what he would say. But like you say, once you get into
that terrain, well, okay, if we're going to talk about the law as a constraint on the free market,
okay, let's have capital control, you could argue for anything, frankly. Do you think that,
do you think they've always lived with those inconsistencies? I mean, the right, the sort of
thatch right, right, or is it sort of becoming more pronounced because now they've got more
exposure, you know, their inconsistencies are perhaps in the spotlight more or was it always there?
There are two sets of inconsistencies that I think are important here, one of which is inherent to
the neoliberal movement and the other of which stems from the necessary alliance between neoliberals
and kind of far right extremists, basically. And the first inconsistency is the inconsistency
with a neoliberal thought, which says that this is an ideology based on kind of the need to promote
human freedom, that accepts that we are all kind of equal individuals playing this free market game.
And the job of a kind of good politician is to set up the rules of that game so that they are
fair, so that, you know, as a society, we think basically that they're fair and such that they
prop up the kind of norms and rules of economics. So we have to have a legal system, basically,
that kind of supports the functioning of the economy and make sure that everyone knows how to
play the free market game fairly, right? So that's the kind of neoliberal idea about what the state
should do. Their critique of the way that the state is, is that it's taken over by vested
interests by bureaucrats who just make policy in the interests of, you know, their little kingdom
building or fiefdom building. And the problem with the neoliberal theory is that they never say,
how do we get from here to there? How do we get from a state that's governed by vested interests to
one that's governed by neutral technocratic enlightened bureaucrats? And of course, we don't.
We just end up with the neoliberal agenda basically being used to push into power people who
veil their naked desire for power with a spiel about the need for free markets and competition,
whereas actually the free market game that they are going to construct and set up will be rigged
in their favor. It's just that the only impetus, the only kind of, the only power that they end up
having is the power to crush people who interfere with the game from a particular perspective. So
you see anti-competition law, for example, in the US being used to break up unions,
but not being used to break up kind of big firms and big banks and stuff. So there's this like,
this inherent problem at the heart of neoliberal ideology, which is its orientation towards the
state basically. It's like the state should be used, state policy and the legal system and law
should all be used to construct this fair good free market economic game. And the fact of life
under capitalism, which has never been a pure free market system, it's always been a system of kind
of private government by capital. And that private government is exercised both within the firm and
over the state as a whole. And there's this kind of what, you know, some theorists have called
this like double truth, what Hayek called actually a double truth at the heart of neoliberal philosophy,
which is tell everyone that we want less state intervention and kind of, you know, a cutting
of red tape and a removal of the state to make space for the free market. And the actual neoliberal
goal, which is creating this apparatus from within the state that supports the functioning of the
free market under the influence of capitalists who are actually rigging that game in their favour.
So this whole like big state, small state thing again, is that that's the
massive biggest lie at the heart of neoliberalism. And then there's the other thing
that even if you didn't have all of that, even if you just accepted the fact that neoliberals
do think there should be this big state, small state, free markets versus state intervention
dichotomy, there's this problem that's come with their from their alliance with the far right,
which is, as I've said, basically composed of people who considered themselves to be
losers or on the verge of losing from the free market economic game and want protections put
in place against people who they consider to be outsiders to preserve what remains of the
spoils of that game for their group. So you have basically the answer between neoliberals who set
up an economy in which people were permanently divided into winners and losers with people
who have ended up losing and now think that we basically need to kind of shit on immigrants
and like, you know, put women in their place in order to preserve their special status within
a game where they feel like losers. And that creates obvious sources of conflict, which we
saw most clearly with, you know, the divide between Johnson's Brexiteers and the kind of extreme
neoliberal libertarian wing of the conservative party that descends from kind of Thatcher.
I think David Graber called it the iron law of liberalism, which is like when government tries
to reduce need for government in this hamfisted way of just like salami slicing public budgets and
so on, they increase the need for government. That's not to say that you come, you know, some
things maybe couldn't be done by the government. Of course, of course, you can have that conversation
and you focus on the things that are really important. So for instance, a pacifist would say
we could spend less on arm spending, for instance. But I think his insight is really interesting.
And it's fascinating what you say about that being a fundamental inconsistency
and contradiction within neoliberalism about here, what you think, the area of values,
here's where you want to get an A can never lead to B. It's like that meme, there's a video of like
Sean Dyson, Pep Guardiola, have you seen this? No. And you've got Sean Dyson, she's going,
keep the ball out of there and that end, put it in the goal and that end. And then you've got
Pep Guardiola saying, we have the inverted right back, we play the false nine, we bring him.
It's like, so you've got two reeds on football, right? One is like very basic Brexit football,
and then there's like, you know, sexy total football, Pep style. And like,
neoliberals love to say, cut the steak, free markets, free people, free government, blah,
and it's like, no, like you end up in the most arcane, we'll do this subsidy here and we'll
cut this here and we'll create this new quanguns, agency, we'll have this and we'll lose money here,
but we'll tax those guys. Like going back to what I said earlier on with this housing policy from
Michael Gove, they'll be allowed to pollute more, but we'll have this change here and we'll give
more money here and taxpayer money can go to this private company here. And even though it's
probably only they still have shareholder dividends, if they don't pay the dividends,
we'll give them money to pay the dividends. Yeah, just just bring water into public ownership
and bring and build some social housing. Like this whole system and the most ingenious thing
about this, right, is that every new piece of regulation creates opportunities for profit
making. Because there's regulatory arbitrage, you can like, you know, use the gaps in existing
regulation to make sure that you're winning against your competitors, because I don't know,
you're like using profit shifting or like other forms of regulatory arbitrage, which basically
just means exploiting differences between laws or gaps in regulation to like create opportunities
for profit. You saw this with the financial crisis, right? Like there was this explosion in
regulation of the finance sector in some ways, especially at the international level going up
to the crisis of 2008. And we're talking about how assets were classified and categorized and how
banks were supposed to value those assets and the way that they were supposed to kind of assess
risk. And actually, that ended up creating opportunities for profit making. It, for example,
incentivize the the parceling up of all these different mortgages into these mortgage backed
securities that looked really safe, because they were supposedly diversified. But which actually
obviously had, you know, within that process, there was this constant risk of kind of massive
catastrophic meltdown. And so that process of setting regulation ended up creating opportunities
for profit making, that also caused the financial crisis. And this is always the case, like whenever
you get a new law, there are ways of exploiting the existence of that law to make money. And
private interest will always do that. It's the same with as well with like, you know,
carbon, carbon credits, the ways that those were set actually ends up making money at the European
level for for some companies when they were able to sell those. So regulation creates opportunities
for profit making. So Labour keeps saying that they'll smash the class ceiling when they're
in government, they'll smash the class ceiling. What does that mean? Well, it depends on whether
or not you are a Marxist or a Liberal. To me, smashing the class ceiling means dissolving
the distinction between the people who own the means of production and those who are forced
to work for a living on pain of destitution by socializing the ownership of and control and
governance of all of the assets that we need to produce the things that we need to survive.
It means dissolving the very existence of class as mediated by ownership, basically.
To a Liberal, it means making sure that the people who start life as losers maybe get to be winners
for a few minutes at some point in their lives. So, you know, the whole Liberal imaginary is about
making sure that rather than actually dissolving the divide between, you know, workers and the
owners of the means of production between capital and Labour, it means making sure that there's
more sortition amongst Labour and maybe the capacity every now and again for some people
within Labour to get into the position of being capitalists. But again, very rarely. So it's about,
yeah, you know, social mobility or whatever. It's not about changing the structure of the system.
There's always going to be winners. There's always going to be losers. And largely speaking,
those winners and losers will be the same people generally pretty consistently throughout
our history, although there will be periods of change and of shift. And the Liberal viewers just
say that change should happen a little bit more frequently. People like us should be in charge.
Exactly. Let's have social mobility. So comprehensive kids like me and on the first
of my family to go to university and I'll not stop tweeting about it. Let's have more people
like me in charge. You know, we did a great interview with Dan Evans and he has a brilliant
critique of social mobility as really a sort of justifying veneer for a dysfunctional economic
social and political system, which also, by the way, increasingly can't even produce any growth
or improved living standards. And like the veneer on that is, sure, we've had zero growth 15 years,
living standards are falling, but I'm the first person in my family to go to university. What the
hell are you talking about? I think this actually comes back to the point that I made at the very
start of this interview, right, about the difference between winners and losers and people who make
the rules, right? Like the conservative view is just that like the winners are the winners and
the losers are the losers. And that's fair because that's based on competition and competition is
its own process of fairness. For those on the left, it's like, well, we should make sure that if
people do lose, they're protected in some way. And actually, they have more opportunities to
become winners and that the winners pay a little bit more to make sure that society works a little
bit better. Whereas the Marxist or the socialist view should be there shouldn't be winners and
losers and people that make the rules. It should be we all make the rules together.
It's a completely different way of organising society.
Grace, on that note, we'll leave it there. When's your book out for people who perhaps come into
you for the first time though? I find it very hard to believe. No, I mean, I'm sure I've been away
for quite a while. I hope that there'll be people who come in for the first time. That's the point
of coming on, I guess. When is it coming out? The 7th of March, I think, next year. Yeah,
so early March next year. And if people want to follow your work, where can they find you?
They can find me at Grace Blakely. Blakely has two E's, EL, EY, on Twitter, on Instagram,
even on TikTok. Oh, wow, TikTok. And you're right for Tribune. You've got a phone there.
And I'm right for Tribune, yes. Great. Well, thank you so much. Thank you.
Thank you.
