I do two things. I design mobile computers and I study brains, and today's talk is about
brains. Yay, I have a brain fan out there. If I can have my first slide up here and you'll
see the title of my talk and my two affiliations. What I'm going to talk about is why we don't
have a good brain theory, why it is important that we should develop one and what we can
do about it, and I'll try to do all that in 20 minutes. I have two affiliations. Most
of you know me from my palm and handspring days, but I also run a non-profit scientific
research institute called the Redwood Neuroscience Institute in Menlo Park, and we study theoretical
neuroscience and we study how the neocortex works. I'm going to talk all about that.
I have one slide on my other life, the computer life, and that's this slide here. These are
some of the products I've worked on over the last 20 years, starting back from the very
original laptop from the first tablet computers and so on, ending up most recently with the
trio, and we're continuing to do this. I've done this because I really believe that mobile
computing is the future of personal computing, and I'm trying to make the world a little
bit better by working on these things. But this was, I have to admit, all an accident.
I really didn't want to do any of these products, and very early in my career I decided I was
not going to be in the computer industry. And before I tell you about that, I just have
to tell you this one little picture of graffiti there. I picked off the web the other day.
I was looking for a picture of graffiti, the little text input language, and I found a website
dedicated to teachers who want to make these, you know, the script writing things across
the top of their blackboard, and they had added graffiti to it, and I'm sorry about
that. So what happened was when I was young and got out of engineering school at Cornell
in 79, I decided I went to work for Intel, and I was in the computer industry, and three
months into that I fell in love with something else. And I said, I made the wrong career
choice here, and I fell in love with brains. This is not a real brain, this is a picture
of one of my drawings, and I don't remember exactly how it happened, but I have one recollection
which was pretty strong in my mind. In September of 1979, Scientific American came out with
a single topic issue about the brain, and it was quite good. It was one of the best
issues ever, and they talked about the neuron and development and disease and vision and
all the things that you might want to know about brains. It was really quite impressive.
And one might have the impression that we really knew a lot about brains. But the last
article in that issue was written by Francis Crick of DNA fame today, as I think the 50th
anniversary of discovery of DNA. And he wrote a story facing, saying, well, this is all
well and good, but you know what, we don't know diddly squat about brains, and no one
has a clue how these things work, so don't believe what anyone tells you. This is a quote
from that article. He says, what is conspicuously lacking? This is a very proper British gentleman,
so. What is conspicuously lacking is a broad framework of ideas in which to interpret these
different approaches. I thought the word framework was great. He didn't say we didn't even have
a theory, he says we don't even know how to begin to think about it, we don't even have
a framework. We are in the pre-paradigm days, if you want to use Thomas Kuhn. And so I fell
in love and said, look, we have all this knowledge about brains, how hard can it be? And it's
just something we could work on in my lifetime, and I felt I could make a difference. And so
I tried to get out of the computer business into the brain business. First I went to MIT,
the AI lab was there, and I said, well, I want to build intelligent machines too, but
the way I want to do is to study how brains work first. And they said, oh, you don't need
to do that. We just got to program computers. That's all we needed to do. I said, no, you
really have to study brains. I said, no, you're wrong. And I said, no, you're wrong, and I
didn't get in. But I was a little disappointed, pretty young, but I went back again a few years
later, and this time I was in California, and I went to Berkeley. And I said, I'll go in
from the biological side. So I got him in a PhD program in biophysics, and I said, all
right, I'm studying brains now. And I said, well, I want to study theory. And they said,
oh, no, you can't study theory about brains. That's not something you do, and you can't
get funded for that. And as a graduate student, you can't do that. So I said, oh, my gosh,
I was very depressed. I said, but I can make a difference in this field. So what I did
is I went back in the computer industry and said, well, I'll have to work here for a while,
do something. That's when I designed all those computer products. And I said, I want to do
this for four years, make some money. It's like I was having a family, and I would mature
a bit. And maybe the business of neuroscience would mature a bit. Well, it took longer than
four years. It's been about 16 years. But I'm doing it now, and I'm going to tell you
about it. So why should we have a good brain theory? Well, there's lots of reasons people
do science. One is the most basic one is people like to know things. We're curious, and we
just go out and get knowledge. Why do we study ants? Well, it's interesting. Maybe we'll
learn something really useful about it, but it's interesting and fascinating. But sometimes
a science has some other attributes which makes it really, really, really interesting.
Sometimes a science will tell something about ourselves. It'll tell us who we are. Rarely.
And Copernicus did this, and Copernicus did this, where we have a new understanding of
who we are. And after all, we are our brains. My brain is talking to your brain. Our bodies
are hanging along for the ride, but my brain is talking to your brain. And if we want to
understand who we are and how we feel and perceive, we really understand what brains
are. Another thing is sometimes science leads to really big societal benefits of technologies
or businesses or whatever, they come out of it. And this is one too, because when we understand
how brains work, we're going to be able to build intelligent machines. And I think that's
actually a good thing on the whole, and it's going to have tremendous benefits to society.
It's like a fundamental technology. So why don't we have a good theory of brains? And
people have been working on it for 100 years. Well, let's first take a look at what normal
science looks like. This is normal science. Normal science is a nice balance between
theory and experimentalist. And so the theories guy say, well, I think this is what's going
on. And the experimentalist says, no, you're wrong. And it goes back and forth. You know,
this works in physics. This works in geology. But if this is normal science, what does neuroscience
looks like? This is what neuroscience looks like. We have this mountain of data, which
is anatomy, physiology, and behavior. You can't imagine how much detail we know about brains.
There were 28,000 people who went to the neuroscience conference this year. And every one of them
is doing research in brains. A lot of data. But there's no theory. There's a little wimpy
box on top there. And theory has not played a role in any sort of grand way in the neurosciences.
And it's a real shame. Now, why has this come about? If you ask neuroscientists, why is this
the state of affairs? They'll first of all admit it. But if you ask them, they say, well,
there's various reasons we don't have a good brain theory. Some people say, well, we don't
still have enough data. We need to get more information. There's all these things we don't
know. Well, I just told you there's so much data coming out your ears. We have so much
information we don't even know how to begin to organize it. What good is more going to
do? Maybe we'll be lucky and discover some magic thing. But I don't think so. This is
actually a symptom of the fact that we just don't have a theory. We don't need more data.
We need a good theory about it. Another one is sometimes people say, well, brains are
so complex. It'll take another 50 years. I even think Chris said something like this
yesterday. I'm not sure what you said, Chris, but something like, well, it's one of the
most complicated things in the universe. That's not true. You're more complicated than your
brain. You've got a brain. And it's also, although the brain looks very complicated,
things look complicated until you understand them. That's always been the case. And so
all we can say, well, my neocortex, which is the part of the brain I'm interested in,
has 30 billion cells. But you know what? It's very, very regular. In fact, it looks like
it's the same thing repeated over and over and over again. It's not as complex as it looks.
That's not the issue. Some people say brains can't understand brains. Very zen-like.
Sounds good, but why? What's the point? Is this a bunch of cells? You understand your liver?
It's got a lot of cells in it too, right? So I don't think there's anything to that. And finally,
some people say, well, I don't feel like a bunch of cells. I'm conscious. I got this experience.
I'm in the world, you know, I can't be just a bunch of cells. Well, you know, people used to
believe there was a life force to be living. And we now know that's really not true at all.
And there's really no evidence this is all other than the people just have disbelief that cells
could do what they do. And so some people have fallen into the pit of metaphysical dualism.
Some really smart people too. But we can reject all that. No, I'm going to tell you,
I'm going to tell you there's something else. And it's really fundamental. And this is what it is.
There's another reason why we don't have a good brain theory. And it's because we have an
intuitive, strongly held, but incorrect assumption that has prevented us from seeing the answer.
There's something we believe that just is obvious, but it's wrong. Now, there's a history of this
in science. And so before I tell you what it is, I'm going to tell you about the history of it in
science. You look at some other scientific revolutions. In this case, I'm talking about
the solar system that's Copernicus Darwin's evolution and tectonic plates. It's Wagner.
They all have a lot in common with brain science. First of all, they had a lot of unexplained data,
a lot of it. But it got more manageable once they had a theory. The best minds were stumped.
Really, really smart people. We are not smarter now than they were then. It just turns out it's
really hard to think of things. But once you've thought of them, it's kind of easy to understand
it. My daughters understood these three theories in their basic framework by the time they were in
kindergarten. And now it's not that hard. You know, here's the apple, here's the orange, you know,
here's the earth goes around, that kind of stuff. Finally, another thing is the answer was there
all along, but we kind of ignored it because of this obvious thing. And that's the thing. There
was an intuitive stronghold belief that was wrong. In the case of the solar system, the idea that
the earth is spinning and the surface of the earth is going like a thousand miles an hour and the
earth is going through the solar system about a million miles an hour. This is lunacy. We all
know the earth isn't moving. Do you feel like you're moving a thousand miles an hour? Of course
not. You know, and someone who said, well, we're spinning around in space and it's so huge, they
would lock you up and that's what they did back then. So, you know, it was intuitive and obvious.
Now, what about evolution? Evolution is the same thing. We taught our kids, well, the Bible says,
you know, God created all these species, cats are cats, dogs are dogs, people are people,
plants are plants, they don't change, no, put them on the ark in that order, blah, blah, blah.
And, you know, the fact is, if you believe in evolution, we all have a common ancestor and you
we all have a common ancestor with the plant and the lobby. This is what evolution tells us. And
it's true. It's kind of unbelievable. And the same thing about tectonic plates, you know,
all of the mountains and the continents are kind of floating around on top of the earth, you know,
it's like, doesn't make any sense. So, what is, what is the intuitive but incorrect assumption
that has kept us from understanding brains? Now, I'm going to tell it to you and it's going to
seem obviously that it's correct. And that's the point, right? Then I'm going to have to make an
argument why you're incorrect about the other assumption. The intuitive but obvious thing is
that somehow intelligence is defined by behavior. That we are intelligent because of the way we
do things and the way we behave intelligently. And I'm going to tell you that's wrong. What it is,
is intelligence is defined by prediction. And I'm going to work, work you through this in a few
slides here and give you an example of what this means. Here's a system. Engineers like to look
at systems like this. Scientists like to look at systems like this. They say, well, we have a thing
in the box and we have its inputs and its outputs. The AI people said, well, the thing in the box is
a program of a computer because that's equivalent to a brain. And we'll feed it some inputs and we'll
get it to do something, have some behavior. And Alan Turing defined the Turing test which is
essentially saying we'll know if something's intelligent if it behaves identical to a human.
A behavioral metric of what intelligence is. And this is stuck in our minds for a long period
of time. Reality, though, I call it real intelligence. Real intelligence is built on
something else. We experience the world through a sequence of patterns and we store them and we
recall them. And when we recall them, we match them up against reality and we're making predictions
all the time. It's an internal metric. There's an internal metric about us sort of saying,
do we understand the world? Am I making predictions and so on? You're all being intelligent right
now, but you're not doing anything. Maybe you're scratching yourself or picking your nose. I don't
know. But you're not doing anything right now, but you're being intelligent. You're understanding
what I'm saying. Because you're intelligent and you speak English, you know what word is at the end
of this sentence. The word came into you. You're making these predictions all the time. And then
what I'm saying is that the internal prediction is the output in the ear cortex and that somehow
prediction leads to intelligent behavior. And here's how that happens. Let's start with a non-intelligent
brain. Well, I'll argue a non-intelligent brain. We're going to call it an old brain. And we're
going to say it's like a non-mammal, like a reptile. So I'll say an alligator. We have an
alligator. And the alligator has some very sophisticated senses. It's got good eyes and
ears and touch senses and so on, a mouth and a nose. It has very complex behavior. It can run
and hide. It has fears and emotions. It can eat you. It can attack. It can do all kinds of stuff.
But we don't consider the alligator very intelligent. It's not like in a human total way.
But it has all this complex behavior already. Now, in evolution, what happened? First thing
happened in evolution with mammals. We started developing a thing called a neocortex. And I'm
going to represent the neocortex here, but this box that's sticking on top of the old brain.
Neocortex means new layer. It is a new layer on top of your brain. If you don't know that it's
the wrinkly thing on the top of your head that just got wrinkly because it got shoved in there,
it doesn't fit. Literally, that's what it is. It's about the size of a table napkin. It doesn't
fit, so it gets all wrinkly. Now, look at how I've drawn this here. The old brain is still there.
You still have that alligator brain. You do. It's your emotional brain. It's all those things and
all those gut reactions you have. And on top of it, we have this memory system called the neocortex.
And the memory system is sitting over the sensory part of the brain. And so as the sensory input
comes in and feeds through the old brain, it also goes up into the neocortex. And the neocortex is
just memorizing. It's sitting there saying, ah, I'm going to memorize all the things that are going
on, where I've been, people I've seen, things I've heard, and so on. And in the future, when it sees
something similar to that again, so in a similar environment or the exact same environment, it'll
play it back. It'll start playing it back. Oh, I've been here before. And when you've been here
before, this happened next. And it allows you to predict the future. It allows you to literally,
it feeds back the signals into your brain. It'll let you see what's going to happen next. It'll
let you hear the word sentence before I said it. And it's just feeding back into the old brain
that allows you to let you make very more intelligent decisions. This is the most important
slide of my talk, so I'm going to dwell on it a little bit. And so all the time, you're saying,
oh, I can predict the things. And if you're a rat and you go through a maze, and then you learn the
maze, the next time you're in the maze, you have the same behavior. But all of a sudden, you're
smarter because you say, oh, I recognize this maze. I know which way to go. I've been here before. I
can envision the future. And that's what it's doing. In humans, by the way, this is true for all
mammals. It showed up in mammals. In humans, it got a lot worse. In humans, we actually developed
the front part of the neocortex called the anterior part of the neocortex. And at nature,
did a little trick. It copied the posterior part, the back part, which was sensory, and put it on
the front part. And humans uniquely have the same mechanism on the front, but we use it for motor
control. So we are now able to make very sophisticated motor planning and things like that. I don't
have time to get into all this. But if you want to understand how a brain works, you have to
understand how the first part of the mammalian neocortex works, how it is we store patterns
and make predictions. So let me give you a few examples of predictions. I already said the word
sentence in music. If you've heard a song before, if you've heard Jill sing those songs before,
when she sings them, the next note pops into your head already. You anticipate it as a
going. And if it was an album of music, the end of one album, the next song pops in your head.
If these things happen all the time, you're making these predictions. I have this thing called the
Altar Door Thought Experiment. And the Altar Door Thought Experiment says, you have a door at home.
And when you're here, I'm changing it. I got to guide it back at your house right now,
moving the door around. And they're going to take your door knob and move it over two inches.
And when you go home tonight, you're going to put your hand out there, and you're going to reach
for the door knob, and you're going to notice it's in the wrong spot. And you go, whoa, something
happened. It may take a second to figure out what it was, but something happened. Now, I could
change your door knob. In other words, I can make it larger, smaller. I could change it from brass
to silver. I can make it a lever. I can change your door. I can put colors on. I can put windows
in. I can change a thousand things about your door. And in the two seconds you take to open your
door, you're going to notice that something has changed. Now, the engineering approach to this,
the AI approach to this is to build a door database. It has all the door attributes. And as you go up to
the door, you know, let's check them off one at a time, door, door, door, you know, color. We don't
do that. Your brain doesn't do that. What your brain is doing is it's making constant predictions
all the time of what is going to happen in your environment. As I put my hand down on this table,
I expect to feel it stop. When I put, I walk every step, if I missed it by an eighth of an inch,
I'll know something has changed. You're constantly making predictions about your environment.
I'll talk about vision here briefly. This is a picture of a woman. And when you look at people,
your eyes are caught over it two to three times a second. You're not aware of this, but your eyes
are always moving. And so when you look at someone's face, you typically go from eye to eye to eye to
nose to mouth. Now, when your eye moved from eye to eye, if there was something else there like a
nose, you'd see a nose where an eye is supposed to be. And you go, holy shit, you know, there's
something wrong about this person. And that's because you're making a prediction. It's not like
you just look over there and say, what am I seeing now? A nose, that's okay. No, you have an expectation
which you're going to see every single moment. And finally, let's think about how we test
intelligence. We test it by prediction. What is the next word in this, you know,
this is to this is this is this? What is the next number in this sentence? Here's three
visions of an object. What's the fourth one? That's how we test it. It's all about prediction.
So what is the recipe for brain theory? First of all, you have to have the right
framework. And the framework is a memory framework, not a computational or behavior
framework. It's a memory framework. How do you store and call these sequences of patterns?
It's the spatial type of patterns. Then if in that framework, you take a bunch of
theoreticians, not biologists, generally, not good theoreticians. That's not always true.
But in general, there's not a good history of theory in biology. So I found the best
people to work with are physicists, engineers, and mathematicians who tend to think algorithmically.
Then they have to learn anatomy and they got to learn the physiology. You have to make these
theories very realistic and anatomical terms. Anyone who gets up and tells you the theory
about the brain works and doesn't tell you exactly how it's working in the brain and how
the wiring works in the brain isn't not a theory. And that's what we're doing at the
Redwood Neuroscience Institute. I would love to have more time to tell you,
you're making fantastic progress in this thing. And I expect to be back up on the stage,
maybe this one, maybe some other time, not too distant future, and tell you about it.
I'm really, really excited. This is not going to take 50 years at all.
So what will the brain theory look like? First of all, it's going to be a theory about memory,
not like computer memory. It's not at all like computer memory. It's very, very different.
And it's a memory of these very high-dimensional patterns, like the things that come from your
eyes. It's also a memory of sequences. You cannot learn or recall anything outside of a sequence.
A song must be heard in sequence over time, and you must play it back in sequence over time.
And these sequences are auto-associated recall. So if I see something or hear something,
it reminds me of it, and then it plays back automatically. It's just an automatic playback.
And prediction of future inputs is a desired output. And as I said, the theory must be
biologically accurate. It must be testable, and you must be able to build it. If you don't build it,
you don't understand it. So I'm going to tell you one more slide here. What is this going to
result in? Are we going to really build intelligent machines? Absolutely. And it's going to be
different than people think. No doubt that this is going to happen, in my mind. First of all,
it's going to be built. We're going to build this stuff out of silicon. The same techniques we use
for building silicon computer memories we can use for here, but they're very different types of
memories. And we're going to attach these memories to sensors. And we'll experience
live real-world data. And these things are going to learn about their environment.
Now, it's very unlikely. The first things you're going to see are robots. Not that robots aren't
useful, and people can build robots. But the robotics part is the hardest part. That's the
old brain. That's really hard. The new brain is actually kind of easier than the old brain.
So the first things we're going to do are the things that don't require a lot of robotics.
So you're not going to see three CPO. You're going to more see things like intelligent cars that
really understand what traffic is and what driving is, and have learned that certain types of cars
that their blinkers on for half a minute probably aren't going to turn, things like that.
We can also do intelligent security systems. Anywhere we're basically using our brain but
not doing a lot of mechanics, those are the things that are going to happen first. But ultimately,
the world's the limit here. I don't know how this is going to turn out. I know a lot of people who
invented the microprocessor. And if you talk to them, they knew what they're doing was really
significant. But they didn't really know what was going to happen. They couldn't anticipate
cell phones and the internet and all this kind of stuff. They just knew like, hey, we'll do
calculators and traffic light controllers. But it's going to be big. In the same way,
this is like a brain science. And these memories are going to be a very fundamental
technology. And it's going to lead to very unbelievable changes in the next 100 years.
And I'm most excited about how we're going to use them in science.
So I think that's all of my time. I'm over and I'm going to end my talk right there.
