Arthur T. Benjamin is a professor of mathematics at Harvey Mudd College.
He graduated from Carnegie Mellon University in 1983, where he earned a B.S. in Applied
Mathematics with university honors.
He received his Ph.D. in Mathematical Sciences in 1989 from Johns Hopkins University.
Since 1989, Professor Benjamin has been a faculty member of the mathematics department
of Harvey Mudd College, where he has served as department chair.
Professor Benjamin's research interests include combinatorics, game theory, and number theory,
with a special fondness for Fibonacci numbers.
Many of these ideas appear in his book, co-authored with Jennifer Quinn, Proofs That Really Count,
The Art of Combinatorial Proof.
In 2006, that book received the Beckenbach Book Prize from the Mathematical Association
of America, or M.A.A.
From 2004 to 2008, professors Benjamin and Quinn served as the co-editors of Math Horizons
Magazine, published by the M.A.A., and enjoyed by more than 20,000 readers, mostly undergraduate
math students and their teachers.
Professor Benjamin is also a professional magician, who has given more than 1,000 mathematics
shows to audiences all over the world.
His techniques are explained in his book, Secrets of Mental Math, The Mathematician's
Guide to Lightning Calculation and Amazing Math Tricks.
Professor Benjamin has appeared on dozens of television and radio programs, including
The Today Show, CNN, and National Public Radio.
He has been featured in Scientific American, Omni, Discover, People, Esquire, The New York
Times, The Los Angeles Times, and Readers Digest.
In 2005, readers digest called him America's best math whiz.
In 1999, Professor Benjamin received the Southern California section of the M.A.A.
Award for Distinguished College or University Teaching of Mathematics, and in 2000, he received
the M.A.A.
Deborah and Franklin Tepper-Hymoh National Award for Distinguished College or University
Teaching of Mathematics.
He was named the George Puglia Lecturer by the M.A.A. for 2006 to 2008.
Professor Benjamin prepared the course guidebook that comes with these lectures.
The guidebook includes the lecture outlines, a timeline, a glossary, biographical notes,
and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to review these materials before
or after each lecture.
