So, what is discrete mathematics?
Perhaps it's easier to define what it is not.
For the last few centuries, the mathematics curriculum has been built on a foundation of
arithmetic and algebra, and most of the mathematics that we learn after that is aimed at preparing
us for one subject, calculus, which is the mathematics of how things grow and change continuously,
like waves in the water or clouds in the sky.
Discrete mathematics, on the other hand, is interested in quantities that can be broken
into neat little pieces, like pixels on your computer screen, the letters or numbers in
your password, or directions on how to drive from one place to another.
Take for instance this deck of cards.
In continuous mathematics, we might want to weigh the deck or toss the deck in the air
and analyze its path, but to a discrete mathematician, a deck of cards offers different possibilities.
We might wonder, for example, how many ways can I arrange all 52 cards in a row, or how
many five-card poker hands can be dealt, and how many of these poker hands contain at least
one ace.
Continuous mathematics is like an old-fashioned analog clock, or wristwatch, whose second
hand moves continuously across a clock, like this.
Whereas discrete mathematics is like a stopwatch, or a digital watch, or clock, that changes
every second, but proceeds one second at a time, like this.
In continuous math, we deal with numbers like the square root of two, or pi, which have
an infinite number of digits.
In discrete mathematics, we mainly use whole numbers, like zero, one, two, three.
In continuous math, we deal with functions like e to the x, sine x, and cosine x.
But in discrete math, our central functions are two to the n, n factorial, and something
called n choose k.
Let's compare the functions of e to the x and two to the n.
Both of these functions get big very quickly.
They both grow exponentially, but their graphs look very different.
The graph of e to the x looks like this.
It's a nice, smooth curve that grows continuously as x travels across the real line.
On the other hand, discrete math, we're usually just interested in two to the n, when n is
a whole number.
So two to the zero, two to the one, two to the two, three, four, five, six, and so on.
Its graph would look like this.
By the way, what do you think of when you hear the word graph?
You might think of a picture like this or maybe a picture like this.
Some people call these things graphs.
But in discrete mathematics, when we talk about graphs, we usually mean a very different
sort of object.
A graph in discrete math is a collection of points where two points are connected by
a line, sometimes called an edge, if they're related in some way.
So here is a graph.
These are the kinds of graphs that we're going to be talking about.
It's a pretty generic sort of graph.
Here the points might represent a group of computers, and the edges indicate which computers
can communicate with each other.
Or perhaps the points are cities, and the edges indicate if there's a direct flight
between those cities.
Some graphs have names, like we'll encounter the graph K6, which is the complete graph
with six points, where every pair of points is connected.
Here's the graph K6.
Or sometimes we put labels on our points and edges, like in this graph, which we'll encounter
in lecture 16.
I'll tell you what it all means then.
Finite mathematics is the foundation of computer science.
With computer science, we're dealing with digital logic, zeros or ones, true or false,
numbers that have finite precision.
The world has grown from only analog to mainly digital in most of its technology, and there
will always be a need for us to understand continuous mathematics.
The laws of nature are written in the language of calculus, and sound waves, electricity,
and gravity are certainly here to stay.
But nowadays I think it's important for people to understand mathematics that's both analog
and digital.
Not just the classical continuous mathematics of calculus, but also the more modern digital
world of discrete mathematics.
Finite mathematics covers a wide range of subjects, and our course will focus on three
of its major fields.
Those are combinatorics, which we'll explore in lectures two through eight, number theory
in lectures nine through fifteen, and graph theory in lectures sixteen to twenty three.
In our last lecture, lecture twenty four, we'll take a look back, put everything together,
and glance beyond the bounds of this course.
And since it's the last class, we'll have a party, which will include a little bit of
magic whose secrets will only make sense to people who understand discrete mathematics.
In this lecture, we'll get to sample a little from each of these topics, so you can get
a sense of what each subject is about.
We'll start with combinatorics, the mathematics of counting, or if you will, the mathematics
of combining things. Combining shares a root with combinatorics.
Let's take, for example, code words. Computers store and transmit information using code
words that combine zeros and ones. The zeros and ones are sometimes called bits, and the
code words are sometimes called binary code words. We say that the length of a word is
the number of bits in it. So you might ask, well, how many code words have length n? So
when n is equal to one, there are two code words, right? There's the code word zero
and the code word one. When n is equal to two, there are four code words, zero zero, zero
one, one zero, and one one. When n equals three, we have eight code words, and I've presented
them here. So you see a pattern here, two, four, eight. The pattern suggests that maybe
there are two to the n different code words of length n. Now that makes sense because
each of the n numbers has two choices, right? A zero or one, another zero or one, another
zero or one. Now if that doesn't make sense yet, it will by the end of the next lecture.
Or another way to see that it's two to the n is, is as you go from one length to the
next, the number of code words should double because every code word that you had before,
you can either attach a zero to it or you could attach a one to it. So you'll have twice
as many numbers as you did before. The number two to the n gets very large very quickly.
For example, two to the 20th is over a million, and two to the 40th is over a trillion. But
it's precisely because these numbers get so large so quickly that we can create secure
passwords without too much effort. Alright, here's another counting question. How many
length n code words have no consecutive zeros? Okay, so we're not going to have as many
code words as we had before. When n is one, zero and one are still legal code words. There
are two ways to do that. When n is two, we don't have four code words anymore. Now we
have three of them. We have zero one, one zero, and one one. The number zero zero is
no longer legal. When n is equal to three, there are five code words that don't have
consecutive zeros. When n is four, there are eight code words with no consecutive zeros.
Now if you look at this pattern, two, three, five, eight, who do we appreciate? Fibonacci.
If you don't appreciate Fibonacci numbers yet, you will by the end of lecture, well,
you will by end of lecture seven for sure. They will reappear throughout this course.
Our second major topic in this course is number theory. Now, in combinatorics, we naturally
deal with numbers as they arise as the solution to counting problems. But in number theory,
we study the numbers, you know, your good old fashioned whole numbers, zero, one, two,
three, etc., for their own intrinsic beauty. The great 20th century number theorist, G.
H. Hardy was quoted as saying, a mathematician, like a painter or poet, is a maker of patterns.
If his patterns are more permanent than theirs, it's because they are made with ideas. Indeed,
we'll learn facts and theorems about numbers that have been around for literally thousands
of years and yet continue to spark the imagination of mathematicians today. Many of their basic
properties were taught to us in elementary school without any reason given. We remedy
that here and present you with additional surprises. Take, for instance, the multiples
of nine. What do they have in common? I've written here the first several multiples
of nine. Do you see a pattern to them? Well, in school, we learned that a number is a multiple
of nine if and only if its digits sum to nine or 18 or 27 or 36, the numbers, the digits
have to add up to nine. So, for example, the number 189, those digits add up to 18 and
18 is a multiple of nine, so therefore 189 is a multiple of nine. But why does this work?
They probably didn't tell you that in school. Once we understand why it works and we will,
we'll be able to look at numbers in a whole new light. For example, take the number 2354.
Now, the digits of 2354 sum to 14, which is not a multiple of nine, so that tells us
that 2354 is not a multiple of nine. But the 14 that we get as the total, that tells
us something too. Since the digits of 14, the total sum to five, right, 14 has digits
one and four, one plus four is five, then that tells us that the remainder when you divide
the original number 2354 by nine is five. We'll also learn in lecture 12 that you can
tell at a glance that 2354 is a multiple of 11. And we'll see how this divisibility rule
is applied to every book that you have on your bookshelf. It's all based on something
called modular arithmetic, which is the mathematics of remainders. For example, when we first
learned to divide numbers in school, like 17 divided by three, we first learned to write
the answer as what's 17 divided by three? It's five with a remainder of two. Later,
when we learned to write it in terms of fractions, you might sound more sophisticated by saying
five and two thirds. And finally, as an infinitely long decimal, five points, six, six, six, six,
going on forever. When doing discrete mathematics, we usually favor the first approach, that
is five with a remainder of two. Because working with whole numbers as much as possible, because
it's easier and tidier to work with five and two, than it is to work with five point six,
six, six, forever. Now, when you divide any number by three, you only have three possible
remainders, right? You either get a remainder of zero, a remainder of one, or a remainder
of two. So for instance, 15 is three times five with a remainder of zero. 16 is three
times five with a remainder of one. 17 is three times five with a remainder of two. And then
when we get to 18, we get back to three times six with a remainder of zero. In general,
when you divide the number, when you divide by the number n, there are n possible remainders,
either zero or one or two, or as big as n minus one. In other words, when you divide,
let's say the number m, by the number n, we get a neat little equation. We say that m
is equal to qn plus r, where q denotes your quotient, and r denotes your remainder. And
that remainder is some number between zero and n. Let's consider all the odd numbers
that don't end in five. I'm going to show you something that's really cute. Okay, here
are all the odd numbers that don't end in five. I claim that each of them divides evenly
into a number consisting of only nines. Now, for the odd numbers one, three and nine, clearly
they all divide into the number nine. 7, 11 and 13, those, as it turns out, all divide
evenly into 999,999. That's because 7, 11 and 13 all go into 1001. But now, I claim
that every odd number, not ending in five, let's say, oh, how about 2009, that any odd
number not ending in five will definitely divide a number consisting of all nines. Let
me try to convince you that 2009 will divide a number consisting of all nines. Okay, let's
look at, and I'll give you some candidates. I'll give you the numbers 9, 99, 999, going
all the way up to the number 999 with 2010 nines. So, when we divide by 2009, we know
from our earlier discussion that there are 2009 possible remainders. Now, I just gave
you 2010 numbers on my list. So, that means that two of these numbers must have the same
remainder when divided by 2009, right? Because there are only 2009 possible remainders.
If I have 2010 numbers, two of them have to have the same remainder. Let's say it's the
number that has i nines and the number that has j nines in it. Okay, so I've got 999 i
times and 999 j times. Let's suppose they both have the same remainder, let's call that
remainder r, when divided by 2009. To express this algebraically, it says that the number
with i nines is equal to 2009 times a quotient q plus the remainder r. And the number with
j nines is 2009 times a different quotient p, but plus the same remainder r. Okay, get
your head around those two equations. And now let's subtract the second equation from
the first equation. I'll assume that j is less than i here. And when you do, what do
you get? If you just did that subtraction like you would on paper, you'd have a bunch
of nines followed by a bunch of zeros. How many zeros would be there? J of them. How
many nines would be there? I minus j of them. And when you subtract the right sides of
those equations, notice that the r's disappear and you're left with 2009 times the quantity
q minus p. But look what happens here. This tells us that 2009 times some integer is equal
to the number consisting of all nines followed by all zeros. And since 2009 is not a multiple
of two or five, we can ignore all those zeros and conclude that 2009 divides a number consisting
of only nines, i minus j nines in this case. Now perhaps this would be a good time for
me to confess that sometimes I get so excited about the material that I go a little fast.
But part of the reason is that there are so many beautiful parts to discrete math that
I want to show you as much as I can. Also, I know since you have the power of the remote
control, you've got the power of the remote that you can revisit these lectures as often
as you'd like. I think most of the material is worth a second viewing and they'll become
clearer when you go through them the second time. I promise.
We saw the function 2 to the n appear in combinatorics. It's also quite important in number theory
too. Since the powers of 2, we will show our discrete additive building blocks for the
integers. That is to say, every number can be represented as the sum of distinct powers
of 2 in just one way. For example, take the number 37. We can write that as 32 plus 4
plus 1, or 2 to the fifth plus 2 to the second plus 2 to the zero. And that's the only way
to write a number as the sum of different powers of 2. We'll also get very well acquainted
with the prime numbers, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11. These are the numbers that cannot be factored into
two smaller numbers. Prime numbers are the multiplicative building blocks of the integers.
For example, the number 40 is 2 times 2 times 2 times 5, and that's the only way to write
it as the product of prime numbers. Prime numbers are very useful and they are a very
discrete idea. You can't talk about primes when dealing with the real numbers of the
continuous world. That would be an irrational thing to do, wouldn't you say?
In lecture 10, we'll see how prime numbers exhibit highly erratic behavior and yet also
highly predictable behavior, depending on whether you look at them closely or from a
distance. Now, if I gave you a 100-digit number, question, could you or your computer easily
tell if it were prime? Surprisingly, we can, and it uses the function 2 to the n.
We'll learn in lecture 13 how to compute 2 to the 2009 power in far fewer than 2009
steps and at the same time tell you its remainder when divided by 2009. The remainder happens
to be 1537, which tells you, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that 2009 is not prime.
In fact, 2009 is 7 times 7 times 41, but our method won't tell you that. What we'll learn
though is how to tell just by looking at that remainder that 2009 is not prime.
Number theory has numerous applications, from card shuffling to error detecting codes to
public key cryptography, which is the basis for secure communication over the internet.
The code is based on the fact that a bank can publish a large composite number that nobody
but the bank knows how to factor. Finally, we'll turn our attention to graph
theory. We saw some examples of graphs earlier. Objects are represented by a finite number
of points, sometimes called vertices, and they're joined by an edge if they're related
in some way. Surprisingly, there are some properties that are common to all graphs and
we'll explore what happens to them as we label them, color them, orient them, or solve problems
on them. Sometimes just the act of drawing a graph gives you a new way of thinking about
a problem, as I'll illustrate. Every discrete math course says something
about sets and subsets. So let's define them here. A set is just a collection of objects.
For example, consider the set S equal 1, 2, 3. We say that the set T is a subset of S
if every element of T also belongs to S. For example, the subsets of 1, 2, 3 are the set
containing 1, the set containing 2, the set containing 3, the set containing 1 and 2,
1 and 3, 2 and 3, the entire set, 1, 2, 3, and even the set containing nothing otherwise
known as the empty set. Now take a look at the subset graph pictured here. Take a look
at that. Each point of my graph represents a subset of 1, 2, 3. At the top we have the
original set which has 3 elements. Below that are all subsets of size 2, then subsets
of size 1, then the subset of size 0. We connect points from one level to the next with an
edge if 1 is a subset of the other. For example, we see that there is an edge that goes from
the set containing 1 to the set containing 1, 2. Now when you look at this graph, what
do you see? A cube, right? A three dimensional cube. Here are the subset graphs by the way
when n is 0, 1 and 2. You see a point, a line, and a square whose dimensions are 0, 1 and
2, and we see with n equals 3 you get a cube. So if you want to draw a four dimensional
cube on two dimensional paper, you just draw its subset graph which looks like this. By
the way, if you haven't guessed by now, the number of subsets of the set 1 through n is
exactly 2 to the n. Our next theorem has social implications. Because human beings come in
discrete quantities, they tend to come in integer sizes, although once I met a group
of radicals, never mind, but graph theory can be great for modeling social interactions
among people. So here is a theorem that may surprise you. I claim that among any six people
there must be three mutual friends or three mutual strangers, and I'm going to prove that
using graph theory. So given any collection of six people, let's call them one through
six and we'll give each of them its own point, its own vertex. I'm going to draw an edge
between all pairs of people, and I'm going to color each edge. Each edge is either going
to get a color of red or a color of blue. A color of red will represent two people that
are mutual friends. A color of blue will represent a pair of people that are mutual strangers.
So perhaps we see a graph that looks like this. So we see who among these people are
friends and who among these people are strangers. So another way to say the same theorem is
that after coloring the edges red or blue, there must be either an all red triangle,
because that would be three mutual friends, or an all blue triangle. That would be three
mutual strangers. In this example, we happen to have a blue triangle, let's see, two, three
and six are mutual strangers, and three, four and five are mutual friends. In this collection
of people, on the other hand, we do have plenty of examples of three mutual friends, but there
aren't any examples of three mutual strangers. There aren't any blue triangles in this graph.
All right, now how are we going to prove this statement? One possibility would be to look
at every possible coloring. How many possible colorings are there? There's two to the 15,
because I've got 15 edges. Each edge can be red or blue. That's 32,768 different ways
to color the graph. We could check every possibility, but no thanks. We don't have to do that.
But by the way, I should mention there's two to the n again. That number, that function,
shows up throughout discrete mathematics. Okay, now here's an elegant proof of the triangle
theorem. All right, let's consider vertex six, or person number six. That vertex has
to have either at least three red edges leaving it, or at least three blue edges leaving it,
right, because there are five edges leaving it. Let's just consider the case where it
has at least three red edges leaving it, because the blue case is obviously similar. Now, if
any edge between A, B and C, let's say those are the, we've got red edges that go to A,
B and C. If any of those, if between A, B and C, if any of those are connected by a red
edge, like here between A and C, then that would give us a red triangle. If I had a red
edge between A and B, that would give us a red triangle. In fact, a red edge between
B and C, that would give us a red triangle, right? So if any of those people are friends
with each other, that would give us three mutual friends. On the other hand, if none
of the edges are red, what do we have to have? We need to have a blue triangle, right? Three
mutual strangers. So either way, you have to have either an all red triangle or an all
blue triangle. That proof still makes me smile. In fact, when I finish a proof that I think
is especially clever, I like to end it with a smiley face of some kind. In fact, even
this discrete mathematics course can be modeled using a graph. Here, I've drawn an arrow
from lecture A to lecture B. If lecture A is a prerequisite to lecture B, I've avoided
redundancies by the way, so if A is a prerequisite of B and B is a prerequisite of C, then I've
not drawn the arrow from A to C. I've drawn dotted lines to indicate when two lectures
have some topics in common. Here's a map of the United States. Even that has applications
of graph theory. So for example, this map happens to have five colors. And we'll prove
in graph theory that any map, no matter what its states look like, can be colored using
five colors in such a way that no adjacent states are given the same color. In fact,
that's even true when you only have four colors. Is it possible to do it with three colors?
Not necessarily. And we'll see why the United States graph cannot be colored with only three
colors and avoid adjacent states of the same color. Other questions that might come to
mind when you look at a map like this are things like, oh, the shortest path problem.
If I wanted to find the shortest way of driving, let's say from California, let's say Sacramento
to every capital in the United States, how can I find the shortest path from Sacramento
to Columbus, Ohio and Sacramento to Austin, Texas, etc. What's the shortest way of doing
each of those problems? Or we'll look at another problem called the traveling salesman
problem that says, suppose I want to tour every capital city, starting at one state,
state capital, say Sacramento, and going to all the other state capitals, you can decide
the order and get back to the original, to the original capital and do that in the least
amount of time or with the least amount of cost. One of these problems has an efficient
solution method. The other one does not. So what is discrete mathematics? I've tried
to give you a flavor of that here, but one of my students put it best. He said, discrete
math is really like sophisticated math for kindergartners, right? Because in kindergarten
you do counting, you do arithmetic, playing with numbers, you might connect the dots and
do coloring. So, and that's what we're going to be doing here, but in a more sophisticated
way. So are we ready to get started? Have I convinced you that discrete math is worthy
of your attention? Honestly, I find discrete math to be much more fun than continuous math,
and I hope you will too. I mean, the topics are more accessible. They've got fun applications.
We'll talk about games and tournaments and puzzles. The proofs, and we'll see a lot
of proofs. They are far easier to understand in discrete math than in continuous math.
The only prerequisite to these topics is high school algebra. There are numerous real world
applications. If I had to sum up discrete mathematics in two words, I'd use the words
relevant and elegant. But most of all, throughout this course, and not least in the next lecture
where we'll explore combinatorics, I hope to convince you that among all areas of mathematics,
discrete mathematics is truly the subject that counts the most.
