Discrete mathematics comes in many shapes and sizes, and if you checked out ten different
college courses on the subject, you'd probably find ten very different syllabi.
But the one topic that all ten courses would certainly contain is combinatorics, the mathematics
of counting.
So here's a simple question, how many ways can you pick five numbers from one to ten?
Now there are a lot of different ways to answer that question depending on two missing pieces
of information.
Does order matter?
And can you repeat numbers?
So if order matters and repetition is allowed, then we call that a sequence.
For example, when creating a five-digit computer password, we're choosing five numbers from
the set of digits zero through nine.
The order definitely matters since the password 31415 is not the same as the password 31451.
And since we're allowed to repeat digits, passwords would be an example of a sequence
because we can repeat and order matters.
For example, okay, what if we were looking at a situation where order matters, but repetition
is not allowed?
Then we call that an arrangement.
So for example, if we were given ten cards, ace through ten say, and we had to deal five
of them in front of us, okay, I just take five cards here at random, then if the order,
then repetition is not allowed because I can only pick each card once.
And if order still matters, like in the game of Five Cards Stud, the order in which those
cards come down typically matters, then ace 2358 would not be the same as 2358 ace, okay?
This would be an example of an arrangement.
Here's another arrangement.
Given that I have five cards in front of me, how many different ways can I arrange them?
That would be another arrangement problem.
Or for instance, if you were looking, watching a horse race, we might care about which three
horses finish first, second, and third, and so the order would matter to us.
The next situation, if repetition is not allowed, but order doesn't matter, then we call that
a subset or a combination.
A combination is a fundamental concept in combinatorics, as you could imagine.
For example, if all that matters is which five cards are dealt to me, but the order
doesn't matter, it doesn't matter in which order I get those five cards.
It's all the same hand to me, and this would be an example of a subset or a combination.
Or if we had a barn full of horses, we might decide which three of them get to go out and
play in the meadow.
That would be a combination.
There's a fourth situation that we'll talk about later where order doesn't matter and
repetition is allowed, but to come up with answers to these questions, we need some basic
rules of counting.
We'll begin with the rule of thumb that I like to call the rule of thumb.
If an action is performed by making A choices or B other choices, then it can be performed
A plus B ways.
For example, if I own four short sleeve shirts or six long sleeve shirts, and no shirt is
considered short and long, then the number of shirts that I could wear would be four
plus six, which is ten.
We'll give a more precise definition of the rule of thumb in a future lecture using the
language of sets, but this basic idea is good enough for now.
The other fundamental rule is called the rule of product, which says that if an action can
be performed by making A choices followed by B choices, then it can be performed A times
B ways.
For example, I have ten shirts, and if I own eight pair of pants, and I obviously don't
care about color coordination, then the number of possible outfits for me would be ten times
eight.
For each shirt, I have eight choices for pants.
Here's a smaller example.
Suppose that a label consists of a letter A, B, or C, followed by a number from the set
one through five.
Then how many labels are possible?
We have three choices for the letter, followed by five choices for the number, so the rule
of product would tell us that we have three times five, fifteen possible labels.
I've listed all the labels here for you to see.
They fit inside of a nice three by five box.
That's how we get fifteen.
Or here's an example we'll see plenty of in this course, cards in a deck.
We know that every card has a value that ranges from ace to king.
You can think of those as the numbers one through thirteen, and a suit, either spade,
hearts, diamonds, or clubs.
So the number of possible cards is thirteen times four.
Thirteen choices for the value, and then four choices for the suit.
That's fifty-two different cards in a deck.
Some might consider this so basic as to be the very definition of multiplication.
Here's an important example that will show up several times in this course.
How many binary sequences, how many binary code words have length N?
So when N is three, we've seen that there are eight code words, eight words that you
can make using zeros and ones.
So where does the number eight come from?
Here for each digit, we have two choices, zero or one for the first digit, then zero
or one for the second digit, then zero or one for the third digit.
And if we have an N-digit word, we have two choices, then two choices, two choices, N
times, giving us two to the N possible words or sequences.
Two to the N, as I've said before, is a very important number in combinatorics.
In fact, it's our first important function in combinatorics.
We'll see powers of other numbers appearing in this course too, not just two to the N.
We'll see three to the N, five to the N, ten to the N, but two to the N probably arises
in the most natural contexts.
All right, here's another combinatorics question.
How many five-digit zip codes are possible?
Now what's a zip code?
It's five numbers, five digits, each between zero and nine.
So we have ten choices for the first digit, then ten choices for the second, ten for the
third, ten for the fourth, ten for the fifth, multiply those together.
That gives us ten to the fifth 100,000 possibilities.
And of course that's the right answer, 100,000, because if you think of a zip code, they could
range from as low as all zeros all the way up to all nines, and all nines would look
like 99,999, therefore there are 100,000 possible zip codes, not that they're all in use.
Next question, how many zip codes have only odd digits in them?
Like my zip code in Claremont, California is 91711.
All of those are odd digits.
Why don't you take a guess at the answer first?
Before I just give it to you, think about it for a second, pause me if you'd like.
And now what did you get as the answer?
How many use only odd digits?
We have to be all odd, we'd have five choices for the first digit, one, three, five, seven
or nine, five choices for the second, for the third, for the fourth, and for the fifth,
and therefore there would be five to the fifth 3,125 possible all odd zip codes.
Next question, how many five digit zip codes use at least one even digit?
So a zip code like 90210 has at least one even digit.
Again, you might want to guess your answer first.
Go ahead, take a minute or two and think about what you think the answer should be.
It's easy to over count this problem and don't be ashamed if you did, and to come up with
an answer like 250,000.
Now that answer can't be right, we know it can't be right because we just saw that there
were only 100,000 zip codes possible so you couldn't have 250,000 of them that had at
least one even digit.
Now fortunately there's a correct approach that breaks the problem into five cases.
How many use exactly one even digit?
How many use exactly two even digits and so on, but we're not yet ready for that approach.
It uses the number n choose k which we'll mention later in this lecture.
Fortunately there is a simpler solution.
It's called the strategy of compliments which says answer the opposite question.
Our question was how many zip codes have at least one even digit?
To do that we count all the zip codes and subtract those that contain all odd digits.
And we know that there are 100,000 possible zip codes and we can subtract off all five
to the fifth all 3,125 ways that use all odd zip codes.
We worked that one out earlier to give us 96,875 zip codes with at least one even digit.
Next we'll try some arrangement problems where no repetition is allowed.
Like how many five digit zip codes have all different digits?
Well there'd be ten choices for the first digit, then once we made that choice now there'd
only be nine choices for the second digit and once we made that choice there'd only
be eight choices for the next digit, then seven, then six, multiply those numbers together
to get 30,240 zip codes that use all different digits.
As a sanity test we see that's less than the 100,000 possible zip codes.
Okay but now suppose we expand from five digit zip codes to ten digit zip codes.
Then how many zip codes would there be?
This time we would multiply all the numbers from ten all the way down to one, ten times
nine times eight all the way down to one.
We know that's the number 3,628,800 or at least we can calculate that.
And we have a shorthand for that number, we call that ten factorial.
An ordered list where every object appears exactly once is sometimes called a permutation.
Some textbooks refer to any sequence without repetition as a permutation but most mathematicians
don't.
We'll just call those situations arrangements.
So this is by the way one of the three most important numbers in combinatorics.
So along with two to the n in the combinatorics Hall of Fame belongs the number n factorial.
And there's another number that we'll meet real soon.
So just remember n factorial is important.
Its official definition is n times n minus one times n minus two all the way down to
one.
N factorial is if you want to memorize anything what does n factorial mean?
When you see n factorial think of it as the number of ways to arrange n different objects
where order matters.
So if I have five cards and I'm asking how many different ways can I arrange them where
the order matters that's five factorial or a hundred and twenty.
Now in lecture one we saw that two to the n grows pretty quickly but n factorial grows
even faster.
Here's a comparison of the first ten numbers two to the n and n factorial as n goes from
one to ten.
You see in fact both of them grow pretty quickly n factorial grows even faster.
N factorial can also be defined recursively that is in terms of smaller factorials.
For example five factorial is by its definition five times four times three times two times
one but the four times three times two times one is itself a factorial.
It's so we have five times four factorial.
In general for any number greater than or equal to one we can say that n factorial is
n times n minus one factorial.
Notice that when n is one this formula says one factorial is one times zero factorial and
in order for this to be true in order for one factorial to be one we're going to have
to define zero factorial to be one.
Also defining zero factorial to be one is better for all our formulas to work out appropriately.
Modules also allow us to answer arrangement problems more compactly.
So for instance when we were counting those five digit zip codes with different digits
the answer ten times nine times eight times seven times six could be simplified and written
as ten factorial divided by five factorial.
Now the third most important number in combinatorics is pronounced n choose k and it looks like
this.
Other names in notation for n choose k you will hear them referred to as binomial coefficients.
Another notation though we won't use them in this course I've seen c n k written in
various forms where the c stands for the word choices or combinations.
Now here's the informal definition for n choose k, alright this is the way I think about
it.
n choose k is the number of ways to choose k objects from n distinct objects where the
order is not important and repetition is not allowed.
So for instance if I have ten cards here then ten choose five would be the number of ways
that I could take five cards out of these ten where the order doesn't matter or if I
took the entire deck of fifty two cards the number of ways that I could take any five
of them would be fifty two choose five.
Ten choose three is the number of ways to create a committee of size three from a class
of ten students or it's the number of ways if you had a barn full of let's say ten horses
to choose three of them to go out and play in the meadow that could be done ten choose
three ways.
Notice that our numbers get smaller as we add restrictions for example the number of
three digit zip codes would be ten to the third or one thousand and if all the numbers
had to be different just like say the first second and third horse to finish in a ten
horse race the answer would be ten times nine times eight that's seven hundred twenty
which is less than a thousand and if order doesn't matter at all then the number will
be even smaller how much smaller as we'll see by a factor of three factorial by a factor
of six.
Okay now here's the formal definition for n choose k. n choose k is officially defined
to be the number of subsets of the set one through n with size k so for we met subsets
in lecture one four choose two for example would count the size two subsets of the set
one through four here are the size two subsets of one through four those are the we've seen
those before those are six of them and so therefore four choose two is six so for example
by the formal definition ten choose three is the number of ways to pick three numbers
from one through ten where order doesn't matter so I'll pick say two seven and eight which
by the way would be the same as picking two eight and seven ten choose three would also
be the number of length ten binary words words consisting of zeros and one where the number
one occurs exactly three times and therefore the number zero occurs seven times like here's
a length ten binary word with three ones why are there ten choose three of them at first
it might seem like hey doesn't order matter in this problem well the order matters in
terms of the sequence but how many of them have exactly three ones all we have to do
is choose which three positions contain the ones so here we've chosen positions two seven
and eight that's the same as choosing the positions two eight and seven so there are ten choose
three such words by the way when I think of binomial coefficients I'm reminded of a story
from a recent visit I took when I was speaking at another college and I was being given a
tour of the campus and one of the mathematicians said to me pointed to one of the buildings
and he said we call that the binomial cafeteria I said oh is it because they offer so many
choices and he said no no it's because you should buy no meal here by the way you may
wonder where the word buy in binomial comes from it comes from the fact that when creating
a subset of a set every entry has two possibilities either that entry is in the subset or it's
not in the subset or in our binary words of length n each digit has two possibilities
it's either a zero or a one okay so if n choose k is so important we should have a formula
for what it is so here it is I'm going to present it to you I'm normally not an advocate of
memorizing formulas but this one occurs so often and I don't want you to have to go
through the derivation each time you're okay to memorize this formula for any number k between
zero and n n choose k is equal to n factorial divided by k factorial times n minus k factorial
so for example 10 choose 3 is 10 factorial over 3 factorial times 7 factorial and since the
10 factorial over 7 factorial there's some cancellation going on there that's equal
to 10 times 9 times 8 we can calculate that as 720 divided by 6 or 120 so that's the formula
but why does it work I'll answer this in sort of an indirect way first let me ask you an easier
question okay imagine I have a classroom with 10 students and I have 10 chairs and three of those
chairs are in the first row and seven of those chairs are in the second row and I ask you how
many ways can those 10 different students sit among those 10 different chairs well that that
question's easy there are 10 factorial ways to do that because the first student has 10 choices
then the second student has nine choices and the third student has eight choices and so on the fact
that there was a first row and a second row didn't matter to answer it this way but let's answer it
a second way let's first decide who sits in the front then we'll then we'll arrange the people
in the front then we'll arrange the people in the back so how many ways can I choose
which three people get to sit in front 10 choose three once I've chosen that those three students
are going to sit in the front they can be arranged how many ways three factorial ways and what about
the people in the back how many ways can those seven people be arranged seven factorial ways
so by the rule of product we have 10 choose three times three factorial times seven factorial
ways for all the students to be seated now I've just given you two different answers to that
question which answer is right well our logic was impeccable both ways therefore our both answers
are right on the one hand the answer is 10 factorial on the other hand it's 10 choose three times
three factorial seven factorial and since both answers were right we can set them equal to each
other and when we do we get 10 choose three equals 10 factorial over three factorial times seven
factorial and the same logic will give you the general formula for n choose k so it makes
sense to look at certain specific values of k so for instance when when k is zero you'll notice
that n choose zero would give us n factorial over zero factorial n factorial and since zero
factorial is one we just get an answer of one which makes sense because there's exactly one way to
choose zero objects out of n all right now let's let's actually play some cards here let's let's
use this to analyze some poker hands starting with the question how many ways can you pick five
cards out of 52 how many five card poker hands are there we've already said the answer to that
is 52 choose five but now we have an actual formula that will allow us to calculate it to be
2,598,960 but what we might really be interested are questions like okay so how many full houses
do i have a full house consists of three of one value and two of the other like we might have
three queens and two sevens that would be a full house so how many full houses are there well let's
let's create a full house first i have um have to choose which value gets tripled
let's uh i've got how many choices for the tripled value 13 it could be any card value from ace to
king in my mind i like to make a definite choice now okay i've chosen queens okay once i've decided
that how many choices do i have for the next card value the card value that gets duplicated
while there are now 12 choices in my mind i'm thinking something like sevens okay now that
i've decided it's going to be queens and sevens i have to choose i have to decide which queens
and which sevens how many ways can i choose three queens out of the four possibilities by definition
four choose three and how many ways can i choose which two sevens four choose two and since four
choose three is numerically equal to four and four choose two is equal to six when i multiply
those numbers together i get 3744 so if you wanted the probability of being dealt a full house right
off the top of the deck the chances of that happening among all the roughly 2.6 million poker
hands about 3700 of them are full houses so 3700 over 2.6 million is about 1 in 700 is your chance
of getting a full house all right here's another question how many ways are there to get exactly
one pair so this time we choose which cards are going to be paired up let's say aces so i've got
13 choices for the paired value let's say for aces and then i decide which aces which two aces out
of the four am i going to have well there are four choose two ways to do that then we have to decide
here's the tricky part then we have to decide which three other card values all right let's say you
decided to go with two three and five how many ways can you decide on those three other card
values it's not 12 times 11 times 10 because that would put some order into the problem
instead it's 12 choose three so i've chosen i'm going to use twos threes and fives and then once
you've chosen those you then have to assign suits to each of those cards there's four choices for the
two four choices for the three four choices for the five multiply now all these numbers together
13 times four choose two times 12 choose three times four cubed and you get 1,098,240 when you
divide that by the total number of poker hands about 2.6 million then you get the probability of
getting exactly one pair is point four two all right here's another poker problem how many
straights are there and for those of you card players out there i'm including straight flushes
in this calculation so a straight would be something like 910 jack queen king five consecutive card
values in a row okay that can be as low as ace through five one two three four five as high as
10 through ace 10 jack queen king ace so there are 10 types of straights and that's the first
number in my calculation that's the bottom card of the straight once i've chosen the bottom card i
know what the other four values are then i have to assign suits to those cards and there's four choices
for the 10 four choices for the first card four choices for the next card and so on four to the
fifth ways of assigning suits that's a little over 10,000 ways of doing it the probability then of
getting a straight is going to be 10,240 divided by our divided by our 2.6 million that's about
one in 250 chance about about 0.4 chance of being dealt a straight here's another question
how many flushes are there a flush is five cards of the same suit like say the two three five eight
and king of hearts that would be uh that would be an example of a flush and again i'm going to
include straight flushes in this calculation so how many ways can that happen well there are
first decide what suit is going to be on every card there are four choices for that suit once
you've chosen that you now have 13 cards let's say all the hearts the ace of hearts through the
king of hearts to choose five cards for your hand and that can be done 13 choose five ways so the
total number of ways of doing it is four times 13 choose five that's a little over 5,000 and the
probability then of getting a flush is about one in 500 by the way if we compare that to the
probability of getting a straight which was about one in 250 we see that flushes are rarer and that's
why they're more valuable in the game of poker now i remember when i was counting poker hands
in one of my discrete mathematics classes years ago and i would take requests i'd say go ahead
throw out a poker hand we'll try and count it and somebody said okay what's how many poker hands
are garbage no pairs no straights no flushes okay so i said well let's try it let's first
consider hands that don't have any pairs in them okay no no repeated values so there how many ways
could we do that so well we have to have five different card values out of 13 so there's 13
choose five ways to pick which five different values we're going to use let's say two three five
eight and king once we've chosen that we can assign suits four to the fifth different ways
but we've over counted that answer is too big so we have to subtract off those poker hands that
were straights right because we don't want any straights we've calculated the number of straights
there are 10 times four to the fifth of those and we've also have to subtract off those hands
that were flushes right so the all these hands that have no pairs in them they might have been
straights they might have been flushes so i have to subtract off those flushes 13 choose five times
four different flushes but now i have to add back now that straight flush issue is going to come back
to haunt me because anything that was a straight and a flush these are called straight flushes
got subtracted off twice so i need to add those back in order to correct in order to get the
correct answer how many how many straight flushes are there there are 10 types of straights and once
i've chosen that i'm going to use a certain kind of straight like three four five six seven and there's
only four choices for the suits choose the first the suit of the first card four choices everything
else there's just one choice so there's our answer 13 choose five times four to the fifth minus 10
times four to the fifth minus 13 choose five times four plus 10 times four slightly over about 1.3
million slightly more than a half now a student of mine pointed out he said that your answer looks
interesting because it factors you could algebraically factor that as 13 choose five minus 10 times
four to the fifth minus four why is that is that a coincidence and i said there are no coincidences
in combinatorics there has to be a good reason why let's see why that is so in order to count that
we'd say well first choose any five values out of 13 how many ways can we do that 13 choose five
minus 10 uh 13 choose five but i have to subtract from that 10 ways for those 10 ways that are
straights i'm not allowed to have a straight so there's 13 choose five minus 10 ways to pick
my card values then i can assign suits practically however i want if i had no restrictions there'd
be four to the fifth ways of doing it but since they can't all be the same suits since i can't have
a flush the answer i have to multiply it by four to the fifth minus four let's summarize let's
recount what we've learned so far from a collection of n distinct objects how many ways
can you select k of them under the following assumptions for sequences when order matters
and repetition is allowed we came up with the answer of n to the k for arrangements where
order matters and repetition is not allowed we came up with the answer of n factorial
over n minus k factorial and in the case of subsets where order does not matter and repetition is
not allowed we came up with our answer n choose k on n factorial over k factorial times n minus k
factorial it's the number of subsets or combinations what if order does not matter and repetition is
allowed these are called multi subsets and we'll discuss them in lecture five we'll consider this
problem and many more variations in future lectures in fact in our next lecture we'll step back to get
an overview of all the types of counting problems whose 12 types are organized into what is sometimes
called the 12 fold way of combinatorics to see how this all unfolds please join me for the next
lecture
