The 12-fold way provides a nice road map of what we'll be doing in combinatorics.
Now when I give this lecture to my discrete mathematics class at Harvey Mudd College,
I tell my students not to take notes this time.
None of this material will be on the test, nor will you need it for the subsequent lectures.
But if you come back to this lecture after you've gained some more combinatorial experience,
you'll find that it will make more sense.
I think all the lectures in this course are worth a second viewing, but this one is especially
worth it.
Now this lecture is all about a combinatorics problem about a combinatorics problem.
Consider the question, how many ways can we place X pieces of candy into B bags?
Now B stands for the word bags, X stands for extremely sweet pieces of candy.
Now the answer to this question depends on a few factors.
Are the candies distinguishable like these?
They come in different shapes and sizes and flavors.
Or are the candies instead like these, where they all look alike?
So also we could ask about the bags.
Do the bags all look alike, is one bag just as good as any other?
Or perhaps the bags have been labeled so that maybe one of those bags is for Laurel,
one is for Ariel, one's for Dina, and one's for me.
So there are a few possibilities.
Also are there any restrictions on the bags?
For instance, maybe a bag can carry any number of candies, or maybe they can hold at most
one candy, the bags were really small, or maybe we will insist that each bag be given
at least one candy so that nobody ends up empty handed.
So my first question is, how many different combinatorics questions can come out of this
question?
So we saw that there are two possibilities for the candies, either they are distinguishable
or identical.
There are three possibilities for the capacities of the bags.
They could either have any number of candies, at most one candy, or at least one candy.
So by the rule of product, there are two times two times three possible questions, 12 possible
questions.
We can represent them in a number of ways.
We can represent these problems in the following table, sometimes referred to as the 12 fold
way of combinatorics.
Of course, there are other variations that we can add, like does order matter inside
of each bag?
For these problems, we'll assume the answer is no.
Everything that's in a bag, the order doesn't matter inside of it.
All that matters is the contents of the bag.
If order mattered, that would give us another dozen problems, and 12 is plenty.
Okay, so once again, here is our table of the 12 fold way, how many ways can X candies
be placed into B bags subject to these restrictions?
Now for certain values of X and B, the answer is obviously zero.
For example, if X is bigger than B, if I have more candy than bags, then there's going to
be no way for each bag to get at most one candy.
So that second column is going to be zero whenever X is bigger than B.
Similarly, if B is bigger than X, if I only had say two pieces of candy and four bags,
then there's no way that I would be able to distribute the candy into the bags in such
a way that every bag gets at least one candy.
Okay, so those situations are clear.
We'll focus on the situations where the answer is not zero.
The good news is that we can already answer many of the questions in the 12 fold way table
just from what we've learned in lecture two.
So let's do those now.
These three answers should be ones that you can figure out right now based on what you
already know.
Let's do the first one.
Suppose I have B distinguishable bags and X distinguishable candies.
All right, then how many ways can we distribute the candy to the bags?
And there are no restrictions on the bags.
Some bags can be empty.
Some bags could have several of them.
Anything goes.
So the first candy has how many choices?
It has B choices.
Okay, I'll say I put it in this bag.
This candy also has B choices.
This candy has B choices and so on.
So there's B times B times B, X times B to the X ways of doing that problem.
On the other hand, suppose that the bags are allowed to have at most one candy.
Then I have B choices for my first candy.
But now my second candy, instead of having B choices, since the bags can only hold one
or zero, since the bags can hold at most one, then I'll have B minus one choices for the
next one, then B minus two choices for the next one, and so on.
So with X candies altogether, we have B times B minus one all the way down to B minus X
plus one, otherwise known as B factorial over B minus X factorial ways to distribute them
in this situation.
Okay, now suppose the bags are still distinguishable, but the candies are identical, and the bags
still are only allowed to hold at most one candy.
Alright, then what's the situation?
Now all these candies are identical.
Let's say I had just two candies, and I have four identical, identical, actually in this
case four distinguishable looking bags.
So these bags are all distinguishable.
I just have to choose two of them that are going to hold at most one candy.
Like this one, and this one.
How many ways can I do that?
No bags allowed to get two or more.
So there'd be four choose two ways of solving that problem, or in general with B bags and
X candies, there'd be B choose X ways of deciding which B bags get the candy, and if X is bigger
than B, then we know that B choose X is zero.
There are two other entries in the table that are easy, but not very interesting.
Okay, and if each bag is allowed to have at most one candy, and if the bags are identical,
so here's the identical situation where all the bags look alike, and if the bags are identical,
situation where all the bags look alike, but the bags still are only allowed to have at most
one candy, then how many ways could I distribute X candies into those B bags?
Again, if X is bigger than B, if I have more candy than bags, the answer is zero.
And if I have less candy than bags, like say I have two candies, let me let them be distinct
candies, I've got these four identical bags, then how many ways can I distribute them?
Well, you say I could go here and here, but that's the same as going here and there, right?
Because the bags are all identical.
Every candy is going to get its own bag, so there's only going to be one way to do it,
whether your candies are distinguishable or identical.
Okay, so those are the next two entries of the table.
All right, the next situation, now we're going to encounter some new situations.
Suppose I have X identical candies and I have B distinguishable bags, then how many ways can I do this problem?
The answer is a familiar looking answer.
It's a binomial coefficient.
It's X plus B minus one, choose X.
That's the answer.
We understand what the answer says, but how do we derive that?
We derive it by what's called the method of stars and bars.
We'll learn about the method of stars and bars in lecture five, but here's a sneak preview of what it's all about.
You might call this next example the method of candies and bars or the candy bar method, if you will.
Okay, so how many ways can we distribute, let's say, ten identical candies into five distinct bags?
I even have a fifth bag here, so it's different from the rest because it doesn't have a label on it.
So I've got five distinct bags, ten identical candies.
So, for example, we might allocate our candies this way, as I'm showing you in the figure, to indicate that bag one gets two candies,
and bag two gets five candies, and bag three gets a candy, bag four gets a candy, bag five gets a candy.
Notice where I put my bars, my dividers, to indicate how many each bag got.
Or we might allocate them this way.
Now, by having the divider right at the beginning is telling us that bag one is empty, then bag two gets three, then bag three gets one,
bag four gets nothing, and bag five gets six candies.
So, do you agree that the number of ways to allocate the candy into these distinguishable bags is exactly the number of ways to arrange these ten circles,
these ten candies, and four bars?
All right, so I have these 14 objects, ten candies, and four bars, and how many ways can I decide where those bars are going to go?
Well, there are four bars out of 14 spaces they could land on, there's 14 choose four ways of doing it.
Now, by focusing on the candy, there would be, with ten circles there, there's 14 choose ten ways to distribute the candy.
When we have X candies and B bags, then the problem is to count the number of ways to arrange X candies and B minus one bars.
We have B minus one dividers, and that can be done.
B minus one choose X different ways.
Okay, so that explains that entry of the table.
Let's go to this one.
Suppose, again, my candy is identical, my bags are distinguishable, but now every bag has to get at least one candy.
Well, in that situation, what do you do?
You say every bag needs at least one candy?
Okay, let's give each one of them a candy.
The candies are all identical, and now we've reduced the problem to the earlier problem.
Now we just have B fewer candies than we had before, right?
And so now instead of distributing X candies into these B bags, we'll have X minus B candies to go into that bag, into the B bags.
So replacing X with X minus B in the problem we just solved, we would get X minus B plus B minus one choose X minus B,
which is equal to X minus one choose X minus B, which is also equal to X minus one choose B minus one.
That gives us the simplest, prettiest answer, X minus one choose B minus one.
Okay, next we move to the situation where we're dealing with distinct candies and identical looking bags.
And now, well, we get stuck a little bit.
We're going to focus on this situation, and we have the restriction that every bag gets at least one candy.
Okay, so I'll say it again.
This is the number of ways to distribute X distinct candy into B identical paper bags where each bag must get at least one candy.
I'm going to, you might say, cop out a little bit.
I'm going to define the answer to this problem as SXB, where SXB is called a sterling number of the second kind.
And here's what SXB is.
So SXB is simply the answer to this question.
Now, so for example, if I have 11 distinct pieces of candy and four identical brown paper bags or red paper bags in this case,
then there are how many ways to answer this question?
S11-4 in such a way that none of the bags are empty.
Notice that since the bags all look alike, this allocation here would be the same as this allocation there, right?
Because all the bags are identical, then those would not be different.
On the other hand, if I say switched this candy with this candy, these would be different arrangements, right?
Because the gold candy was with the black jelly bean in this situation.
Whereas in that situation, the red candy was with the black jelly bean, okay?
We'll eventually come up with a formula for SXB in lecture six.
When we study the principle of inclusion-exclusion.
But for now, we'll just content ourselves with answering this question as SXB, a sterling number of the second kind.
By the way, in case you were wondering, we mentioned these were called sterling numbers of the second kind.
If you were wondering what sterling numbers of the first kind are, they count permutations of X objects with exactly B cycles.
We'll briefly talk about permutations and cycles in lecture 13 as we apply number theory to the mathematics of card shuffling.
Once we know sterling numbers, there are two other entries of our table that we can get pretty quickly.
For example, let's go back to the situation where the candies and the bags are distinguishable.
Then how many ways can I do that same problem where every bag has to get at least one candy?
Well, it's the same as the last problem.
First, pretend as if the bags were identical.
Distribute your 11 candies or your X candies into the B bags, SXB ways, and then make the bags distinguishable by putting labels on them.
Decide which of those bags is for Laurel, which is for Ariel, which is for Dino, which is for me, and how many ways can we do that?
Here we could do that four factorial ways.
In general, you'd be able to do that B factorial ways.
And so the answer to that problem is going to be B factorial times the answer to the previous problem, that is B factorial times SXB.
Alright, now what if our bags are identical, but we allow some bags to be empty?
So I'm going to the case where I don't have any restrictions, some bags are allowed to be empty.
My candies are all distinguishable.
Then how many ways can we do that?
Well, here we say, well, if all the bags had to have something in them, we know there were S114 ways of distributing those 11 candies among four identical bags.
On the other hand, if they don't all have to have something in them, then I'm either going to have four bags or three bags or two bags or one bag.
So the answer is S114 if they're all full, or S113 if three of them are full, or S112 if two of them are full, or S111 if one of them is full.
And the others are empty.
Alright, so since the bags are identical, we get our answer of S111 plus S112 plus S113 plus S114.
And in general, now if we want to use summation notation, which we'll introduce in lecture four, the answer would be the sum of S11k as k goes from 1 to 4.
And for an arbitrary x and b, the answer would be the sum of Sxk as k goes from 1 to b.
I'll use that compact notation since it fits in our table nicely.
Finally, we turn our attention to the bottom row of the table where the candies and the bags are identical.
So I'm going to put all these distinguishable candies away, only deal with identical candies now, and all my bags are identical too.
Alright, so the problems in this row are sometimes called integer partition problems in contrast to the problems in the third row, which are sometimes called set partition problems.
So the question is, how many ways can I put x identical candies?
How many ways can I put them into b identical non-empty bags?
I'm going to do the situation where every bag has at least one candy.
Again, we're going to begin by inventing an answer.
We're going to call the answer to this problem pb of x, which stands for the number of partitions of the number x, the integer x, into exactly b parts.
So for example, let's say I have six identical candies, here's six identical candies, and three identical bags.
Now, how many ways can I distribute these six candies into three identical bags?
I can either go four in a bag, then one, then one, which is the same as going one and four and one, right, because the bags are identical.
So I can either do four plus one plus one, or I could do three plus two plus one, or I could do two plus two plus two.
That's it. Those are the three ways, because everything's identical.
The bags are identical looking, the candy's identical looking.
There's just three ways of doing it, so we say that p3 of six is equal to three.
Here's another example. Suppose I had ten identical candies to be placed into five identical bags.
Then that can be done in exactly seven ways.
Now, I'm not going to actually do the distribution here, but you can think of, this is why we call this an integer partition.
We're taking the number ten, and we're breaking it into smaller numbers.
So ten can be thought of as six plus one plus one plus one plus one, or you could write the number ten as five plus two plus one plus one plus one.
Notice I'm writing my numbers in decreasing order, because since the order doesn't matter, some bag gets five, some bag gets two, some bag gets one, some bag gets one, some bag gets one.
You may as well write them in decreasing order, and here we have seven ways of doing it, so p5 of ten is seven.
When the objects are identical, the number of ways of putting candies into bags is smaller than when things are distinguishable,
so it's a little bit surprising that there's actually no simple formula for partition numbers.
Although there are ways of calculating them through a recursion, and we'll say more about recursions in lectures seven and eight,
the best answer we can give to the number of ways to put x-identical candies into b non-empty bags is pb of x.
For the last entry of our table, let's consider the situation where some of our bags are allowed to be empty.
For example, I may have six identical candies and three paper bags, then we know that there are p3 of six ways that use exactly three of the bags.
How many use just two bags? Well, p2 of six, which is also equal to three, because you could write the number six as five plus one, or four plus two, or three plus three.
How many use just one bag? Well, p1 of six, which is just one, put all six candies into one bag.
Altogether, there are seven ways to allocate the candy, three plus three plus one, or p3 of six plus p2 of six plus p1 of six ways.
Or if we want to write this using sigma notation, that's equal to the sum of pk of six, as k goes from one to three.
And in general, with x candies and b bags, the number of allocations would be the sum of pk of x, as k goes from one to b.
And that gives us the final entry of our 12-fold-way table. Isn't it beautiful?
Let's look at some numbers to see if our table looks reasonable, okay?
So with five candies and ten bags, if we plug into all the formulas from our 12-fold-way table, these are the numbers that we get.
Now, whenever I look at numbers, I like to sort of apply a sanity test to them.
That is, are these numbers reasonable? What sorts of things should always be true, no matter what numbers I'm using,
whether it's five and ten or something else?
Well, clearly the top row where the bags are different-looking and the candies are different-looking,
there should be more ways of doing that stuff than when some of the objects are identical.
So the top row should always dominate all the rows beneath it, and you can see clearly here that it does.
Also, the first column where we have no restrictions on the bags, some bags can be empty,
some bags can have more than one object, then there should be more ways of doing that
than the situations where the bags are restricted, where a bag can have at most one candy,
or a bag needs at least one candy.
So the first column should dominate the second and the third column, and it does.
Even the bottom row where everything's identical, that should be the least ways of doing things, right?
That should be dominated by the third row and the second row, and you can see that that happens too.
On the other hand, with ten candies and five bags, that's the situation I have here,
then we get these numbers, right?
Notice these numbers are quite a bit bigger, but the same sanity test applies.
The first row dominates the rows below it, the leftmost column dominates the other two columns,
the bottom row is less than the rows that are above it.
And just for fun, let's see what happens when X and B are equal to the same number N.
Here, we get, this time instead of having zeros in a given row, because we no longer have more,
we don't have B bigger than X, we don't have X bigger than B.
Both B and X are equal to N, so we have a bunch of ones this time.
And look at the numbers that we have, they're familiar numbers to us.
There's N to the N, an exponential type function.
There's N factorial appearing twice.
There's a binomial coefficient, 2N minus 1, choose N appearing.
And we've got these two other numbers, B of N, which stands for the Nth Bell number,
and that's just the sum of the sterling numbers.
And P of N is the number of, is known as the Nth partition number,
and that's the number of ways to partition the integer N into any number of parts.
Whereas the rightmost number, we had to have partitioning N into exactly B parts.
Here, we're partitioning it to any number of parts.
Let's say a little bit more about partition numbers.
So partition numbers are usually defined this way.
Pk of N is the number of ways to express the integer N as the sum of k positive numbers, where order doesn't matter.
So for example, P3 of 6 is 3 because 6 can be written as the sum of 3 integers in 3 ways.
4 plus 1 plus 1, 3 plus 2 plus 1, or 2 plus 2 plus 2.
Since the order doesn't matter, I list the numbers again in decreasing order.
Equivalently, you can say that Pk of N is the number of ways to distribute N identical candies
into k identical bags with no empty bags, as we saw before.
Some values of Pk of N are obvious.
For instance, when N is greater than or equal to 0, PN of N is equal to 1.
We just put one candy in each bag.
Likewise, for N greater than 0, P1 of N is also equal to 1.
If I only have one bag and N identical candies, guess what?
They all go into that bag.
And if there are more bags than candy, then Pk of N is 0 whenever k is bigger than N.
But what about the non-obvious situations?
If there's no formula for Pk of N, then how do we compute it?
The answer is by using a recursion, that is, by expressing Pk of N in terms of smaller problems.
For example, when computing P3 of 6, we can break the problem into two cases.
Either the smallest bag has size 1, or the smallest bag has size that's more than 1.
So how many, where the smallest bag has size 1?
If I have six pieces of candy, then that would require us to have two bags for the remaining five candies.
And that can be done, how many ways to put five identical candies into two bags?
P2 of 5 ways, which is a smaller problem.
In fact, P2 of 5 is 2 because you could distribute those candies, either 4 and 1 or 3 and 2.
Again, remember, my bags are identical.
Okay, how many, where the smallest bag has more than one?
Well, if the smallest bag has more than one, that means all the bags have to have at least one,
has to have more than one candy in it, right?
If the smallest bag has more than one, and we still have three bags to fill with the remaining, with the remaining candies,
and that can be done P3 of 3, that is one way.
Therefore, P3 of 6 is equal to P2 of 5 plus P3 of 3, which is 2 plus 1, which equals 3.
And in general, for k between 1 and n, we get this recurrence, Pk of n is equal to Pk minus 1 of n minus 1 plus Pk of n minus k.
This would allow our computer to calculate Pk of n for any specific value of n and k.
As I said at the beginning of the lecture, don't panic if some of this material went by a little quickly.
It's a good preview of things to come, and it will definitely make more sense if you come back to this lecture later,
as you become more comfortable with combinatorial concepts and arguments.
In our next lecture, we go more deeply into the combinatorics of combinations,
as we explore the beautiful properties of Pascal's Triangle.
