Let's begin this lecture with a warm-up question, although maybe I should call this a cool-down
question. Suppose a restaurant has, say, 31 flavors of ice cream. Then, how many triple
cones are possible? Now, of course, if you're an ice cream connoisseur, the order in which
the flavors appear on the cone is important, right? It affects your tasting experience.
So how many ways can we create a triple cone? Well, we have 31 choices for the first scoop,
then 31 choices for the next scoop, then 31 choices for the third scoop. So, all together
there would be 31 times 31 times 31, 31 cubed, or 29,791 possibilities. It would take you
many years to go through all possibilities if you had a triple scoop of ice cream every
day. Okay, now suppose we say, well, okay, we don't need that many possibilities. Suppose
we insist instead of, we'll still go with a triple scoop of ice cream, but this time,
instead of doing any sequence, like we did in the first problem, we're going to restrict
our sequence so that we're not allowed to repeat flavors. Okay, so you're not interested
in repeating flavors, then you'd have 31 choices for the first scoop, then 30 choices for the
second scoop, then 29 choices for the third scoop, all together that's 31 times 30 times
29, 26,970 possibilities, which is a little bit less than 31 cubed. So, next question,
how many triple cups are possible? Now, if your three scoops of ice cream appear in
a cup, then the order in the cup doesn't matter, right? Because you could take your
spoon and dig around however you'd like. So, in a cup, a triple cup, the order won't matter.
So now, how many possibilities do we have? This is a subsets problem, right? So, we've
got 31 flavors of ice cream. Choose three different flavors. How many ways can we do
it? By definition, 31 choose three, which we can calculate is 31 times 30 times 29, the
first three numbers on the top, divided by three factorial, one times two times three,
on the bottom. You get 4,495. Now, that happens to be exactly one-sixth of the answer to the
previous problem, right? The number of triple cones was 31 times 30 times 29. This is 31
times 30 times 29 divided by three factorial. Why is that? Well, look at any cup and ask
yourself, how many different cones could you create using the three different flavors from
the cup? So, if your cup has chocolate, vanilla, and strawberry, you can put it on the cone
three factorial different ways, right? Three choices, what goes first, then two, then one.
That's why there are six times, three factorial times, as many triple cones without repetition,
as there are triple cups. Okay, now for the question of the day. Suppose your flavors
can be repeated and you're going to put them in a cup. Then, how many triple cups are possible
where you allow repetition? The most obvious answer to try is, well, building on the logic
that we just went through, there are 31 cubed possible triple cones, maybe one-sixth of those
should be the number of triple cups. I claim that that answer is can't be right, and the
most obvious reason why it can't be right is 31 cubed over six isn't even a whole number,
right? Six doesn't go into 31 cubed, so there's no way we get an integer out of that. What's
wrong with that, though? What goes wrong with the logic? The problem is, since my cups allow
repeated flavors, it's not always going to be the case that I can have, that those flavors
can produce six different cones. For instance, if I had all vanilla in my cup, then there's
only one triple cone we could create from that, or if I had two vanillas in one strawberry
in the cup, then there'd be three different cones, not six different cones, that I could
create. So, how do we answer that question, then? From 31 flavors, how many triple cups
are possible, order is not important, and the repetition is allowed. Well, here we can
break the problem down into three cases. We can ask ourselves, well, how many of those
triple cups use exactly three flavors? How many use two flavors? How many use one flavor?
And then by the rule of sum, we could add those answers together. So, how many use three
flavors? We've already done that one. If they're all different, it's 31 choose three, 4,495.
How many, let me skip one and say, how many use one flavor? That's easy, 31 choices, choose
your one flavor, there's 31 ways to do it. Okay, how about the middle question? How many
use exactly two flavors? Now, it's tempting to say 31 choose two, end of story, but not
quite, because if you chose your two flavors as chocolate and vanilla, then you still have
a choice to make. Am I going to have two chocolates and a vanilla, or two vanillas and a chocolate?
All right, so depending on what you've chosen there, there are two ways of doing that. So,
the number of triple cups that use exactly two flavors is 31 choose two times two, that's
930. If we add those answers together, the numbers that use three flavors, two flavors,
and one flavor, we get a total of 5456. Now, that answer worked fine for three in a cup,
but what if we were, instead of a cup of ice cream, we were going to go for a bucket
of ice cream that has 10 scoops in it. We wouldn't want to do this, we wouldn't want
to take this approach to answer that problem. We'd have many more than 10 cases to go through.
And yet, surprisingly, this problem has a simple answer, even a simpler solution than
the one we came up with. We're going to see, for instance, that with 31 flavors, the number
of triple cups turns out to be exactly 33 choose three, or 5456, just like we saw before.
But look at this and say, where's the 33 in this problem? How could you expect to get
33 choose three? That's what we're going to learn in this lecture. The topic, I'm going
to introduce a word that's probably unfamiliar to you. We call this multi-choosing. Multi-choosing
definition. We define n multi-choose k. It looks like n choose k, but it has an extra
set of parentheses around it. n multi-choose k is the number of ways to choose k objects
from a set of n objects, where order is not important, but repetition is allowed. So,
for example, if n is 31, like the number of ice cream flavors, and k is 3, like the number
that are going to go into my cup, then we just showed the long way that 31 multi-choose
3 is 5456. Let's look at some smaller examples. For instance, when n is 3 and k is 2, what
would 3 multi-choose 2 be? Well, from the set of flavors, we'll call them flavors 1,
2, and 3, I'm going to choose two of them. I'm going to have two scoops in a cup, where
the order doesn't matter. How many ways can I do that? You can see for yourself there
are six ways of doing it. In your cup, you can have 1 and 1, 1 and 2, 1 and 3, 2 and
2, 2 and 3, or 3 and 3. Six ways of doing it. What's 2 multi-choose 3? Well, at the surface
it's 2 multi-choose 3. That sounds weird. It sounds weird because 2 choose 3 is 0. The
number of ways to pick a committee of size 3 from a class of size 2, that's obviously
0, but 2 multi-choose 3 is not 0 because how many ways can I pick, say a triple cup, where
I only have two choices for flavors, flavor 1 and flavor 2? How many triple cups are
possible? They can all be a flavor 1, or I can have two of them a flavor 1, or one of
them a flavor 1. There are four possibilities, and so 2 multi-choose 3 is in fact 4.
So how are we going to attack these multi-choose problems? I like what's known as the method
of stars and bars. Let's look at this through an example. Suppose n is 3 and k is 10. I've
got three flavors of ice cream, and I'm going to have a bucket of size 10. 10 scoops in
my bucket. How many ways can I do that? We're going to represent any bucket using 10 stars
and two bars. I'm just going to give you a few examples until you get the hang of it.
For instance, suppose I have four stars and a bar, then two stars and a bar, followed
by four stars. That's going to represent four scoops of flavor 1 and two scoops of flavor
2 and four scoops of flavor 3. Remember, there's no order inside this bucket. I just have four
of flavor 1, two of flavor 2, and four of flavor 3, and that's represented by 4, 2, 4.
This would correspond to the multi-subset 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, because I've got 4 of flavor
1, 2, 2, because I've got 2 of flavor 2, and 3, 3, 3, 3, since I have 4 of flavor 3.
Here's another example. Suppose I have two stars, a bar, eight stars, and a bar. Then
what does that represent? That represents 2 of flavor 1, 8 of flavor 2, and none of
flavor 3. This would correspond to the multi-subset 1, 1, and then 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2.
How about this one? Maybe we can work this one backwards. Suppose I wanted to represent
the allocation of four scoops of flavor 1, no scoops of flavor 2, and six scoops of
flavor 3. How would you represent that with stars and bars? You'd have four stars, then
a bar because we're done with flavor 1, then immediately another bar because there's nothing
for flavor 2, then six stars to represent flavor 3.
I hope you see through these examples that the number of ways of putting in 10 scoops
into your bucket with three choices of flavors is equal to the number of ways of arranging
10 stars and two bars. Three, multi-choose 10. The answer to our problem is the number
of ways of arranging 10 stars and two bars. How many ways can you do it? How many objects
are we playing with? What's the total number of stars plus bars? 10 plus 2 is 12. They're
going to occupy 12 physical spaces. How many ways can I choose two of those spaces to be
bars? By definition, 12 choose two. I'll choose two. I'll choose two. I'll choose
spaces 5 and 6. Or you could have said, how many ways can I choose 10 of those spaces
to be stars? And that we can do 12 choose 10 ways. Either way, we get three multi-choose
10 is equal to 12 choose 2, or we know from symmetry that's equal to 12 choose 10.
In general, we have the multi-choose formula, the number of ways of arranging n multi-choose
k. So n multi-choose k, you have n flavors of ice cream and you're going to put k in
your bucket. If you have n flavors of ice cream and k in your bucket, how many stars
are you going to have? You're going to have k stars. How many bars are you going to have?
Well, if you have n flavors of ice cream, you're going to need n minus 1 bars to separate
those flavors. And how many ways can we arrange k stars and n minus 1 bars? n plus k minus
1, that's the total number of stars and bars, k plus n minus 1 or n plus k minus 1, same
thing, choose n minus 1. Choose where those bars are going to go. And n plus k minus 1
choose n minus 1 by symmetry, that's the same as n plus k minus 1, choose k.
So here it is officially, the multi-choose formula, n multi-choose k is nothing more
than an ordinary binomial coefficient, n plus k minus 1, choose k. If we go back to our
original ice cream problem that we started with, we had the problem of choosing 3 in
a cup from 31 flavors. We were interested in 31 multi-choose 3, and by the multi-choose
formula, that's going to be 31 plus 3 minus 1, choose 3. 33 choose 3, which you can calculate
is 5,456. So let's summarize what we learned from lecture 2. From a collection of n distinct
objects, we answered in lecture 2 three of the four questions. From a collection of n
distinct objects, how many ways can you select k of them under the following assumptions?
If we're better equipped to answer this question, how many sequences are there where order matters
and repetition is allowed? Here we saw that there were n to the k ways of doing it, n choices,
n choices, n choices, k times. Also we saw sequences without repetition where order
matters and repetition is not allowed. So there would be n choices for the first object,
and n minus 1 choices for the second object, all the way down to n minus k plus 1 choices
for the kth object. Now I want you to look at that product because I've got k numbers
in it, starting with n, then n minus 1, and the kth number in that product is n minus k
plus 1. I'm going to draw a comparison to that one later. So when n is 10 and k is 5,
we get 10 times 9 times 8 times 7 times 6, 30,240.
What about the subset problem? If order doesn't matter and repetition is not allowed, we have
our usual subset formula. n choose k is n factorial over k factorial, n minus k factorial. That
is, and when n is 10 and k is 5, that says 10 choose 5 is exactly 252. And now we come
to the problem that we weren't able to answer before, where order does not matter and repetition
is allowed. We now know that that is n multi-choose k. From a set of n objects, we're going to
choose k of them. Order doesn't matter. Repetition is allowed. We get n plus k minus 1 choose
k. And if you look at that product, I'm writing it from smallest number to largest number,
n times n plus 1 times n plus 2 up to n plus k minus 1 divided by k factorial. So that's
the product of k numbers starting at n and going up. Whereas with subsets, with n choose
k, we have the product of k numbers starting at n and going down.
I'm going to ask you a new question, but it has the same answer. How many ways can we
distribute k identical pieces of candy, identical pieces? They're all lollipops, all the same
flavor, to n hungry ninjas. I'm choosing ninjas because ninjas begins with n. And candies,
if I spell it wrong, begins with k. For example, suppose I have three ninjas and ten pieces
of candy. How many ways can I distribute those pieces of candy to the ninjas? Again, we can
answer that question with a stars and bars argument. We can put ourselves with ten stars
and two bars. So the arrangement of four stars and a bar, two stars and a bar followed
by four stars, now means that ninja one gets four candies, ninja two gets two candies,
and ninja three gets four candies. How many ways can we do that? We know the answer to
that one. Twelve choose two or twelve choose ten ways. Is that a coincidence? Why should
this a very different sounding question have the same answer? Well, there's a direct connection
between them. So for instance, you could think of these, the first ninja getting four pieces
of candy like our choice to use four scoops of flavor one, and the second ninja getting
two pieces of candy means two choices of flavor two, and the third ninja getting four pieces
of candy is just like putting four scoops of flavor three. So here's a related question.
How many ways can we distribute K identical candies to N ninjas, but this time because
we don't want to get attacked by any of these ninjas, every ninja must get at least one candy.
So how do we do this? Again, the candy is identical, and since the candy is identical,
we can start just to be on the safe side, safe for our own security, is we're going
to give each ninja one candy right off the bat. How many ways can that be done? One way.
One way because all those candies are identical. And then the problem reduces to distributing
the remaining K minus N candies to the N ninjas. And how many ways can we do that? It's
not N multi-choose K anymore, it's N multi-choose K minus N. And if you plug that into the multi-choose
formula, the answer simplifies to K minus one, choose N minus one. Now there's a rule
in combinatorics that says there are never coincidences in combinatorics. If you see
a simple answer like K minus one, choose N minus one, then there's got to be a good reason
for it. There has to be some direct way of getting that answer. So here's a much simpler
explanation for that problem. How we could get K minus one, choose N minus one, without
even mentioning multi-choose. So here imagine I've got these ten pieces of candy and I've
got these three ninjas. I'm going to spread those ten pieces of candy along the table
and I'm going to leave one space, a physical space, in between each candy. And now to decide
how the candy is going to be allocated to the ninjas, I'm going to stick, I'm still going
to have two bars to distribute, but I can't put two bars in one space because that would
result in a ninja being empty handed, and we don't want that to happen. So we have to
put two bars among how many spaces? Well, I had ten stars in between those stars representing
the candies. There were nine spaces. So there's nine choose two ways of getting that answer.
There's nine ways of putting the bars there. So that's why we would get K minus one, choose
N minus one, as the number of ways to allocate your K identical candies to N ninja, where
everyone gets at least one candy. Incidentally, this question is much harder when the candies
are distinct. That will require techniques from our next lecture on the principle of inclusion
exclusion. But let's take a look at another problem from my favorite game of all actually
is the game of backgammon. And I spent a good amount of time as a student and as a graduate
student, even a little bit of time as a professor, analyzing the game of backgammon. And one
of the things is every game eventually ends up with having to take off all your checkers
before your opponent takes off all of his or her checkers. And you can't start taking
off your checkers until all 15 of your checkers are inside what's called your home board. And
that home board consists of six points. The points look like little triangles. And you
can have as many checkers on any of those points. So once all 15 checkers are inside
your board, you can start taking them off. So here is a typical what's called bear off
position. And the question you may want to answer is how many ways could you distribute
these 15 checkers, their identical checkers, among the six landing spaces. And again, a
landing space can be empty or it could have all 15 checkers if need be. So again, here's
a typical picture. This represents a multi set, right? It's a physical embodiment of
a multi set. This would represent the multi set 6666 because I got four checkers on the
six point 55 because I got two checkers on that five point 443332211. Okay, so that's
a multi set. How many multi sets are there? Well, we've got six points on which to allocate
those 15 checkers. So the number of multi sets that you can create is six multi choose
15. And we know that that that simplifies to six plus 15 minus one choose 15 or 20 choose
15. Now, the other question might say is, but wait a second, as you start taking these
checkers off, as you start taking them off the board, you're not going to have 15 checkers
anymore. What's the total number of bear off positions? A bear off position can have any
number of checkers on it from 15 checkers 141312 all the way down to zero if you'd like. So
now how many positions are there? How many how many bear off positions and backgammon
are there? Well, here you have six multi choose 15 ways to allocate the 15 checkers. You'll
have six multi choose 14 ways for 14 checkers six multi choose 13 for 13 checkers all the
way down to six multi choose zero. That's fine. That is a valid answer to your question
and you can add up all 16 of those numbers. However, I claim that that answer simplifies
and a simpler way of answering that is that that whole sum collapses to seven multi choose
15. How did I get seven multi choose 15? Let's think of ourselves as we have those six points
where those checkers are are in to bear off and then a seventh point where we drop them
after we've taken them off. So really you could think of that problem as distributing 15
checkers not among six points, but of seven points. That's and therefore you're going to
have 15 or fewer checkers among those first six points. And so seven multi choose 15. That's
equal to 21 choose 15, which is 21 choose six, which turns out to be 54,264. Incidentally,
this backgammon analysis has allowed us to prove a very interesting combinatorial identity.
What we've shown by that same argument is if you take n multi choose zero plus n multi
choose one plus n multi choose two all the way up to n multi choose M, you're going to get
n plus one multi choose M. Does that make sense? If we have instead of bearing off among six
points, if we have n points for which we were going to put M or fewer checkers, that's the
same as putting exactly M checkers among n plus one points. What's kind of curious about
that formula, by the way, is that there is no simplification for the choose version of
that formula. That is, if you say n choose zero plus n choose one plus n choose two up to n choose
M, instead of summing multi chooses, summing chooses, you don't get anything simplified.
And that's kind of strange, but there just is no simplification for that. Here's another
question in the spirit of multiple choices. How many ways can I distribute 11 candies so that Mara,
Patty, Ira, and Steven get one candy, two candies, four candies, and four candies respectively?
So how many ways can I distribute the candies? Well, first, these candies are distinguishable.
They're not all lollipops, but I've got 11 different candies. So we'll let Mara choose first.
So she has 11 choices for which candy she wants. Once she's done that, then Patty is going to have
two choices from the remaining 10. So she can choose those 10 ways, 10 choose two ways.
Then Ira can choose four candies from the remaining eight. He can do that eight choose four ways.
And Steven, he has to choose the other four. So how many ways can we do that? Oh my gosh, look what
happened. That turns out to be the same question as how many ways can you rearrange the letters
of Mississippi? And as we just saw, there are 11 choose one times 10 choose two times eight choose four
ways of doing it, right? First decide where the M's are going to go, then you can decide where the P's
are going to go, and then you can decide where the I's are going to go. Now, if you expand that out
using factorials, you'll see a curious thing happen. We get massive cancellation, and we get 11 factorial
over one factorial, two factorial, four factorial, four factorial. And those factorials were the number
of candies that each child got, or the number of appearances of each letter in Mississippi.
Incidentally, had you chose them in a different order, if you let Ira go first by picking which
four out of the 11, and then Steven choose which four of the remaining seven to do.
In other words, if you first distributed the I's, then the S's, then the P's, you still get the same
fraction. This, by the way, has a nice notation. Instead of calling it a binomial coefficient,
it's called a multinomial coefficient. And so 11 factorial over four factorial, four factorial,
two factorial, one factorial, that has this multinomial term, 11 over four, four, two, one.
Just as we experienced the binomial theorem in lecture four, there's a similar sounding
multinomial theorem. Instead of looking at x plus y to the n, being expressed in terms of binomial
coefficients, we can look at x plus y plus z to the n, and get that expressed in terms of
multinomial coefficients. And whether we're adding x plus y plus z, or a whole bunch of numbers,
x plus y plus alpha plus beta plus gamma plus z, we can write that in terms of something that looks
a lot like the binomial theorem, but instead uses multinomial coefficients.
Okay, let's end this lecture on an easy one. From the word combinatorics, how many ways can you spell
comic? And I'm going to, my combinatorics word, I'm using all different colored letters, so all the
C's are different colors, all the O's are different colors, and so on. How many ways could you spell
comic? Well, I would have, the first C could be chosen in two different ways. I've got two colors
of C's to use. The O, there'd be two choices of O's to use. The M, there's just one M to use. The I,
there're going to be two choices of I to use. And then the second C, there's only going to be one choice
for that. There's only one way to do that. So by the rule of product, there's two times two times one
times two times one, eight ways to spell comic. Last question, from the word combinatorics, how many
ways can you spell coincidence? The answer, of course, is zero, because as I've hoped you've
learned in this lecture and what we've done so far in combinatorics, there are no coincidences
in combinatorics. Thank you.
