In this lecture, we study the structure of numbers, that is, how numbers can be represented
in terms of simpler numbers that have desirable properties.
We will find, for instance, that the powers of two, which arose so often in our solution
to combinatorial problems, form a particularly nice set of additive building blocks for the
positive integers, whereas the prime numbers, whose only positive divisors are one in itself,
form an especially nice, multiplicative set of building blocks, as we'll demonstrate
with the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
In discrete mathematics, it's often convenient to represent numbers in terms of powers of
two.
This is called binary representation.
For example, the number 83, we can write that as 64 plus 16 plus 2 plus 1.
That has binary representation, 101, 0011, which means that 83 is 1 times 2 to the 6th
plus 0 times 2 to the 5th plus 1 times 2 to the 4th, and so on.
Computers represent numbers using binary representation.
So how many length and binary sequences are possible?
Well, we know by the rule of product that there are two choices for the first number,
we call those numbers bits, two choices for the second bit, two choices for the third bit,
two choices for the nth bit, there are two to the n binary sequences of length n.
And the numbers they represent go all the way from all zeros, which represents the number
zero, to the binary number having all ones, which represents, well, what would it represent?
Working backwards, 1 plus 2 plus 4 plus 8, all the way up to 2 to the n minus 1, and
when you sum those numbers, you can prove by induction that gives you 2 to the n minus 1.
Powers of 2 provide a convenient set of building blocks for the integers since we can show
by induction that every integer has a unique binary representation.
Actually, the induction proof uses something called strong induction, and we'll see an
example of strong induction later this lecture.
Next we explore the multiplicative building blocks of the integers.
The definition of the day, our prime definition.
A positive number is prime if it has exactly two positive divisors, namely one and itself.
So the first several prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and so on.
A positive number with three or more positive divisors is called composite.
Composite numbers can be broken into smaller parts, this is called factoring.
For example, 6 is 2 times 3, 8 can be factored as 2 times 4, 9 can be factored as 3 times
3, and so on.
They are composed of more than one part, that's why we call them composite.
By the way, the number 1 is neither prime nor composite.
Mathematicians give that a name, they call a number like that a unit, it's a unit because
it divides into everything in our number system.
Technically, if we wanted to think about negative numbers as well, negative 1 would also be
a unit.
The number 0 is not considered to be prime or composite either, we have a special name
for that kind of number, we call it zero.
In all seriousness, a zero is something which when you add zero to it, it doesn't change.
Now every number can be factored into primes.
So for example, we know 8, we wrote it as 2 times 4 earlier, we can write 8 as 2 times
2 times 2.
How about 2009, we can factor that as 7 times 7 times 41.
But you might wonder, can 2009 be factored another way, aside from mixing up the digits
so that you got say 41 times 7 times 7, is there another way of factoring that number?
The answer is no, and this is the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic says that every number greater than 1 has a unique
prime factorization.
Now we learned this fact in grade school, but I'm sure it wasn't proved to you, it
was probably just presented as a fact.
In this lecture, we'll learn why it's true and see some interesting applications.
But to get to that, we first need an important theorem, and I give this theorem a name because
it's so important, I call it the important theorem.
It says this, if D divides the number AB, and D and A are relatively prime, then D divides
B. Think of what that's saying, says D and A are relatively prime, so they have nothing
in common, yet D divides this product A times B, therefore all of that D has to be going
into B.
That's the intuition, but here's a rigorous proof.
Since D divides AB, then we can write AB as D times some integer Q, so AB equals DQ.
Now since D and A are relatively prime, remember Beizut's theorem tells us that there must
be an integer combination of D and A that gives us 1, because that's the greatest common
divisor.
Now, take that equation and multiply both sides by B, that tells me that DXB plus ABY equals
B. But now remember AB is equal to DQ, so we can replace AB with DQ to get DXB plus
DQY equals B. And now I can factor out a D on the left side, D times some integer, XB
plus QY equals B, and since D times an integer gives me B, that tells me that D divides B.
When the number D is prime, we actually have an important special case, and I call this
special case the theorem of prime importance.
It says this, let P be prime.
If P divides AB, then P divides A, or P divides B. This is not a property that composite
numbers have.
If 6 divides 3 times 4, doesn't mean that 6 divides 3, or 6 divides 4.
But with prime numbers, you always have this nice property.
Here's the proof.
Suppose P divides AB.
If P divides A, then we're done, there's nothing more to prove.
Otherwise P doesn't divide A, in which case P and A have to have a greatest common divisor
of 1.
Now why is that?
Well P being prime only has two divisors, namely 1 and P. And since P does not go into
A, then the only thing left over to go into A is 1.
So their greatest common divisor is 1, which means that P and A are relatively prime.
Now P and A are relatively prime and P divides AB, so by the important theorem, that tells
us that P divides B. So either way, we have been able to conclude that P divides A, or
P divides B. This theorem, by the way, can be extended using induction.
So there's a general version of the theorem of prime importance that we're going to take
advantage of.
It says if P is a prime number and P divides the product A1 times A2 times A3 up through
An, then P divides A1, or P divides A2, or P divides An.
So that theorem, by the way, can be proved by induction as well.
Now we're ready to start the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
The first half of it anyway says every number n greater than or equal to 2 can be factored
into primes.
So here's the idea of the proof.
Take any number n, let's say 420.
Can you factor it?
Sure.
You could say it's 6 times 70, but now look at the number 6.
Can you factor that?
Sure.
It's 2 times 3.
Look at 70.
Can you factor that?
Sure.
It's 7 times 10.
Now look at the factors you have.
You've got a 2, 3, 7, and 10.
You can't pull apart 2, 3, or 7 anymore, but you can pull apart 10.
10 is 2 times 5.
And now none of the numbers can be pulled apart anymore.
They're all primes.
And that's the basic idea of why any number can be pulled apart into primes until it can't
be pulled apart anymore.
To prove this rigorously, we use a concept called strong induction.
So just like regular induction, we begin with a base case, so can the number 2 be factored
into primes?
Yeah, the number 2 is just itself, too.
It's its own little product.
Now we state what's called the strong induction hypothesis.
Suppose the theorem is true not just for the number n, but for all numbers between 2 and
n.
The goal is to prove, as usual, that it will continue to be true for the number n plus
1.
But we're allowed to assume that it was true for all the numbers from 2 to n.
Now if n plus 1 is prime, then we're done.
We can't pull it apart anymore.
Otherwise, n plus 1 is factorable as a times b, where a and b are between 2 and n.
That since a and b are between 2 and n, we can use our strong induction hypothesis and
write a as the product of primes and b as the product of primes.
Therefore, n plus 1, which is a times b, is the product of primes times the product of
primes, which is a product of primes.
And that's the proof.
OK, now I can complete the statement of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic.
It says, every number greater than or equal to 2 can be factored into primes in a unique
way.
Now before we prove this, we should say that not every number system has unique factorization.
For example, on Mars, where all the Martians walk around with two heads, the only numbers
they know about are even numbers.
So the set 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, the set of even numbers, let's think of those as the
set of Martian numbers.
Now even on Mars, we can talk about primes, numbers that can't be pulled apart anymore.
What would some Martian primes be?
Like a number like 2 is still prime.
A number like 6 is also prime.
You might say on Earth that it's 2 times 3, but a Martian doesn't know the number 3.
So 6 can't be pulled apart into smaller numbers, neither can 10 or 14 or 18 or 22.
Every other even number is prime.
On the other hand, numbers like 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, those are composite.
Why?
Because 16 is 2 times 8, 20 is 2 times 10, it's always 2 times another even number.
Now notice then on Mars that the number 36 can be factored into primes in two different
ways.
For instance, 36 on the one hand is 6 times 6, and we know that 6 and 6 are both prime.
It's also equal to 2 times 18, and on Mars 2 and 18 are both prime.
So it's a little surprising that the fundamental theorem of arithmetic should work for our
integers.
Let's prove uniqueness now.
Usually the way a uniqueness proof begins in mathematics is you suppose to the contrary
that there was more than one way of doing it.
Suppose to the contrary we had numbers that had more than one prime factorization.
Let M be the smallest number with more than one prime factorization.
So if the fundamental theorem of arithmetic isn't true for all numbers, then there has
to be a number where it fails.
And let's look at the smallest number, let's call that number M as in minimum.
So M can be expressed as the product of primes on the one hand as p1 times p2 through pr,
on the other hand as q1 times q2 through qs, where all the p's and q's are prime.
Now notice that the number p1, obviously it divides the product p1 times p2 through pr,
and that's equal to q1 times q2 through qs.
So by the theorem of prime importance, since p1 divides that product, it has to divide
one of the terms.
It has to divide q1 or q2 or qs.
Let's just say it divides q1 and see what happens.
If p1 divides q1, but q1 is a prime, so how can p1 divide q1 if q1 is a prime?
Only if q1 was itself equal to p1.
But if q1 is equal to p1, then I can divide both sides of that equation and get that the
product p2 through pr is equal to the product of q2 through qs.
In other words, the number m over p1 would have two different prime factorizations.
But m over p1 was less than the number m, and m was supposed to be the smallest number
with two different prime factorizations.
So we just found an even smaller one that did it.
That contradicts the minimality of m, and therefore the theorem is true.
There cannot be any numbers that have more than one prime factorization.
Now by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, every positive number is of the form n equals
two to some power times three to some power times five to some power and so on, where
all those powers are greater than or equal to zero.
Now whether or not you choose to list the zero is optional.
Sometimes it's convenient to list them.
So for instance, 280, you could write it as two to the third times three to the zero
times five to the first times seven to the first, or you could skip out that zero exponent
and say 280 is two to the third times five to the first times seven to the first.
Remember the notation we had for sums.
If I want to abbreviate a1 plus a2 up through ak, I can write that as the sum as i goes
from one to k of a sub i.
Similarly, there is a nice product notation.
Instead if you want to write a1 times a2 all the way up to ak, you can write that as the
product of ai using a capital pi symbol as i goes from one to k.
For example, the number n factorial, which appeared so often in combinatorics, can itself
be expressed in product notation because n factorial is one times two times three up
to n, so it's the product with that big pi as i goes from one to n of i.
It's one, then two, then three, all the way up to n.
Now the fundamental theorem of arithmetic says that every positive number can be expressed
in a unique way as the product of pi to the ei, where each pi is a distinct prime and each
exponent ei is positive.
Now if you know how a number factors, then I claim you know an awful lot about that number.
For example, if n is a perfect square, if and only if, every exponent is even.
Now when you write a number in product notation, let's see why that's true.
When we write a number in product notation, we would say this is saying that n is a perfect
square if each exponent ei is even for every i.
So for example, the number 1,960,000 is, when we express it in terms of its prime factorization,
it's two to the sixth times three to the zero times five to the fourth times seven to the
two.
But by the law of exponents, I can write that as two to the third, three to the zero, five
to the second, seven to the first, and square that whole thing.
In other words, it's 1400 squared.
It's a perfect square, and you can only do that because the exponents are even.
Also if you know a number's prime factorization, I claim you know what all of its divisors
are.
All right, so let's say n has a prime factorization of two to the e1 times three to the e2 and
so on.
And let d be any other number.
That's say of the form two to the f1, three to the f2, and so on.
Then I claim that d divides the number n if and only if each of the f exponents are less
than or equal to their corresponding e exponents.
That comes from the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
So for instance, if I asked you how many positive divisors does the number 126 have, well, if
you wrote 126 in its prime factorization, you would get two to the first times three
to the second times seven to the first.
And therefore all of its divisors must be of the form two to the a times three to the
b times seven to the c, where a is either equal to zero or one, b has to be less than
or equal to two, so it's zero one or two, and c is zero or one.
How many choices do I have for those exponents?
Two choices, then three choices, then two choices, so by the rule of product I have 12 divisors,
12 positive divisors.
And in general, how many positive divisors does the number n have?
If we have its prime factorization, it would be the product of one plus e1 times one plus
e2 times one plus e3, and so on.
Here's another thing you can learn from prime factorizations.
If you give me two numbers and give me their prime factorizations, I can find their greatest
common divisor just by taking for each exponent the smaller of the two exponents.
So for instance, the number 126 is two to the first times three to the second, five
to the zero times seven to the first, and 600 is two to the third times three to the
first times five to the second times seven to the zero.
I want a number that's going to divide into both of those numbers, right?
So I want to make the exponents as big as possible, but I'm not allowed to let the exponent
be larger than either of the two exponents.
And so I do that by making the exponent the smaller of the two, that's the biggest that
I can get away with.
So in this case, the largest number I could get away with would be two to the first times
three to the first times five to the zero times seven to the zero, which is the number
six.
Now what if we replace min with max?
What if instead of taking the smaller of the two exponents, I took the larger of the two
exponents, then that gives me the least common multiple of a and b, which we denote by writing
it as LCM of AB, or simply as AB with closed brackets, hard brackets instead of soft brackets.
So for instance, with the numbers 126 and 600 to get their least common multiple, I replace
the exponents with the larger of the two.
So in this case, it would be two to the third times three to the second times five to the
second times seven to the one, which is 12,600.
You might notice, by the way, that if you took the GCD and the LCM and multiply them
together in our last example, six and 12,600, you would get 75,600, which happens to be
126 times 600, the product of the original numbers.
And in general, the greatest common divisor times the least common multiple will always
give you the product.
And we can prove that using prime factorization.
Let me go through the proof pretty quickly here.
Let's say A is equal to two to the A1 times three to the A2 and so on.
And B is two to the B1 times three to the B2 and so on.
Then when I take their GCD times their LCM, I have the product of PI to the min of AI and
BI times the product of PI to the max of AI and BI.
But by the law of exponents, I can combine those to get the product of PI to the min
plus the max of AI and BI.
But what's the min plus the max of AI and BI?
One of them has to be the smaller, one of them has to be the larger, so they're going
to add up to AI plus BI.
But the product of PI to the AI plus BI is the product of PI to the AI times the product
of PI to the BI, which is our original two numbers, A and B.
We call that with the Martian numbers, two, four, six, eight, ten, the Martian primes were
just every other number, two, six, ten, fourteen, pretty boring.
But the usual primes using the normal set of integers are fascinating.
Their behavior is both regular and irregular.
Let me give you some examples.
On the one hand, we know that there are an infinite number of primes and that proof goes
all the way back to Euclid.
On the other hand, we also know that there are arbitrarily long strings of consecutive
composite numbers.
For instance, here are 99 consecutive composite numbers.
We have 100 factorial plus two, 100 factorial plus three, all the way up to 100 factorial
plus 100, and I claim that every one of those has to be composite.
Why?
Let's pick a random one, like 100 factorial plus 17.
Why is it composite?
Because I know 17 divides into 100 factorial.
Every number from one to 100 goes into 100 factorial.
Therefore, 17 will go into 100 factorial plus 17.
By that same argument, all those numbers are composite.
We know that there are infinitely many prime numbers of the form 4k plus one, numbers that
are one bigger than a multiple of four.
There are also infinitely many primes of the form 4k plus three, numbers of the form that
are three bigger than a multiple of four.
In fact, Dirichlet proved that there were infinitely many primes of the form ak plus
b whenever a and b are relatively prime.
On the other hand, we don't know if there are infinitely many prime numbers of the form
x squared plus one, or any polynomial for that matter with degree greater than or equal
to two, or infinitely many primes of the form 2 to the n plus one, or 2 to the n minus one,
or 10 to the n plus one, or n factorial plus one.
Nor do we know if there are infinitely many twin primes, that is pairs of primes that
are two apart, like 5 and 7 and 11 and 13.
Are there infinitely many primes consisting of all ones?
We don't know.
We've only found them when the number of ones is 2, 19, 23, 317, and 1031.
By the way, in case you thought that 11,111 is prime, it's actually equal to 41 times
271.
Let's take my favorite numbers, the Fibonacci numbers.
It's known that every prime number has to divide some Fibonacci number.
On the other hand, we don't know if there are infinitely many prime Fibonacci numbers.
On the other hand, we do know that there are only two Fibonacci numbers that are perfect
squares, namely 1 and 144, 12 squared.
We also know that there are only two Fibonacci numbers that are perfect cubes, 1 and 8, and
it's been proved that there aren't any more.
Here's another famous open problem, Gold Box Conjecture.
Every number bigger than 2 is equal to the sum of two primes, and even though this conjecture
has been verified into the zillions, nobody has a proof yet.
And yet, even though the prime numbers pop up like weeds among the integers, there's
no formula for the nth prime number.
But when you look at them from a distance, when you take a step back, there's a discernible
pattern.
Let's take a look at this table.
Here I've listed the number of primes below 100, 1,000, 10,000, and so on.
And you're looking at the numbers might not give you a pattern, that there were 25 primes
below 100, 168 primes below 1,000, and so on.
But if you look at the proportion of primes below each of these powers of 10, you have
1 in 4, 1 in 6, 1 in 8.1, 1 in 10.4, 1 in 12.7, 1 in 15.0.
For each factor of 10, the proportion of primes decreases.
And that denominator is going up by about 2.3.
And what's special about 2.3?
It happens to be the natural log of 10.
More precisely, we have the prime number theorem, which says that the fraction of primes below
n is approximately 1 over the natural log of n.
Or if you want to get even closer, it's 1 over the natural log of n minus 1 is an even
better approximation.
So for example, when n is 6, the fraction of prime numbers between 1 and a million,
10 to the 6th, is about 1 over the log of 10 to the 6th minus 1.
That's 1 over 6 times the log of 10 minus 1.
And since the natural log of 10 is 2.3, we get 1 over 12.8.
That's what the prime number theorem predicts.
And the exact answer is about 1 in 12.7, so that's amazing.
And although this theorem was guessed by Gauss, it was not officially proved until about the
end of the 19th century.
The proof was that this approximation gets better and better as n gets larger and larger.
And speaking of Gauss, whom we'll say more about later, he also explored what became
known as Gaussian integers, complex numbers of the form a plus bi, where a and b are integers
and i is the so-called imaginary number that satisfies i squared equals negative 1.
Now, if you don't know about imaginary numbers, we're not going to build on this anymore in
this course.
But for those of you that have seen them, this is really cool.
So for example, 2 plus 3i is a Gaussian integer, 3 minus 4i is a Gaussian integer.
Even the number 5, since it's 5 plus 0i, is a Gaussian integer.
But a complex number like 2-thirds plus 3i is not a Gaussian integer because 2-thirds
is not an integer.
Now recall that some composite numbers like 6, 10, and 14, though they are composite on
Earth, they were prime on Mars.
In the same way, we'll see that some prime numbers on Earth like 5, 13, and 17 are composite
as Gaussian integers.
But some of them, like 7 and 11, remain prime.
And you'll see why in a moment.
The Gaussian integers can be added and multiplied just like the integers.
So if you take, say, 3 plus 4i times 5 plus 2i, and you multiply them together, you get
7 plus 26i, which therefore is composite because I was able to factor it into two parts.
On the other hand, a number like 2 plus i is a Gaussian prime because it can't be factored
into smaller Gaussian integers.
And by smaller, I mean you can't have a factor of 1 or negative 1 or i or negative i.
There's just no way of factoring 2 plus i without using one of those terms.
So notice on the other hand that 2 plus i times 2 minus i by algebra is 4 minus i squared.
And since i squared is negative 1, that's equal to 5.
So 5 is not a Gaussian prime.
Also 13, though it's prime on Earth, is composite as a Gaussian integer because it's 3 plus
2i times 3 minus 2i.
On the other hand, the Earthly number 7 is not only is it prime on Earth, it's also
a Gaussian prime.
Here's a picture of Gaussian primes, a plus bi, where a squared plus b squared is less
than 1,000.
So the dark squares represent the primes, and the white squares represent the composites.
It's a beautiful picture.
It actually has eight-fold symmetry.
And it's all the Gaussian primes that are about 31 away from the origin, from 0.
Remember that we saw earlier that among the usual integers, there are arbitrarily long
stretches of consecutive composite numbers.
Remember we found 99 consecutive composite numbers.
So if you wanted to hop from one prime to the next along the real line, you wouldn't
be able to do that if, say, your hops couldn't go more than a distance of 98.
You'd eventually be stuck, right?
You wouldn't be able to get past 100 factorial, for instance.
You couldn't, you could not keep going on towards infinity.
With Gaussian primes, it's actually been shown that if you could not jump more than a distance
of 5, then you would get stuck.
That is, there's a Gaussian moat of composite numbers of size square root of 26.
But it's unknown if you'd get stuck if you could jump, say, a distance of 10.
That's still an open problem.
Because the Gaussian integers satisfy a theorem like the division theorem, we can find greatest
common divisors using Euclid's algorithm, and they also satisfy unique factorization.
So they behave like the integers in a lot of nice ways.
The last thing I want to show you is that the fundamental theorem of arithmetic even
has consequences for irrational numbers, all right?
Let me quickly show you that square root of 2 is irrational.
Again, it's a proof by contradiction.
Suppose to the contrary that the square root of 2 was rational, say, it was equal to a
over b.
Then when we square both sides, that would tell us that 2 equals a squared over b squared.
Since a squared and b squared are perfect squares, remember that means that all of their exponents
have to be even in their prime factorization, and in particular, the exponent of 2 has to
be even.
On the other hand, 2b squared, because it's b squared times 2, the exponent in that is
going to have to be odd.
So looking at the exponent for 2, for a squared, it's going to be a 2.
For a squared, the exponent has to be even, and for 2b squared, for 2b squared, that exponent
has to be odd.
And since a number can't be both even and odd, that gives us a contradiction, which proves
that the square root of 2 is irrational.
In our next lecture, we'll have more to say about even and odd numbers, and even the square
root of 2, as we prepare to ponder the power of parity and the pigeonhole principle.
