In this lecture, we explore modular arithmetic, the mathematics of remainders, which will
play an important role in all of our lectures on number theory.
Modular arithmetic was invented by Carl Friedrich Gauss in his book Disquisitiones Arithmeticae,
published in 1801, written three years earlier when Gauss was just 21 years old.
So to set ourselves up for modular arithmetic, let's think about parity once again.
Here's a notation we didn't need when discussing parity, but we will need with modular arithmetic.
We're going to say that A and B have the same parity.
What does that mean to us?
It means A and B are the same parity if they're both even or they're both odd.
And the notation we'll use for that is to say that A is congruent to B mod 2.
That's the notation that we'll use for that.
Notice that if A and B have the same parity, if A is congruent to B mod 2, then what does
that mean?
It means that A and B have the same remainder when divided by 2, because when you divide
by 2, the remainder is 0 or 1.
Another way of saying that equivalently is A mod 2 equals B mod 2.
Remember our original definition of mod is A mod 2 is the remainder you get when you
divide by 2.
So A mod 2 equals B mod 2 is to say that they have the same parity.
Remember you could say A is equal to B plus 2j for some integer j.
In other words, it says that A is equal to B plus a multiple of 2.
And the last way, equivalent way of saying this is that the number 2 divides their difference.
Because A minus B would have to equal 2j for some integer j, which means 2 divides their
difference.
Make sure that you see that all of these definitions are in fact saying the same thing that A and
B have the same parity.
So the general definition for any integer m greater than 0, we say that A is congruent
to B mod m if m divides their difference.
If m divides A minus B.
The number m is called the modulus.
Let me say this a few other ways.
All of these are equivalent.
You should convince yourself that all of these are saying the same thing.
To say that A is congruent to B mod m also means that A and B differ by a multiple of
m.
Or we could say A is equal to B plus mj, where j is any integer, positive or negative.
Or A and B have the same remainder when divided by m, which is the same as saying A mod m
equals B mod m.
So A is congruent to B mod m if A mod m equals B mod m, if they have the same remainder when
divided by m.
Let's look at some examples.
We can say that 26 is congruent to 20 mod 3 because 3 divides their difference.
That's the original definition.
We say A is congruent to B if m divides A minus B. Does 3 divide 26 minus 20?
Sure does.
3 divides 6.
We could also say that 26 is congruent to 2 mod 3 because 3 divides their difference
26 minus 2.
3 divides 24.
We could say that 26 is congruent to negative 1 mod 3 because 3 divides their difference,
which is 27.
But 26 is not congruent to 1 mod 3 because 3 does not divide their difference 25.
I'll write with modulus 3, 26 is congruent to 20.
The fact of the matter is we've been doing modular arithmetic ever since we could tell
time.
In fact, some people call modular arithmetic clock arithmetic.
If somebody said it was 13 o'clock and you're just looking at a wall clock, what time is
that really?
I know the joke is it's time to get a new clock, right?
But if you had to give an answer, 13 o'clock, you'd say, well, that's the same as 1 o'clock.
What would the natural time for 0 o'clock be?
If the clock had a 0 on it, where would it be?
It would be right on top of that 12.
That's because 12 is really the same as 0 mod 12.
13 is the same as 1 mod 12.
Sometimes the way I express this is I'll say, when I put on my mod 12 glasses, 13 and 1
look the same to me.
If you were using a 24-hour clock, by the way, instead of working mod 12, you'd be working
mod 24.
Now it turns out that the congruence, it looks a lot like an equal sign, doesn't it?
I've got these three horizontal lines, an equal sign has two horizontal lines.
They actually behave an awful lot alike.
It's easy to prove that if you have any integers a, b, and c, and any modulus m, that a is
always congruent to a mod m, right?
And why is that?
Because m divides their difference.
a minus a is 0, and m certainly divides 0.
If a is congruent to b, then b is congruent to a.
Because if m divides a minus b, then m divides its negative b minus a.
And finally, we have a transitive property of congruences.
If a is congruent to b, and b is congruent to c, then a is congruent to c, assuming we're
using the same modulus m everywhere, right?
Why is that?
Because if m divides a minus b, and m divides b minus c, then I want to show that m divides
a minus c.
How do we get that?
We use the IC theorem, right?
If m divides a minus b, and m divides b minus c, then m divides their sum, which is a minus
c.
And that's what we wanted to show.
m divides a minus c.
a is congruent to c mod m.
Anything that, anytime you have an operation that works just like equals in those three
capacities, that's called an equivalence relation, though we won't be pursuing that
any further.
So now that we know what congruence is, the fun part is we can actually do arithmetic with
these congruences.
This is called modular arithmetic.
So first, let me show you that congruences can be added to each other.
That is, if a is congruent to b mod m, and c is congruent to d mod m, then a plus c is
going to be congruent to b plus d mod m.
Here's the proof.
Suppose a is congruent to b, and c is congruent to d mod m.
That means that m divides a minus b, and m divides c minus d.
Therefore, m divides their sum, which is a plus c minus b plus d.
But if m divides a plus c minus b plus d, that means that a plus c is congruent to b
plus d mod m.
This theorem's not too surprising if we think of clocks, right?
If the clock says one o'clock, picture the clock says one, and then 12 hours from now,
what's the clock going to say?
It's still going to say one o'clock.
Because when I add 12 to it, when I'm working mod 12, that's just like adding zero to it.
On the other hand, if it's one o'clock, then 17 hours from now, what time is it going to
be?
Well, let's see, 17 hours, that's five bigger than 12 hours.
So adding 17 hours is just like adding five hours.
So if it's one o'clock now, then adding five hours or 17 hours, it's going to be six o'clock.
One more piece of kindergarten math.
If it's six o'clock now, then in nine hours, what will the clock say?
We could do this one.
Six plus nine is 15, and 15, when I think of it, mod 12, 15 mod 12 is three.
So 15 is congruent to three, so the clock is going to say three o'clock.
By the way, we also determined the days of the week, not mod 12, but mod seven.
Every seven days, the week repeats.
So for example, if today is Sunday, then what day will it be 72 days from now?
Well if we work mod seven, 72 is the same as two, 72 is congruent to two mod seven.
So in 72 days from now, it'll be the same day of the week as two days from now.
And if it's Sunday, and I add two days, it's going to be Tuesday, wouldn't it?
So although it's no surprise that addition works mod M, it's far from obvious that multiplication
should also work mod M. Here's our next theorem.
If A is congruent to B mod M and C is congruent to D mod M, then I can multiply those congruences.
A times C is congruent to B times D mod M. I'll prove this in a slightly different way.
Suppose we're told that A is congruent to B mod M. That means that A is equal to B plus
some multiple of M, say JM for some integer J. And C is congruent to D mod M, that means
that C is equal to D plus some multiple of M. Let's say it's KM.
Therefore when I take A times C, that's the same as doing B plus JM times D plus KM.
When I expand that, I get BD plus BKM plus JMD plus JKM squared, but most of those terms
have an M in them.
Not the first one, that's BD, but then I have plus M times some integer.
And so A, C is equal to BD plus M times an integer, which means that A, C and B, D are
congruent mod M.
As a corollary of this theorem, if A is congruent to B mod M, I can multiply both sides by the
same constant C to get AC is congruent to BC.
Or more surprisingly, if I take A congruent to B, I can multiply that congruence by itself
to get A squared is congruent to B squared.
And one good multiplication deserves another.
If I take A squared congruent to B squared and I multiply that by the original congruence,
A congruent to B, I get A cubed is congruent to B cubed.
And I can keep on doing this and get A to the N is congruent to B to the N mod M.
So if A is congruent to B, then A to any power is congruent to B to the same power.
We call this the power theorem, and it's very powerful.
Okay, now I've got another magic trick for you.
Pull out a calculator, and what I want you to do is multiply one-digit numbers on your
calculator until you have an eight-digit number.
Go ahead, pause me for just a minute while you multiply one-digit numbers, just don't
multiply by zero, it'll take forever, until you have an eight-digit number.
Okay?
You got it?
All right.
Now I want you to, the number you've got, an eight-digit number, I want you to add those
digits.
You probably now have a two-digit number, if it's a one-digit number, stop.
If it's a two-digit number, I want you to add those two digits together.
Chances are, if we were in sync here, you now have the number nine, though it's not
guaranteed.
Okay?
I'll explain the trick later.
But the trick is based on a property that's known as casting out nines.
Okay?
Here's the theorem.
Here's the secret behind the magic trick.
So for any integer x, let's define s of x to be the sum of its digits.
So if I had the number 4688, the sum of its digits would be 4 plus 6 plus 8 plus 8, that
would be 26.
Okay?
So here's what I claim, that any number is x is congruent to s of x mod 9.
They have the same remainder when you divide them by 9.
So for instance, 4688 is going to be congruent to 26, which is going to be congruent to 8,
right?
2 plus 6 is 8, mod 9.
And 8469 adds up to 27, which is congruent to 9 if I add the digits.
And 9 is congruent to 0 mod 9, we just know that.
So that means that 8469 is a multiple of 9.
And 4688 is not a multiple of 9, you'll get a remainder of 8 when you divide it by 9.
Now let's prove that.
So here's the idea of the proof.
So take a number like 4688, what does that mean really?
It means 4 times 1000 plus 6 times 100 plus 8 times 10 plus 8.
But 1000 is 10 to the third power.
But when I put on my mod 9 glasses, like I'm doing here, I look at 10, and all those
10s there, they look like ones to me.
And so 10 to the third power, that looks like one to the third power.
When I'm working mod 9, 10 to the third just looks like one.
And 10 squared, that looks like one squared to me, which is the same as one.
And so we can look at that 4688 instead of 4 times 1000 plus 6 times 100 plus 8 times
10 plus 8.
That to me looks like 4 times 1 plus 6 times 1 plus 8 times 1 plus 8, that's 26.
So 4688 is equal to 26 mod 9.
Here's another proof that you might like.
Instead take 4688 and replace 1000 as 999 plus 1.
And 100, we can write that as 99 plus 1.
And 10, we can write that as 9 plus 1.
So when you do it that way, you now have 4 times 999 plus 6 times 99 plus 8 times 9
plus a dangling 4 times 1, 6 times 1, 8 times 1, and an 8.
But we know that those numbers 9, 99, and 999 are obviously multiples of 9.
So when I put on my mod 9 glasses, those look like zero to me.
So 4688 mod 9 is 4 plus 6 plus 8 plus 8, which is 26.
Now this actually has some applications for checking out, checking your work to arithmetic
problems.
Accountants, accountants would use this and they call this process casting out nines.
But even you could use it in the grocery store.
Let's say you had $4.19 plus $8.53 and so on.
Let's think of them as whole numbers.
In terms of the number of pennies, we have $419 plus $853, $0.37, $0.107, and $299.
If you add those up correctly, you'll get $17.15 or $1,715.
If I want to reduce that number mod 9, then I add its digits, which is 14, and I could
add its digits to get 5.
So when you add those numbers mod 9, you get 5.
Let's check to see that if I replace each number with its mod 9 equivalent, do we still
get 5?
Our theorem says that we will.
So 419 adds up to 14, we replace that with a 5.
853 adds up to 16, that we replace that with a 7 mod 9.
3 plus 7 is 10, which looks like 1.
107, those digits add up to 8, we'll leave that as 8.
299, those add up to 20, we'll replace that with a 2.
Now when I add those numbers mod 9, 5 plus 7 plus 8 plus 1 plus 2, that's 23, which simplifies
to 5.
That's interesting.
Well, it's good.
It means that our theorem predicted that we would get the same answer.
The application of this is that if you got different answers, if one of those was a 5
and the other one was a 6, it means you made a mistake somewhere.
If the numbers match, it doesn't guarantee that you got it correct, but if you did make
a mistake, then roughly 9 times out of 10 or 8 times out of 9, it should catch your error.
You can also check your multiplication that way.
Say 41 times 49, that's equal to 2009.
We can check and if we simplify that mod 9, 2009 looks like 11, which reduces to 2.
If we do this in mod 9 land, 49 mod 9 is equal to 4, 4 plus 9 is 13, which reduces to 4.
41 mod 9 is 5, 4 times 5 is 20, and 20 mod 9 is 2.
The answers match there, so we feel confident in our answer.
Let me now explain that opening magic trick for you.
I was betting on the fact, I was taking a little risk here, that when you multiplied
a bunch of numbers until you got an 8 digit number, that chances are you would end up
with a multiple of 9, because if at any time you multiplied and you used the 9 key, or
the 3 key twice, or the 6 key twice, or the 3 and the 6 at least once, you were going
to have a multiple of 9, and therefore when you added up your digits, then you were going
to be forced to have a multiple of 9, eventually when you were summing your digits, it would
reduce to the number 9.
You might be interested in mod 11 arithmetic as well.
We just saw a great trick for 9s.
How can you tell if a number is divisible by 11?
Most people don't know this one, but by alternately adding and subtracting the digits from right
to left, you're going to get the remainder when you divide by 11.
You're going to get something congruent mod 11.
Let me give you some examples.
So 1, 2, 3, 4, if we start from the right and we say 4 minus 3 plus 2 minus 1, we get
2, and I claim that 1, 2, 3, 4 is congruent to 2 mod 11.
The number 3, 1, 4, 1, 5, if you read it from right to left and you do 5 minus 1 plus 4
minus 1 plus 3, you get 10, and that's your remainder when you divide it by 11.
87 will take a simple one.
You get 7 minus 8 is negative 1, but when you put on your mod 11 glasses, negative 1 looks
like 10, right?
Add 11 to it.
You've got 10.
So the remainder you get when you divide 87 by 11 is going to be 10.
Take 909 as our last example, 909 would look like 9 minus 0 plus 9 is 18, which is congruent
to 7 mod 11.
So why does this work?
This works because whereas when I was working mod 9, the base 10 looked like the number
1 to me, but working in mod 11, the number 10 looks like negative 1 to me.
So this time when I see a number like 1,000, 10 to the third power in mod 11 land looks
like negative 1 to the third power, and 100, which is 10 to the second power, looks like
negative 1 to the second power.
So if I replace all those 10s with negative 1s, then that justifies the method.
Now I know what you're thinking.
What good is mod 11 arithmetic?
When would that ever come in handy?
As it turns out, every book has an ISBN number, check it out, and that number is coded using
mod 11 arithmetic.
It should have a 10-digit number called its ISBN or its ISBN 10 number, it's a 10-digit
number, and let's say it has the digits a through j, it's got some dashes in between.
Then check this out.
If you take 10 times a plus 9 times b plus 8 times c plus 7 times d, and so on, all the
way down to 1 times j, you are always going to get 0 mod 11.
This is more sophisticated than a parity check where we were looking at a total mod 2.
Here we're looking at a total mod 11.
The last digit in the book, j, is called the check digit.
So you can put whatever 9 digits you want to start, you put them however you'd like,
and you choose that 10th digit, j, to be just what you need so that the total is going
to be a multiple of 11 to be congruent to 0 mod 11.
You may ask, what if that total needs to be, what if j needs to be 10?
What digit do you use there?
Check this out.
They'll use the symbol x for that, and x is the Roman numeral for 10, so that actually
makes sense.
It's obviously devised by a mathematician.
So let's take an example.
The ISBN number for the course transcript book of my teaching company course, The Joy of
Mathematics, is 159803 3115, so 5 is the check digit.
Now if you take those numbers, and you successively multiply them by 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, and so on,
then add those numbers together, you get 10 times 1 is 10, plus 9 times 5 is 45, plus
8 times 9 is 72, and so on.
Add those numbers together, you get 220.
By the way, mathematicians have a name for this kind of process, which we'll talk about
later, called the dot product.
So I took the dot product of the vector 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, down to 1, and the vector, the
list of the numbers 1598, the numbers in my transcript book.
So when you add those, you get 220, and 220 is a multiple of 11, right?
So it's congruent to 0, mod 11, and so it checks out.
Using this system, if one digit, why would they do such a system?
Why make it so complicated?
One of the advantages of this system is if any one digit is entered incorrectly, then
the scanner can detect it.
Let me give you an indication as to why that is.
Suppose my ISBN number has a single digit error.
Let's say the third letter, C, was incorrectly entered as C plus E, where capital E as an
error.
Error can be anything that's not 0, mod 11.
It could be positive, it could be negative.
And the scanner would take the dot product of the 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, et cetera, vector with
this vector, and when you do, you'd get the old number, 10A plus 9B plus 8C plus 7D and
so on, but it would also have an extra factor of 8 times E.
And 8 times E, well, the long part, the first part, when I put on my mod 11 glasses, I know
that that's 0.
And I know that 8E won't be 0 because 8 is not a multiple of 11 and E is not a multiple
of 11.
And so there's no way of multiplying two numbers that aren't multiples of 11 to get a multiple
of 11.
Okay, so this error would be detected from any position, not just in the third position.
Another advantage of the ISBN code is it can also detect errors resulting from any two
digits being transposed, whether they're next to each other or not.
If you just transpose two of the digits, then the ISBN code can detect it.
This is actually because the modulus 11 is prime.
We're actually taking advantage of the fact that 11 is prime.
This feature is not true for barcoding systems based on modulus 10, by the way.
So interestingly, as of 2007, books will also be printed with 13-digit ISBN codes, they just
started running out of codes, that will use a modulus of 10 instead of 11.
And that's unfortunate because that will be prone to some transposition errors.
And in case you're curious, the 13-digit number of the ISBN number is dotted against
the vector 13, 13, 13, etc., and in the end must equal zero, mod 10.
So far we've seen that congruences can be added, subtracted, and multiplied.
But what about division?
I mean, a divided by b might not be an integer, right?
So you can't just divide both sides of a congruence, you might not get an integer.
So suppose AX is congruent to AY mod M. Does it follow that X is congruent to Y mod
M?
Can I cancel the A from both sides?
We could do that with equals, but can we do that with congruences?
And the answer is no, or at least you have to be careful.
The answer is sometimes, okay, but not normally.
So for instance, 78 and 18 are congruent mod 20.
They differ by 60, which is a multiple of 20.
That is to say 6 times 13 is congruent to 6 times 3 mod 20.
Can I cancel the 6 from both sides?
No, because that would say 13 is congruent to 3 mod 20, and that's not true.
So here is one of the most important theorems in modular arithmetic.
It's called the cancellation theorem.
It says if AX is congruent to AY mod M, and if the greatest common divisor of A and M
is 1, that is if A and M are relatively prime, then X is congruent to Y mod M.
So yes, you can cancel your A's as long as A is relatively prime to M.
Let's see why that's true.
Since AX is congruent to AY mod M, that means that M divides their difference AX minus AY,
which means M divides A times the product X minus Y.
And since A and M are relatively prime, then I know by the important theorem, since M
and A have nothing in common, if M divides the product, M has to divide X minus Y, which
is to say that X is congruent to Y mod M.
As a consequence of this, we say that an integer A has a multiplicative inverse, almost a reciprocal,
if you will, if there's some number X that you can multiply A by to give you 1 mod M.
And as a consequence of the cancellation theorem, we get that A has a multiplicative
inverse mod M, if and only if A and M are relatively prime.
So the only time a number has a multiplicative inverse, it's when the two numbers are relatively
prime.
Furthermore, the inverse is unique in the sense that if AX is congruent to 1 and AY is
congruent to 1, then X and Y have to be the same number mod M.
We can also apply the cancellation theorem to prove another important result from number
theory.
It's a beautiful theorem called Wilson's theorem, and it says this.
It says that N is prime, if and only if N minus 1 factorial is congruent to negative
1 mod N.
Wilson's theorem is interesting because it allows us to determine if a number is prime
just by multiplying numbers together and seeing what you get.
If you got negative 1 at the end of the process, you're prime.
It doesn't involve looking for factors, you normally think of finding, telling if a number
is prime as a division process, Wilson's theorem finds it through a multiplicative process.
The bad news is there is no shortcut for computing N minus 1 factorial.
It really takes N minus 1 steps, which can take a long time if N is like a 100 digit
number.
On the other hand, although N factorial can take forever to calculate, we'll learn in
our next lecture that the number 2 to the N can be computed very efficiently.
In fact, so can the number N to the N, even though N to the N is a much bigger number
than N factorial.
And once we know how to compute 2 to the N efficiently, in the following lecture, we'll
see how we can use that to come up with an efficient test for whether or not a number
is prime.
In our next lecture, we'll also see how modular arithmetic can tell us things about enormous
numbers, card shuffling, and even the size of the Chinese army as we explore applications
of modular arithmetic.
