When you were a kid, did you have a favorite number?
I did.
Mine was 2,520.
I know.
I was a strange kid.
Now, why did I like the number 2,520?
Because I had figured out that it was the smallest positive number that was divisible
by all the numbers from 1 through 10.
I figured this out by trial and error, and I didn't really know the fundamental theorem
of arithmetic at the time.
In fact, I figured out it was the only number below 5,000 that had that property.
In other words, I had discovered that 2,520 was congruent to 0 mod 2, because 2 divides
2,520.
And that 2,520 would be congruent to 0 mod 3 and mod 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10.
Now, I should point out some of those congruences are redundant.
If a number is divisible by 8, then it's automatically going to be divisible by 2
and 4.
If a number is divisible by 9, then it's automatically going to be divisible by 3.
If a number is divisible by 2 and by 5, then it's automatically going to be divisible by
10, and if it's divisible by 8 and 9, then it's automatically going to be divisible
by 6.
So the only congruences left that we really need to know is that 2,520 is a multiple of
5, 7, 8, and 9.
And since 5, 7, 8, and 9, then we know they'll have a least common multiple of 5 times 7
times 8 times 9.
Because 5, 7, 8, and 9 are relatively prime, their least common multiple will be their
product, which is 2,520.
Now here's another problem.
Let's look at the number 83, mod 9, and let's look at the number 83, mod 11.
When we look at 83, mod 9, we see that 9 goes into it 9 times with a remainder of 2,
so 83 mod 9 is 2, and 11 goes into 83 7 times with a remainder of 6, so 83 mod 11 is 6.
And our next theorem is going to show us that in fact there are no other numbers between
1 and 100 with this property.
And moreover, every number between 1 and 99 has a distinct fingerprint, mod 9 and 11.
In other words, the system of congruences, if I ask you to find a number n that was congruent
to 2, mod 9, and was congruent to 6, mod 11, then our next theorem shows that it has
a unique solution, mod 99, namely n must be congruent to 83, mod 99.
This theorem is called the Chinese remainder theorem, and I'll tell you where it gets
that name from later.
Here's what the theorem says.
If m1 and m2 are relatively prime, just like 9 and 11 were, then the system of congruences,
n congruent to a1 mod m1, and n congruent to a2 mod m2, has a unique solution, mod m1 m2.
What's cool about the Chinese remainder theorem is there is in fact a simple formula to find
the number n.
Rumor has it that it was invented by a Chinese couple named Max and May.
Now here's how we come up with the formula for the solution.
Since m1 and m2 are relatively prime, then we know by Beizu's theorem that there exists
x and y so that m1x plus m2y equals 1, and we can find x and y using Euclid's algorithm.
So here's the formula provided by Max and May.
Let n be the number Max plus May, that is, m1 times a2 times x, plus m2 times a1 times
y.
I started the rumor about Max and May.
They don't really exist, but it makes the formula easier to remember.
Let's do an example.
Let's find a number n that's congruent to 6 mod 11 and congruent to 2 mod 9.
Our experience tells us that that number should be 83.
Let's see how Max and May find it.
In other words, in this problem, m1, my first modulus, is 11, m2 is 9, a1 is 6, and a2 is
2.
Now since 11 and 9 are relatively prime, we know that there exists numbers x and y so
that 11x plus 9y is equal to 1, and Euclid finds such numbers.
We could do this in our heads.
We could find, because these numbers are small, but Euclid could tell us that 11 times 5 plus
9 times negative 6, that's 55 minus 54, gives us 1.
So in this problem, x would equal 5 and y would equal negative 6.
Now n is equal to Max plus May.
What does that equal in this case?
m1 is 11, a2 is 2, x is 5, m2 is 9, a1 is 6, y is negative 6.
So Max plus May would give us 110 minus 324, and that's equal to negative 214.
Wait, that's not 83, but remember I only promised that we were looking at our answer mod 99.
So the solution is that n is congruent to negative 214 mod 99.
If I want to make that a nice positive number, I'll add a few multiples of 99 to it.
3 times 99 is 297.
When I add that to negative 214, we get 83 as desired.
So why does the Chinese remainder theorem work?
Here's a quick proof.
Since m1 and m2 are relatively prime, we know that there exists x and y so that m1x plus m2y is equal to 1.
Now, using the fact that n is equal to Max plus May, let's verify that when we put on our mod m1 glasses,
what do we want n to look like when we put on our mod m1 glasses?
We want it to look like a1.
We want to show that n is congruent to a1 mod m1.
So when I'm working mod m1, what happens?
I look at Max plus May, but when I put on my mod m1 glasses,
anything that's a multiple of m1 looks like 0.
It disappears.
So Max plus May, we see that Max disappears because Max is a multiple of m1.
So I'm just left with May.
m2 times a1 times y.
Now, let's take May and let's write her name differently.
Instead of m2a1y, let's write her name as a1m2y.
So now May has turned into Amy, of course.
Now, look at the my in Amy.
m2y, we see from the equation above, is equal to 1 minus m1x.
So I have a1 times 1 minus m1x.
But remember, I'm looking at this mod m1 so that m1x disappears because m1 is equal to 0 mod m1.
So that m1x disappears, I'm left with a1 times 1, which of course is just a1.
In other words, we just showed that n is congruent to a1 mod m1.
A similar calculation shows that n is also congruent to a2 mod m2, and you should do that yourself.
As for uniqueness, I now want to show that the only solution to this problem is max plus May.
So if there were another solution, so how do I prove uniqueness?
The way we usually prove uniqueness is assume that there's some other solution and show that
that other solution has to be the same as the solution we started with.
So let's say there was another solution.
Let's call it n star that was also congruent to a1 mod m1 and congruent to a2 mod m2, just like n.
Well, if it's just like n, then that means that n star and n are both congruent to a1 mod m1,
which means they're congruent to each other mod m1.
And likewise, n star is congruent to n mod m2.
So that means that m1 divides their difference, n star minus n, and m2 divides their difference, n star minus n.
And since m1 and m2 are relatively prime and they both divide n star minus n, then so will their product.
So m1 times m2 divides n star minus n, which is to say that n star is congruent to n mod m1, m2.
So repeating this process, we can extend the Chinese remainder theorem to more than two moduli.
So for instance, the Chinese remainder theorem says for several moduli, if m1, m2 through mt are all relatively prime in pairs.
It means if you take any two different moduli in our list and you compare them, they will be relatively prime.
Thus, if you have a system of congruences that looks like x is congruent to a1 mod m1, x is congruent to a2 mod m2,
and so on down to x is congruent to at mod mt, then that's going to have a unique solution mod their product, m1 times m2 through mt.
Just like Euclid's algorithm, the Chinese remainder theorem is smart and fast.
In fact, it uses Euclid's algorithm to quickly find the solution.
Now the Chinese remainder theorem has some nice applications, and I told you I would tell you where the name Chinese remainder theorem came from.
I believe, and this is the truth, it was actually developed in ancient China, and they used it as a method for counting their troops.
Imagine they have, oh, the Chinese army has somewhere between, oh, some number of troops might be under a thousand, or they might know it's between 1,000 and 2,000, or something like that.
But they don't know it exactly, and they don't want to count every, you know, it takes too long to take attendance.
What they can do is the following.
They say, okay, soldiers, everybody line up in rows of seven.
Everybody lines up in perfect rows of seven, and then the general overseeing the crowd sees that there are perfect rows of seven, except at the end there were three people left over.
And then general says, okay, everybody line up in rows of 11.
So a horn is two to 11 times, everybody lines up in rows of 11, and they see the remainder from that.
And then they do another one with 13.
Everyone get up in rows of 13.
And then what they discover is they have a number.
They said the total number of troops, they know it's remainder when it's divided by seven.
They know it's remainder when it's divided by 11.
They know it's remainder when it's divided by 13.
And therefore, by the Chinese remainder theorem, they will know it's remainder when divided by a thousand and one.
And if the number of troops was under a thousand, you would know that number exactly.
Or if you know the troops is somewhere between one thousand and two thousand, you'd know that number exactly.
And if you're, if you, if you don't even sure you have that good a handle on the size of the troops, then you could have them do it into rows of 17.
Okay, because that's relatively prime to seven, 11 and 13.
Then you'd know your answer mod 17,000 and 17.
Okay, anyway, this was, this was the original application of the Chinese remainder theorem.
Now, who else likes to be discreet?
Why?
Magicians, of course.
So next we're going to apply modular arithmetic to one of my favorite topics, card shuffling.
Now, there are several different types of shuffles out there.
You may be familiar with the overhand shuffle, right?
Or perhaps the riffle shuffle, like that.
And those are, those are pretty good ways of randomizing the deck.
In fact, not long ago, a couple of mathematicians, Dave Bayer and Percy Diaconis,
showed that you need to do about seven of these riffle shuffles before your deck can be considered to be completely randomized.
Okay, but the shuffle I want to talk about is something that magicians call the perfect shuffle or the pharaoh shuffle.
And although the shuffle appears to be random, it's not random at all, which is why it's used by magicians.
So here's what the perfect shuffle looks like.
We take the deck of cards and we cut them as close as best as we can.
We try and cut it exactly in half.
To do a perfect shuffle, you have to cut it exactly in half.
And then you push the cards together in such a way that the cards interlace perfectly.
Now, almost got it.
If you do this perfectly, then the cards should be perfectly interlaced.
You'll see I missed it here.
I've got these two cards on the top, but just about everything else.
Up, down, up, down, up, down, up, down.
Okay, there's another two that are up.
I probably have some down together there.
Okay, it's probably because I didn't cut the cards exactly in half.
Anyway, a good magician can do these perfect shuffles consistently.
Let's explore the mathematics behind the perfect shuffle.
So let's label our cards, first of all, from top to bottom.
Let's call that the top card position zero and the bottom card position 51.
So they're in position zero, one all the way down to 51.
So the first thing you do is you cut the cards exactly in half so that one half has the cards zero to 25.
The other half has the cards 26 to 51, and then the cards are meshed together perfectly.
Now, there are two ways that you can mesh the cards perfectly.
Either card zero stays on top or card 26 goes on top.
If card zero stays on top, then that's going to force card 51 to be on the bottom.
That's called an out shuffle because the outermost cards stay at the outside.
So what used to be, after you do the out shuffle, instead of the cards being in order zero through 51,
we're going to see them in order zero, then the card that used to be in position 26,
then the card that used to be in position one, then the card that used to be in position 27, and so on down.
On the other hand, in in shuffle, card 26 becomes the top card, followed by card zero, then 27, then one, and so on down.
Let's analyze the out shuffle.
So what happens to a card at position X?
Then let me give you the answer and then we'll verify that it's true.
I claim that the card in position X is sent to position O of X, O as in out shuffle, where O of X is 2X if X is between zero and 25,
and it's 2X minus 51 if X is between 26 and 51.
And the beauty of this formula is that you can simplify it because if I put on my mod 51 glasses, then we'll see that 51 just disappears.
And so we can say that O of X is equal to 2X mod 51.
Unless X was in position 51 to begin with, O of 51 is still at position 51.
Okay, so for example, O of 2 is 4, because the card that was originally in position 2 is now in position 4.
Check that out.
Zero, one, two, three, four.
Card 2 is in the position number 4.
O of 14, that's going to be 28.
2X14 is 28.
But O of 28, the card in position 28, that gets sent to 56 mod 51, which is 5.
So card 28 will now be in position 5, and you can verify that.
We call O of X a permutation or a rearrangement of the numbers zero through 51.
And yes, this is the same word and the same usage of permutation that we talked about earlier in combinatorics.
So here's the first interesting result about card shuffling.
I claim that if you do eight perfect shuffles, then that restores the deck to its original position.
So whatever order I have these cards in, if I do eight perfect out shuffles, just out shuffles now, then that's going to...
After those eight out shuffles, the cards will still be in their original position.
I'll give you two proofs of this theorem.
One is we can actually represent our permutation, our out shuffle, using something called cycle notation.
So here's what we do.
We follow the path of every card in the deck in a rather efficient way.
So for instance, card zero after one out shuffle, it's still in position zero.
Not very interesting there.
So card one, on the other hand, after one out shuffle, it gets doubled to position two.
And card two gets doubled to position four.
And four goes to eight.
Eight goes to sixteen.
Sixteen goes to thirty-two.
And now when I double thirty-two, I get sixty-four.
But remember we're doing this mod fifty-one.
So card thirty-two is sent to thirteen.
Thirteen gets sent to twenty-six.
And twenty-six, when we double that, we get fifty-two.
But fifty-two, mod fifty-one is one.
So we're back to where we started.
All right.
On the other hand, card three has a different path.
It goes to six, then to twelve, then to twenty-four, forty-eight.
Forty-eight doubled is ninety-six.
Mod fifty-one is forty-five, and so on.
The entire deck can be expressed in terms of these cycles.
Now if you look at the cycles we have here, you'll notice that six of them have length eight.
And one of them has length two, and two of them have length one.
So what happens to, what happens to say card number four after three out shuffles?
After three out shuffles, where is it going to be?
Well, counting three places, it'll be in position thirty-two.
How about card thirty-two?
Where will it be after three out shuffles?
It'll be in position one.
Where is card one going to be after eight out shuffles?
It's going to be back to where it started.
In fact, everything in an eight cycle is going to be back where it started after eight out shuffles.
And that'll also be true for everything in a cycle of length one, or anything in a cycle of length two.
So any number, no matter what size cycle it's in, is going to be back to where it started after eight out shuffles.
So since the least common multiple of the numbers one, eight, eight, eight, eight, two, eight, and one is eight,
everything gets back to where it started.
Another proof that we can do, I'll just say this one quickly,
is we can express the out shuffle by just trying to do all those cases at once.
Consider a card in position X.
Where will that be after one out shuffle?
It'll be in position 2X, mod 51.
And after two out shuffles, it'll be in position 4X, mod 51, because the 2X gets doubled.
And after three out shuffles, it'll be in position 8X, then 16X, 32X, 64X.
Did I say 64X?
Well, when I put on my mod 51 glasses, that 64 looks like a 13.
So that's position 13X.
I'll double that to get 26X.
I'll double that to get 52X.
And that means after eight shuffles, card X is in position 52X, but working mod 51, that's in position X.
So after eight shuffles, every card is back to where it started.
With the in shuffles, well, life is not so neat.
This can show that with an in shuffle, a card in position X is going to be sent to position 2X plus 1, mod 53.
And so nothing gets sent to position 52 in an in shuffle, which is good, because you didn't have really a position of 52 with your deck.
So everything gets sent to position, X is sent to position 2X plus 1, mod 53.
In your cycle notation, you get one long cycle of length 52 and then one little cycle of length 1 for the invisible card in position 52.
And what that means is you would have to do 52 in shuffles to restore the deck to its original order.
Now, if we combine in shuffles without shuffles, we get a truly amazing result.
Suppose I'm a magician and I want to send the top card, the card in position 0, into some position N. How do we do that?
The answer is, if you know your discrete mathematics, you represent the number N in binary.
So take the number say, let's say I want to bring the top card to position 41, the 42nd card in the deck.
Then I take 41 and I write it as 32 plus 8 plus 1.
And when I write that in base 2 in binary, that's 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1.
And now I simply follow instructions. What does that give us? It gives us in shuffle, out shuffle, in shuffle, out shuffle, out shuffle, in shuffle.
And you could verify for yourself that the card in position 0, after doing an in, out, in, out, out, in, will send you to position 41.
The reason that this will always work is based on a technique that I call seed planting, which is used for raising numbers to big powers.
As we'll see in our next lecture, there are many advantages to being able to raise big numbers to big powers.
Now, if I asked you to compute 3 to the millionth power, mod 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, then how long would that take?
Well, by the obvious naive method, you would do 3 times 3 times 3 times 3 a million times, that would take you a million multiplications.
But by the smart method that I'll show you, it would only take you about 40 multiplications using a method that I call seed planting.
Or to do another example, say I asked you to take 3 to a 1,000 digit number, mod some 1,000 digit number, by the naive method that would take you forever, really.
And the smart method would only take you a few 1,000 multiplications, even though your exponent was 1,000 digits long.
So the easiest technique to explain is something that's called successive squaring.
Let's say I want to compute the number 6 to the 83rd power in far fewer than 83 multiplications.
Then one thing you could do is you could take the number 6 and you could square it to get 6 squared, square that again to get 6 to the fourth,
square that again to get 6 to the eighth, then 6 to the 16, 6 to the 32, 6 to the 64.
And since 83 can be written in terms of powers of 2 as 64 plus 16 plus 2 plus 1, we get that 6 to the 83 is just the product of 6 to the 64,
6 to the 16, 6 to the 2, 6 to the 1, in far fewer than 83 multiplications.
For a more streamlined approach, I recommend what I call the seed planting method.
Here's how it goes.
Again, we write 83 in terms of its powers of 2.
I have those numbers in red.
And I take the number 6 and I'm going to just keep on squaring it, square, square, square, square, square,
but occasionally I bump it.
I bump it by another factor of 6, anytime I'm at a red number.
So I start at 6, I square it to get 6 squared.
I square that again to get 6 to the fourth.
But since I'm at a red number, I bump it with a 6 to get 6 to the fifth.
And then I square again to get 6 to the 10th, square again to get 6 to the 20, square again to get 6 to the 40.
But since I'm at a red number, I bump it with a 6 to get 6 to the 41.
Then I take 6 to the 41, I square that to get 6 to the 82, bump it with a 6, and that gives me 6 to the 83.
By the way, notice that every step the exponent is either doubling or it's doubling plus 1,
which is the same thing that happened to the top card of our deck as we were bringing it to that 42nd position.
Okay, but I digress.
Why does the seed planning work?
Well, if we never did any of that bumping, then what would have happened?
We would have started at 6 and then we would have squared, squared, squared, squared, squared,
and we would have ended up at 6 to the 64 when we were done.
But by bumping it at that red 16 level, then that little 6 that we've bumped by is itself going to get squared four times
and thereby contribute an additional 6 to the 16 to the final result.
Likewise, the 6 that's second from the bottom is going to get contribute twice, is going to contribute twice,
and the 6 at the very bottom contributes once, and therefore our 6's altogether have contributed 83 times.
The seed planting method works even when we're working mod M.
For example, suppose we wish to raise 6 to the 83 mod 79.
We go through the same calculations, but at each step we reduce our numbers mod 79 so the calculation would look like this.
By the way, how do we actually reduce the number mod 79, like at that step where we have 7776 mod 79?
Here's an easy way to get 34.
Take 7776, divide it by 79.
Your calculator will show 98.430, etc.
Subtract off the 98, get rid of the integer part, and then multiply back by 79, and that will give you the 34.
The seed planting method is a fast, efficient, all-purpose method, but sometimes we get lucky,
and we can compute A to the N mod M even faster if we can find an exponent D for which A to the D is equal to 1 mod M.
For example, let's do the problem 4 to the 3002 mod 21.
Notice that if we're working mod 21, 4 to the 3, which is 64, is 1 bigger than 63, and 63 is a multiple of 21,
so we got lucky because 4 to the 3 is equal to 1 mod 21.
Therefore, 4 to the 3000, which is almost what I want, 4 to the 3000 is 4 to the 3 raised to the 1000.
But when I put on my mod 21 glasses, 4 to the 3 just looks like a 1, so that's 1 to the 1000, which is equal to 1 mod 21.
Therefore, 4 to the 3000 and 2 is going to equal 4 to the 3000 times 4 to the 2, which will be congruent to 1 times 4 to the 2, which is 16.
Mod 21, it's still 16.
You may wonder, is there a simple way to find a lucky exponent?
As we'll see in the next lecture, the answer is often yes, and it's especially nice when the modulus is prime.
And is there an easy way to determine if a big number is prime?
Again, the answer is yes, and the secret involves modular arithmetic and raising numbers to large powers, just what we learned in this lecture.
And we'll discover this in our next lecture as we explore Fermat's theorem and prime testing.
