When drawing a typical graph, you're allowed to let edges cross.
For example, the graph K4 can be drawn like this.
It has just four vertices, even though the edges cross in the middle, it only has four
vertices, so don't count the place where they cross in the middle.
But some graphs are more useful when they can be drawn without any crossing edges.
This is important in computer hardware where it's expensive to add extra layers to a computer
circuit board.
So for example here, we have a circuit that traces the one side of this board, and then
there's a layer of insulation, and then there are more circuit paths on this side of the
circuit board.
Or to give a larger example, the graph of a highway system is much more complicated and
expensive if you need overpasses and off-ramps to keep the roads from crossing.
So the definition of the lecture is this, a planar graph is a graph that can be drawn
in such a way that no edges cross.
For example, trees are planar graphs, like the one we have here, since they can always
be drawn so that none of their edges cross.
K4, now although we drew it originally with crossing edges, nevertheless K4 is planar because
it can be drawn in a way where none of the edges cross.
Like it can be drawn like this, or it can be drawn like this, like this little tetrahedron.
In fact, a planar graph can always be drawn using only straight lines.
Now that's tricky to prove, but it's true.
So for example, this graph here, which looks like K5 with one missing edge, it has a plane
graph, that's what we call when you've drawn it in such a way that none of the edges cross.
So this is an example of a plane graph, which means that that graph is planar, or we could
straighten out the edges so that it looks like this instead.
But as we shall see, the graph K5, the complete graph on five vertices where all pairs of
vertices are connected, is non-planar, definitely not planar.
But first, we present Euler's planar graph theorem.
This will be our third and final theorem named after Euler.
The other two were the Eulerian graph theorem and his generalization of Fermat's theorem.
Here's what Euler's planar graph theorem says.
Every plane graph divides the plane into regions or faces, including the external face.
So for example, here's a plane graph, none of the edges cross, and this graph has six
faces, including that external face F. The external face may seem a little funny, but
if you take your graph and you wrap it onto the surface of a sphere, then the external
face looks just as normal as all the other faces.
Here's what Euler's planar graph theorem says.
If G is a connected plane graph with N vertices, E edges, and F faces, then N minus E plus
F equals two.
A graph theoretic formula to marvel at, N minus E plus F equals two, will prove this by induction
on E, the number of edges in the graph.
Starting with the base case where E is zero.
So if I've got a connected graph with no edges, then what does my graph look like?
A single point.
So it has one vertex, no edges, and one face.
So N equals one, E equals zero, F equals one, and so N minus E plus F would equal two.
There's the base case.
Now we state our induction hypothesis, assume it's true for any graph where the number of
edges is equal to K, and now consider a graph G, a connected plane graph that has K plus
one edges, that is where E is equal to K plus one.
I'll break this part of the proof into two cases.
The first case, the graph is a tree, and the second case when the graph is not a tree.
Now the case where it's a tree, I'm not even going to need induction here.
Since G is a tree with N vertices, then we know it has how many edges?
N minus one.
And how many faces does a tree have?
It just has one.
And therefore N minus E plus F is going to equal N minus N minus one plus one, which
equals two.
All right, now case two, suppose G is not a tree.
Again, G is a connected plane graph with K plus one edges.
So in the spirit of induction, what am I going to do?
I'm going to find a way to reduce it to the case where it has K edges.
So my graph has N vertices, K plus one edges, and F faces.
And I want to show that N minus E plus F will equal two in this case.
Now since the graph is connected and it's not a tree, then it has to contain a cycle.
Let's call that cycle C. So take that cycle C and remove any edge you want from C to obtain
a smaller graph.
And we'll call that smaller graph G prime.
So G had N vertices, and the number of edges was K plus one, E was equal to K plus one,
and it has F faces.
Now what's G prime going to look like?
I haven't removed any vertices, so the number of vertices is still N. I removed one edge,
so instead of having K plus one edges, I now have K edges.
And what happened to the faces?
If you think of every edge as separating two faces, at least that's the case when the
edge appears on a cycle.
So it's separating two faces, and one face contains water, the other face contains water.
You get rid of the dam that's separating them, and the water flows together, and you
now have one fewer face than you had before.
So instead of having F faces, you now have F minus one faces.
So this new graph G prime, it's a plain graph, it's still connected, right, because I took
an edge away from a cycle.
So you can always remove an edge from a cycle and keep the graph connected.
It has now how many edges?
K edges, all right, and since it has K edges, our induction hypothesis applies to it that
says N, its number of vertices, minus K, its number of edges, plus F minus one, its number
of faces, is equal to two.
I can rewrite that statement as N minus K plus one, plus F equals two, and when I go
back to my original graph, K plus one was the number of edges, F is the number of faces,
N was the number of vertices, so we have N minus E plus F equals two as desired.
Euler's theorem also applies to three-dimensional objects, too, called polyhedra.
I take this cube here, and this is a polyhedron, and it has how many vertices?
It has eight vertices, right, these four on the top, these four on the bottom.
It has how many faces?
It has six faces, right, it's like a six-sided die, one, two, three, four, five, and six,
and how many edges does it have?
It has four edges that run across the top, four edges that run across the bottom, and
four edges that come down, giving me 12 edges altogether, right, four plus four plus four,
and now when we calculate N minus E plus F, we get eight minus 12 plus six, which equals
two.
You can also draw the planar graph of a cube by squashing it onto a flat piece of paper.
Now this cube is pretty solid, so I'm not going to be able to squash it, but you could
look at the picture here.
The cube is going to go from this to this, right?
Now what you can't see is the bottom face of the cube.
That disappears and becomes the external face of the planar graph, and that's why Euler's
theorem will apply both to polyhedra and to the planar graphs.
Okay let's switch topics.
We're still talking about planar graphs, but here's a planar graph we've had the pleasure
of encountering earlier when we were in our lecture on the principle of inclusion-exclusion.
Here we have a Venn diagram with three circles.
Now a Venn diagram separates your total region into eight different regions, depending on
if I call my circles A, B, and C, are my points in just A, just B, just C, or are they
in A and B and not C, or maybe they're not in any of the three.
How many ways can I decide whether a point is in A or not, B or not, C or not?
Two times two times two, eight ways of doing it.
So a Venn diagram with three circles is going to have eight regions, just like we have here.
Now I'm going to draw it in such a way that whenever two circles intersect, they intersect
at two points, and we call both of those points vertices.
We're just going to stick a vertex wherever two circles intersect.
So this Venn diagram, you can count, has exactly six vertices, it has 12 edges, and it has,
as we said earlier, eight faces.
And when we calculate N minus E plus F, we get 6 minus 12 plus 8, we get 2.
So here for Euler's Planar Graph Theorem, it works here.
But have you ever seen a Venn diagram with four circles?
You probably haven't because they're actually impossible to draw.
But let me prove to you that it's impossible to draw a Venn diagram with exactly four circles.
Well first of all, how many faces would it have to have?
How many regions would it have to have?
Just like with three circles, you had to have eight faces, and with four circles, you'd
have to have 16 faces, two to the fourth, because a point is either in A or not, B or
not, C or not, or D or not.
So it has to have 16 faces, okay, one for every subset of the four circles.
What else?
How many, how many vertices is it going to have?
Well, each pair of circles creates two vertices, right?
Each pair of circles.
So how many pairs of circles are there?
I have four circles.
How many ways can I choose two of them?
Four choose two ways.
Four choose two is six, and since every pair of circles creates two vertices, that gives
me 12 vertices.
And now how many edges do we have, all right?
Take a look.
How many edges are we going to have to have?
Well, wherever two edges intersect, wherever two circles intersect at every vertex, how
many edges come out of that vertex?
Every vertex has degree four.
So how does that tell me the number of edges?
Well by the handshake theorem, the sum of the degrees of the vertices is twice the number
of edges.
So what would that tell us here?
We have 12 vertices, each has degree four, so the sum of the degrees of the vertices,
that would be 48.
That's equal to twice the number of edges.
So if twice the number of edges is 48, then the number of edges must be 24, okay?
So we've calculated the number of vertices, edges, and faces.
When we calculate n minus e plus f, we have 12 minus 24 plus 16, and that gives us four,
which is not equal to two.
And that means that a Venn diagram for four circles would actually be impossible, because
if it were possible, n minus e plus f would have to equal to, here it's equal to four.
So we can't draw a Venn diagram for four circles, and a similar argument will show that you
can't create one for five or more circles either.
Our next theorem proves that planar graphs can't have too many edges.
If you just have too many edges, then you inevitably are going to have crossings, and
you don't like that.
So more precisely, if g is a planar graph with at least three vertices, okay?
If it has n vertices, where n is at least three, and let's say it has e edges, then
in order to be planar, we must have e less than or equal to three n minus six.
So in a planar graph, the number of edges is at most three times the number of vertices
minus six.
Now first of all, we need the condition that n is at least three.
The theorem is false when n is equal to one or two.
When n is equal to one, then our graph would look like k one, a single point, and there's
no way e is going to be less than negative three.
We can't have a negative number of edges.
And in the graph k two, that has two vertices and one edge, then here, three n minus six
would be zero, and the number of edges is one, and that's bigger than three n minus six.
So the theorem doesn't work when n is less than three.
All right, next, I'm going to break this proof down into two cases.
Either the graph is connected or the graph is not connected.
First, consider the case where the graph is connected, all right?
So suppose g has n vertices, e edges, and f faces, then by Euler's planar graph theorem,
since g is connected, we can say that n minus e plus f is equal to two.
Now create what I call the edge face matrix, m, that will contain e rows and f columns.
It's going to be an e by f matrix where the ij entry of the matrix is one if edge number
i borders face number j, and otherwise we put a zero, all right?
So we've got a matrix full of zeros and ones where the ij entry is one if the i-th edge
borders the j-th face.
So take a look at this example, okay?
Here's our graph g, and here is its edge face matrix m.
The graph has seven edges, and it has three faces, so it's a seven by three matrix.
Let's look at, say, the first edge, all right?
That first edge borders face number two, and the external face face number one, and it
doesn't border face number three, and that's why that first row of the edge face matrix
would be one, one, zero.
Or you could take a look at a typical face, like, say, face number two, has what edges
bordering it?
It has edges one, two, and three bordering it, and therefore, therefore, if I look down
column number two, I'm going to see that it has ones in row one, two, and three, and
zeros everywhere else, okay?
So what I'm going to do now is I'm going to count the number of ones in my matrix, and
I'm going to do this counting in two different ways.
I'm going to count the ones row by row, and I'm going to count the ones column by column,
okay?
I'm interested in the total number of ones in the matrix, and I'm going to call that
total x.
Okay, what can we learn about x as we count the ones row by row?
Now what can you say for any edge, how many faces does it border?
In our example, it usually borders two faces, but it's also possible for an edge to border
just one face, like look at edge number seven there.
You'll see all it has, you know, it's inside of face three.
That's the only face that it borders, so its row looks like zero, zero, one, and in general
for any graph, an edge will either border two faces or one face.
Therefore, if I sum up all the ones row by row, how many ones am I going to have?
I'll have at most two times the number of rows, that is at most two times the number
of edges.
Therefore x is less than or equal to two times e.
On the other hand, if I count my edges column by column, what can we say about any given
face?
For any given face, how many edges border it?
I'm using the fact that n is at least three here, so take a look at a typical face, like
face number two, it looks like a triangle.
It's going to have at least three edges bordering it, or face number three.
That looks like a square with something inside of it.
It's going to have at least four edges bordering it, but the smallest possible face that I
could have is a triangle, and therefore every face borders at least three edges.
Therefore, if I'm counting my ones column by column, the total number of ones, x, is
going to be at least three times f, because every face has at least three edges on it.
Therefore, since x is less than or equal to two e, and x is greater than or equal to
three f, x must live between three f and two e, that is, three f is less than or equal
to x, which is less than or equal to two e.
Now, if I get the x out of there, I just have the inequality three f is less than or equal
to two e, but let's get rid of f.
We know from Euler's equation n minus e plus f equals two, which means that f is equal
to two minus n plus e, replacing f with that tells me that three times two minus n plus
e is less than or equal to two e, which says that six minus three n plus three e is less
than or equal to two e, and subtracting two e from both sides tells us that e is less
than or equal to three n minus six.
Are we done?
We only did the case where g is connected.
On the other hand, if g is not connected, here we just add the edges to g to create
a graph g prime that's connected with, let's call it, e prime edges.
The graph is still planar, just like in the picture here.
If the graph isn't connected, add some edges so that it becomes connected, and now we know
from case one, since this is a connected planar graph, that e prime is less than or equal
to three n minus six, and therefore the number of edges in the original graph, e, was less
than e prime, so that's still less than or equal to three n minus six.
You may ask, can e actually equal three n minus six?
The answer turns out to be yes, we can.
For instance, if we're looking at the triangle, k3, that's three, and that's got three edges
and three vertices, so e is equal to three n minus six here, and in the graph k4, that
has four edges and six vertices.
Here we also have e equal to three n minus six as well.
The theorem says if g is planar, with n vertices and e edges, then e is less than or equal
to three n minus six.
The contrapositive of this theorem says for any graph with at least three vertices, what
would the contrapositive say?
If the number of edges is bigger than three n minus six, then the graph is non-planar.
As a corollary, we have that k5, the complete graph on five vertices, is definitely not planar.
The proof is simple, k5 has five vertices and it has ten edges, and since the number
of edges, e, is bigger than three n minus six, three n minus six is nine, then k5 must not
be planar.
What about the converse theorem?
What is the converse theorem?
The converse says if the number of edges is less than or equal to three n minus six, then
g is planar.
Is that converse statement true or is it false?
Turns out it's false.
In fact, here's the counter example I'll give you is one that you might have seen as a kid.
You actually saw it in our lectures when we were talking about the stable marriage problem.
It's the graph k3, three.
In the stable marriage discussion, we had three men on the left, three women on the
right.
We drew an edge between every possible man and woman.
This is k33 is called the complete bipartite graph with three vertices on the left and
three on the right.
What makes it complete is there's every possible edge that can be drawn from left to right
is drawn.
Now, I remember seeing this graph when I was a kid because they'd give us this little
puzzle in this activity book.
They'd say we've got three houses here, three utility companies there, connect every house
with a utility company in such a way that the edges don't cross.
I remember working on that problem, working on that problem, and I just couldn't do it.
Finally, I'd look up in the back of the book and it would say one of two things.
It would either say there is no answer or say, sorry, don't you feel foolish?
Or they give some cheap answer like, oh, well, one of the edges, you have to kind of dig
below and go underground and go up.
It wasn't being drawn in the plane.
You might say I was a complainer about that problem.
Anyway, here's a graph k33.
In this graph, we have how many vertices?
We have six vertices.
We have how many edges?
Three times three is nine.
The number of edges nine is less than three on minus six, which is 12, but nevertheless
k33 is non-planar.
Here's the proof.
Suppose to the contrary that k33 is planar.
If it was planar and we could straighten it out into some kind of plane graph, then how
many faces would it have?
We know the number of vertices n is six and we know the number of edges is nine.
That's given to us.
By Euler's theorem, we know the number of faces could be calculated as two minus n plus
e.
That's two minus six plus nine, which is five.
In the plane graph, it would have to have five faces.
If I created an edge face matrix for k33, it would have nine rows, one for each edge,
and five columns, one for each face.
If I count the number of ones in the edge face matrix, call that total number of ones.
Let's call that number x.
Then just like before, counting it row by row, every row has at most two ones in it.
That is x is less than or equal to two times the number of rows, two times e, and e here
is nine, so that says that x is less than or equal to 18.
On the other hand, for the graph k33, unlike your typical planar graph where your smallest
face might be a triangle, if you look at k33 because it's bipartite, it's impossible to
have a triangle.
You can't go from the left to the right, and then to the left again, you can't hook
up with that original vertex.
You have to go to the right again.
Every cycle would have to have at least four edges.
If every face has at least four edges, then in that case, x is greater than or equal to
four f.
Graph is five, so that would say that x is greater than or equal to 20.
Now we have a contradiction, because on the one hand, we saw that x was less than or equal
to 18.
On the other hand, x would have to be greater than or equal to 20.
Therefore you can't draw an edge face matrix at all, therefore your graph is not planar.
I claim that in fact, so we've seen two graphs that are non-planar, k5 and k33.
As a matter of fact, k5 and k33 are the simplest non-planar graphs out there in a very real
sense in that every non-planar graph must contain either k5, it has to contain one of
them.
Specifically, this is called Kurotowski's theorem.
Every non-planar graph contains inside it either k5, living somewhere in your graph,
or k33, or a subdivision of k5 or k33.
What's a subdivision?
Here is a subdivision of k5, here is a subdivision of k33, a subdivision of a graph is just taking
that graph and putting pimples on it.
In other words, I've added a bunch of vertices along some edges, but those vertices that
I add, they only have degree two.
In other words, I can't put a vertex where two lines might cross in the graph, I'm just
adding, I'm subdividing one of the edges into smaller and smaller parts.
There's a subdivision of k5, a subdivision of k33, and every non-planar graph either
contains k5 or k33 or one of its subdivisions.
We won't prove Kurotowski's theorem, but it's definitely an intriguing result.
Incidentally, in case you were wondering where the k came from in the complete graph
like k5 or the complete bipartite graph k33, it's not for some kind of German word for
complete, but rather it's in honor of Kurotowski and the theorem that we just described.
Speaking of which, speaking of complete graphs, this completes our lecture on planar graphs.
The planar graphs will play a key role in our next lecture on map coloring, leading
to one of the most famous problems in graph theory, the four-color theorem.
