In our last lecture, we discussed planar graphs, which can be drawn in the plane with no edges crossing.
In this lecture, we'll talk about coloring graphs and coloring maps for which planar graphs will play an important role.
Given a graph G, a coloring of G is obtained by assigning a color to every vertex where repetition is allowed.
It's called a proper coloring if no adjacent vertices have the same color.
For example, this graph here has been properly colored since no adjacent vertices have the same color.
We say that a graph is K-colorable if it can be properly colored using at most K-colors.
Thus, the graph in our example is four-colorable since it can be properly colored with four colors.
It's also three-colorable since we can also do it with three colors like this.
Is it two-colorable? No, because the triangle on top would require that vertices 1, 2, and 5 must be given different colors, so the graph is definitely not two-colorable.
The smallest number K for which a graph is K-colorable is called the chromatic number of the graph.
Isn't that a colorful name? The chromatic number of the graph.
For example, our last graph has a chromatic number of three because we can properly color it with three colors and not two.
The complete graph, KN, has a chromatic number of N since every vertex must be given a different color.
Now, take a look at this map of the USA, of the continental USA.
You'll notice that in this map, every state is assigned one of four colors and that no two adjacent states are given the same color.
We say that this map has been properly colored.
Some questions. First of all, can we properly color the states with just three colors?
We saw us able to do it with four. Can we do it with three? And the answer is no, and we'll prove that later.
Next, can every map be properly colored with just four colors? And here, the answer is yes.
This question, called the four-color question, has a long history and we'll say a few words about it after establishing some ground rules of our map.
First assumption, every state is a connected region.
So a state like Michigan that has two parts to it, that would have to be considered as two separate states.
In our coloring, we were able to give both parts of Michigan the same color, but that is not required by our rules.
Second, adjacent states have at least an edge in common. They can't just have a point in common.
So their border must contain an edge somehow.
Thus, on our map, Arizona is not considered to be adjacent to Colorado, and it would be legal to give Arizona and Colorado the same color.
That would be OK, likewise with Utah and New Mexico.
This assumption is needed to keep the problem interesting.
Otherwise, we would need, for this map of Peat-Thylvania, we would need at least eight different colors to properly color this map,
because if everything there was considered to be adjacent, you'd need eight colors.
But by our rules, it can be properly colored with just two colors, plain and pepperoni.
Let me give you a brief history of the Four Color Theorem.
The Four Color Theorem was brought to the attention of the mathematics community in 1852,
when a student showed the problem to a prominent logician, Augustus de Morgan.
De Morgan circulated the problem to a wider mathematics community.
In 1879, Alfred Kemp published a proof.
But 11 years later, someone noticed a flaw in his logic.
Kemp's logic allowed one to conclude that any map could be properly colored with just five colors,
but the argument did not extend to four colors.
The problem became one of the most famous unsolved problems in mathematics
until it was finally proved by mathematicians Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Hocken in 1977,
where it became one of the most controversial problems in mathematics.
We'll have more to say about their proof later in this lecture.
In this lecture, we'll give a proof of the Five Color Theorem
and give some background on how the Four Color Theorem was proved.
But first, let's answer the question.
Can we properly color the continental U.S. map using just three colors?
Earlier I said no, and here's why.
Let's focus on the state of Nevada.
Let's try to color everything with just three colors,
and we'll give Nevada the color of yellow.
Alright, and next to it, California has to have a different color.
Let's give it red, and then Oregon has to have a color that's different from California, Nevada.
Let's give it green.
Alright, next we go over to Idaho.
Now we don't want to introduce a fourth color, but it can't be yellow or green, so we make it red.
And then Utah can't be yellow or red, so we have to make it green.
But now look at Arizona.
It's adjacent to a state that's red, a state that's yellow, and a state that's green,
so it has to be given a fourth color.
Therefore, just by focusing on those states alone,
we see that the U.S. map would require at least four colors.
But how do we prove that every map can be properly colored with at most five colors?
It's true of four, but we'll prove it with five.
Any map with a bunch of states can be represented by a graph as follows.
Inside each state, we place a vertex at its capital,
and then we connect two capitals with an edge where that edge just goes through the two states
if their states share a border.
This is called the dual graph of the map.
Okay, so if here's the map of Pennsylvania,
and I've drawn its capital in each of those states,
and then its dual graph would look like that.
Here's a more complicated example.
This map here has a dual graph that looks like that.
So notice, for example, that region A is adjacent to regions B and D and F.
So the face A borders face B, face D, and face F,
and then when we look at its dual graph,
we see that vertex A is adjacent to vertex B, vertex D, and vertex F.
The dual graph is always planar, because why can't any edges cross?
Well, since the edge that takes us, say, from A to B can't cross the edge that goes from C to D,
because the edge that goes from A to B stays entirely in regions A and B,
and the edge that goes from C to D stays entirely in C and D, so they're not going to cross.
Coloring the states of the original map,
coloring the faces of the original map, corresponds to coloring the vertices of the dual graph.
So since we can turn any map problem into a graph problem,
where instead of coloring the faces, I'm coloring the vertices,
I'm just going to focus on graph problems.
So, for example, this map here, with, let's say, region A colored red,
and region B colored green, and so on,
and we would simply assign the color red to vertex A,
and the color green to vertex B, and so on.
And I'll say it again, the dual graph is always planar.
So at this point, we're going to focus our attention on coloring the vertices of a planar graph
so that no adjacent vertices are assigned the same color.
And anything we learn about vertex colorings of planar graphs will give us information,
will tell us information about coloring the faces of any map.
Thus, if I want to prove the five-color theorem for any map,
our new goal is to prove this theorem.
For any planar graph G, the vertices of G can be properly colored,
that is, so that no adjacent vertices have the same color using at most five colors.
Or in other words, every planar graph is five-colorable.
All right, to prove this, we're going to need a lemma.
Now, I hear you cry, what's a lemma?
A lemma is a theorem or a statement that's going to help us prove a bigger statement.
Okay, so the theorem we're really after is the five-color theorem,
but the following lemma will help us get there.
The lemma says this, every planar graph G must contain a vertex of degree less than or equal to five.
Okay, so let's prove that.
Let's suppose, as it's proved by contradiction,
suppose to the contrary that it wasn't true.
All right, then there would have to be a graph G that has n vertices, v1 through vn,
and e edges such that what?
There'd have to be a graph where every vertex had degree greater than or equal to six.
All right, so the degree of vi is greater than or equal to six for all i in this graph.
But, oh, so certainly we'll have to have at least seven vertices in such a graph.
But by the handshake theorem, we know that the sum of the degrees of the vertices
is always twice the number of edges, but on the other hand, in a graph like this,
we'd have n vertices each with a degree at least six,
so the sum of the degrees of the vertices would have to be at least six m.
Therefore, two e is greater than or equal to six n,
and that means that e, the number of edges, is greater than or equal to three n,
three times the number of vertices, but three n is bigger than three n minus six.
And that contradicts the planarity of G.
Remember, G was supposed to be a planar graph,
since a planar graph satisfies e less than or equal to three n minus six.
Therefore, every planar graph has to have a vertex of degree less than or equal to five.
Okay, next, we're going to prove the six-color theorem.
We're not ready for five colors just yet, but the six-color theorem is pretty easy.
It says, for any planar graph G, the vertices of G can be properly colored with at most six colors.
Let's prove this by induction on n, the number of vertices.
Okay, so, base case.
Well, I got a bunch of base cases.
Clearly, it's true whenever n is less than or equal to six, right?
If you have a graph with six or fewer vertices,
then you could give each vertex a different color.
That's going to be a proper coloring that uses at most six colors.
Okay, next, we state our induction hypothesis.
Assume that the theorem is true for planar graphs with k vertices,
that any planar graph with k vertices can be properly colored with at most six colors.
Our goal is to prove it for planar graphs with k plus one vertices.
Okay, so, let G be a planar graph with k plus one vertices.
By our lemma, we know there has to be a vertex, v, where the degree of v is less than or equal to five.
Let's temporarily remove v and its edges from the graph G.
This gives us a new graph that we'll call G minus v.
Now, since G minus v is still planar, right, you just remove some edges.
So, it's not going to suddenly cause edges to cross, the graph is still planar.
But now it has k vertices, so we can apply the induction hypothesis,
which says that this new graph G minus v can be properly colored with at most six colors.
So, do so, okay?
Properly color it with six colors.
Now, bring v back into the graph.
So, we're back to G again.
Now, that vertex v had degree that was at most five.
So, it had at most five neighbors.
And since it had at most five neighbors, we can assign v a sixth color,
a color that wasn't used by any of its neighbors.
And now the entire graph G has been colored with at most six colors.
And that's the proof.
Alright, that was the sixth color theorem.
Now, we're ready for the five color theorem.
That says for any planar graph G, the vertices of G can be properly colored with at most five colors.
The beginning of the proof goes exactly the same as the sixth color theorem.
We do our base case, we state our induction hypothesis,
assume that it's true for any planar graph with at most k vertices,
that it can be properly five colored.
Our goal is to prove it for planar graphs with k plus one vertices.
So, let G be a planar graph with k plus one vertices.
By our lemma, there's a vertex v whose degree is less than or equal to five.
Just like before, we temporarily remove v and its edges from G,
giving us the graph G minus v.
Now, here's where things change.
Since G minus v is still planar and has k vertices,
then by the induction hypothesis, we can properly color G minus v with at most five colors this time.
Alright, now let's get some easy cases out of the way.
If v has at most four neighbors, then we're done, right?
Because then we can assign v a fifth color that's different from any of its neighbors,
just like in the proof of the sixth color theorem.
So, we'll assume then that v, the vertex we used, really had five neighbors, alright?
But now, if in the proper coloring of G minus v,
if any of those five neighbors were given the same color,
then there'd be at most four different colors among these neighbors, right?
If that's the case, then we can assign v a new color, okay?
So, here we would let v be green,
and we would have now done it with at most five colors.
Therefore, the only situation we have to worry about is when v has five neighbors,
let's call them v1 through v5,
and in the proper coloring of G minus v, they've all been assigned five different colors.
Let's call those colors red, yellow, green, blue, and purple as shown in our figure.
In that order, clockwise around v.
Next, here's the idea.
We would like to change v1 from red to green, right?
If we can get away with that, then we can assign v the color red,
because it'll have two green neighbors, and we'd be done.
So, what's stopping us? Why don't we change v1 from red to green?
The problem is that v1 might already have some green neighbors, right?
If it didn't, we'd be done. We'd be happy.
Okay, mission accomplished.
But let's say it has some green neighbors.
So, what do you do to those neighbors?
Turn them red, right?
But I know what you're thinking.
These might be adjacent to some other red vertices, so turn them green.
But I know you're saying those might be adjacent to some other neighbors.
When does the madness stop?
Okay, so here's what I want to think about it.
Imagine I have with me some red-green glasses
that only allow me to see vertices that are colored red or green.
And I'm going to look at v1 here, and I'm going to look at every vertex
that I can reach using only red and green vertices along the way, okay?
So, you could think of this component, this connected component
that's connected to v1 that only uses red and green vertices.
Now, if this red-green component doesn't reach vertex v3, then I'm happy,
because what I'll do is on that red-green component attached to v1,
I'll just turn all my reds into greens and all my greens into reds,
and I'll still have a proper component.
But now v1 would be green instead of red, okay?
So, I'll be happy.
So, if that's the case, that red-green component doesn't include v3, then we're done.
So, the only situation I have to worry about now is when vertex v is adjacent
to five different vertices given five different colors where v1 is red,
v3 is green, and there exists a red-green path that goes from v1 to v3.
So, I've drawn it here.
It surrounds the vertex v2, you'll notice as we do this, okay?
Now, what do we do in this situation?
We take v4 and we take v4 and we switch it from blue to yellow with the usual chain reaction.
So, this time I pull out my blue-yellow glasses,
and anything that any blue and yellow vertices that are connected on that v4 component,
using only blue and yellow vertices, I'm going to turn everything that's blue into yellow
and yellow into blue.
Can that component somehow reach v2?
It can't because v2 is surrounded by this fence, this electric fence of red and green vertices.
So, it can't be penetrated by a blue-yellow chain because none of the vertices on that surrounding v2
are blue and yellow, and it can't cross the fence because the graph is planar, okay?
So, what does that mean?
That means that we can turn v4 yellow.
Now, v is adjacent to two yellow vertices.
I can color v blue and we're done.
That's the proof of the five-colored theorem.
In his paper, Kemp tried to push this induction argument.
This was essentially the induction argument that Kemp used,
and he tried to extend that induction argument just as we went from the six-color theorem to the five-color theorem.
He wanted to do this for the four-color theorem, and his article was published in 1879.
But, eleven years later, a subtle error was found in his argument, and he was unable to fix the proof.
It would take nearly a hundred years from the publication of Kemp's paper
until two mathematically trained computer scientists, Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Hocken,
were able to prove the four-color theorem,
but it required the construction of a set of over a thousand different graphs,
and having a computer program check the logic for each of these cases.
The result was controversial for two reasons.
One, mathematicians were uncomfortable with trusting the computer to provide much of the reasoning.
The computer had never been used to the extent that it was in this proof before.
As far as that issue goes right now, through other independent verifications,
the math community now accepts the truth of the theorem.
Other people have written similar programs.
It's still used to computer, but they felt that the theorem has been independently verified.
The second controversial aspect is, what does it mean to prove a theorem?
Is it merely verifying whether a statement is true or false,
or is a proof a human activity that provides people with deeper understanding of the problem?
And this computer proof certainly didn't accomplish that.
So, I will say, though, that the mathematics community still holds hope
that someday a simpler proof will be found.
Surprisingly, the four-color theorem can be generalized to other surfaces besides the plane.
For example, any map drawn on a sphere, like a globe, can be transformed to a map on the plane.
Basically, you take a beam of light at the north pole,
and at every point on the globe, that becomes a point on the plane.
So, as a result of that, you can show that any globe can be properly colored with just four colors.
But the surface of, say, a donut, which mathematicians call a torus,
is fundamentally different from a sphere.
So, it's been shown that any map on a torus can be properly colored with just seven colors.
And the surface of a two-hold donut can be properly colored with eight colors.
In general, it's been proved, and without computers,
that a map on the surface of a donut with G-holes in it, where G is a positive number,
is always K-colorable, where K is the largest integer less than or equal to this number,
7 plus the square root of 1 plus 48G divided by 2, of course.
The proof of this theorem required that the surface has at least one hole in it.
But what's kind of cool is that the formula still works for the no-hole situation, for the sphere.
Since when G is zero, the formula gives us 7 plus the square root of 1 over 2, in other words, 4.
It predicts the four-color theorem, even though the proof of it isn't valid for that situation.
Coloring problems arise in more situations than you might think.
For instance, if you play the game Sudoku, who doesn't,
you're essentially trying to properly color a graph with 81 vertices,
where two vertices are adjacent if they're in the same row, or the same column, or the same box of 9.
In the game of Sudoku, some of the vertices have already been colored.
They've been given a number between 1 and 9, and you have to find the one way to color the rest of them.
You have to fill out the box in such a way that no number appears twice in the same row,
the same column, or the same box of 9.
Graph coloring problems arise also in assigning schedules, such as trying to assign meeting times for various committees,
in such a way that if two committees have a common member, then they have to meet at different times.
The synchronization of traffic signals can also be modeled using graph coloring, too.
Sometimes we're interested in counting the number of different ways you can properly color a graph,
when you have k different colors to choose from.
So, for example, the path graph of length n can be colored k times k minus 1 to the n minus 1 ways.
Why is that?
Well, if you have k colors, how many choices do you have for vertex 1?
K choices.
How many for vertex 2?
Well, now that you had k choices for the first one, you have k minus 1 choices for the second,
because it can't be the same color as vertex 1.
How about vertex 3?
That also has k minus 1 choices, because it can't be the same as vertex 2.
And so on and so on and so on.
So the first vertex, you have k choices, but every vertex after that, you have k minus 1 choices.
So the number of proper colorings, k colorings of the path graph of length n is k times k minus 1 to the n minus 1.
In fact, the same is true for any tree, not just the path graph, but for any tree with n vertices.
Notice, by the way, that k times k minus 1 to the n minus 1 is an nth degree polynomial, right?
It's a polynomial in k with degree n.
As it turns out, for any graph with n vertices, the number of proper colorings using at most k colors is always an nth degree polynomial with variable k.
It's called the chromatic polynomial of g.
And it can be computed by a recursion, and it has lots of nice properties.
For example, it can be shown that the cycle graph C5, pictured here, has chromatic polynomial f of z equals z minus 1 to the fifth minus z minus 1,
which expands out to z to the fifth minus 5z to the fourth plus 10z cubed minus 10z squared plus 4z.
As in this example, notice that the leading coefficient is 1.
That's always true.
The next term is the negative of the number of edges, right?
The number of edges in C5 is 5, and we've got a negative 5z to the fourth term.
It's an alternating polynomial that it goes positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative.
You're always going to have that in your chromatic polynomial.
The chromatic number is the smallest positive integer z for which f of z is greater than zero.
If you think of the definition of chromatic polynomial, that makes sense.
But this, which is really cool and doesn't make much sense, is that f of negative 1 tells you the number of ways you can orient the edges so there are no directed cycles.
It's kind of like a tournament.
How many ways can you orient the edges in such a way that there is not a directed cycle in the graph?
So if we plug in various values, we see that f of 0, f of 1, and f of 2 all evaluate to zero.
So there's no way to color this graph properly with zero, one, or two colors.
f of 3 is 30, which means that there are 30 ways to properly color this graph with three colors, let's say red, white, and blue.
And f of negative 1 is negative 30.
And what that negative 30 tells you is that there are 30 ways to orient the edges on C5 in such a way that you don't get a directed cycle.
Now C5 looks like a cycle.
How would you get a directed cycle?
Only if all the edges were pointing clockwise or all the edges were pointing counterclockwise.
So there are two ways to create a cycle.
And then there are two to the fifth minus two ways, two choices, two choices, two choices, for each of the edges.
So there are 32 ways of orienting the edges, two of which are bad, therefore 30 of which are good.
Given a graph, it's easy to tell whether it's too colorable.
By the way, it's also called bipartite since they partition the vertices into two parts, the blue ones and the red ones.
And you can tell if a graph is too colorable just by proceeding in a greedy way.
Take any vertex, color it blue, make its neighbors red, make their neighbors blue, make its neighbors red, and keep on doing that until you've assigned a color to every vertex.
And if no two adjacent vertices have the same color, then you're too colorable.
If not, you're not too colorable.
But suppose we asked if that can be done with three colors.
Then for some graphs, this problem can be very hard.
For example, although it's easy to prove that the United States graph is not three colorable, suppose you were given a graph that looked like this, then the problem could be much harder.
In fact, this kind of problem is so hard that if you could find an efficient algorithm to determine if a large arbitrary planar graph could be properly colored using just three colors, then you would actually win a million dollars in worldwide fame.
We'll learn more about these kinds of problems in our next lecture on algorithms and complexity.
