Kapuni Uriah Plant in southern Taranaki has observed several milestones recently.
It began as one of Prime Minister Rob Muldoon's think-big projects 30 years ago.
For the past 20 years, balanced agri-nutrients has owned the operation
and recently it's invested $30 million in capital improvements
and secured gas supply and resource consents to ensure operation for the next two decades.
In December of 2012 we celebrated 30 years of operation.
Prior to Kapuni, all nitrogen, all Uriah was imported into New Zealand.
Having said that, 30 years ago the demand for Uriah was not what the demand for Uriah is today.
Now there's about 600,000 tonnes of Uriah used in the agricultural sector alone.
We are deemed an energy intensive industry and an industry which is under threat from imported product as well.
We are consented to operate on our site.
That consent covers both our nitrogen waste, our water abstraction, our emissions to atmosphere.
And we have consents in place through to 2035.
In terms of bigger picture environmental consent, we also surrender carbon units
for all the natural gas that we consume on site, both as fuel and as processed gas.
The Uriah manufacturing process starts with natural gas.
Natural gas is a raw material of which we reform to separate into hydrogen and carbon dioxide.
Really the process is one of purification.
We try and get those hydrogen streams, the CO2 streams as pure as we possibly can
before combining the hydrogen and nitrogen which we suck out of the air in the ammonia synthesis loop.
That ammonia is like an intermediary product.
Once we've got the ammonia, we combine that with the CO2 that we removed at the reformer.
When you put it back together, it reacts really strongly.
It's a really exothermic reaction, releasing lots of heat.
And at that point you've got an impure Uriah mixture.
And the rest of the Uriah plant processes about purifying that Uriah
and then turning it from a liquid product into a granular product.
There's two types of gas that arrives on site.
One is fuel gas and one is processed gas.
Composition and make-up, they're exactly the same.
It's just how we use them.
So the processed gases are the building blocks of what we're going to make the Uriah from.
We need the carbon that's in the natural gas and we need the hydrogen that is in the natural gas, i.e. as methane.
The fuel gas we're simply using as an energy source, our heat source,
and to drive some of our big engines on site.
The liquid Uriah is then sprayed onto seed Uriah.
So seed is very small particles of Uriah.
And as that liquid Uriah is sprayed up onto them, those seeds grow larger and larger and larger through about nine spray stages.
The first time that we actually get to see the physical product that we're going to make is at the end of the granulator.
And at the end of the granulator we can get a bit of a gauge on the size of the product that we're making.
Usually from the granulator we get quite a wide size distribution and then through sieving and crushing and sorting,
we get the size distribution tighter and tighter so that we get a consistent product which is going to end up with our spreaders
or end up with our industrial customers.
Product sampling is critical to ensuring that the product that we put out,
is going to make Uriah for agricultural use, Uriah for industrial use,
or Uriah for using the GoClear diesel additive.
We've got to make sure that the different impurities in the process are managed and always controlled within our tolerance limits.
At the end of the day we end up with 260,000 tonnes every year of this granular Uriah.
We're catching this product in bulk and in bulk trucks, 30 tonne payloads and 20 kg bags, 40 kg bags,
one tonne bags and half tonne bags.
This program was made with funding from New Zealand On Air.
