Welcome back. In this lecture we're going to explore cardiovascular disease and determine
what are the risks. But I'm going to start out by telling you a story. My first year
at the Houston Texans I had the privilege of looking at everybody's lab work and I had
a young man 27 years old who played a big program in Texas come to me and his lab values
were a mess. His cholesterol was high, exceptionally high. And as I was sending him to the cardiologist
in Houston he got cut by the Texans and picked up by another team. After he left Houston
he went to his other team and suffered a heart attack at 27 years old. So the tragedy of
that is that people looked at him and said he was physically active, he worked out. Yeah,
he ate a lot but you know he's burning all this off. He doesn't have to worry about heart
disease. And that actually is a fallacy that cost this young man his football career as
well as his ability to earn a living because he had significant complications after his
MI, myocardial infarction. So unfortunately we've got this really scary disease that faces
cardiovascular disease and it's the number one cause of death and disability in the United
States and most European countries. And it's hard to say in this day and age that that's
tragic but it is because we've learned a lot about cardiovascular disease. But a lot
of the stopping of cardiovascular disease really requires a reframe for most of us.
Some sources say that approximately 50% or one out of two Americans will develop some
form of heart disease within their lifetime. It kills more cancer, kills more Americans
than cancer and many other chronic illnesses but if you ask most women what they fear most,
they fear breast cancer and not necessarily cardiovascular disease. Just like in my football
player he just didn't develop cardiovascular disease at 27. This is a disease that actually
begins in childhood with cardiovascular injuries, inflammation which we'll explore and plaque
buildup accumulation. So what that means is that the prevention efforts must, must,
must start in childhood. So if you have children or grandchildren you can't say oh you know
I ate that way when I was a child. There's no reason why they shouldn't have whole milk
as a 10 year old. You know everybody loves pizzas so we're going to get pizza two to
three times per week because after all they're children. Keep in mind that those habits they
develop as children are going to be difficult for them to change so one of the best gifts
that you can give your children is cardiovascular protection and again continue that throughout
the life cycle. In this lecture we're going to look at different types of cardiovascular
disease, some modifiable risk factors that you can actually change, some things that
you can't and have you be a little bit better consumer in terms of predicting your risk.
We're going to start out with the skinny on cardiovascular disease, some information on
types, terminology and again common symptoms. This is not however to replace a physical
exam by your physician. This is more an overview of the types of cardiovascular diseases that
we can encounter. Angina or sometimes pronounced angina can be described as severe chest pain
that's generally considered to be a lack of blood supply or oxygen to the heart muscle.
Sometimes people describe it as discomfort, pressure, heaviness, a tight feeling rather
than a sharp pain and this angina can be either stable or unstable. Aside from the chest pain
can be experienced in the upper abdomen, back, jaw, neck, shoulders so what you might confuse
as heartburn could actually be angina. Stable angina is often times experienced in times
of emotional stress or physical exertion so you go out, you get up first thing in the
morning, you go exercise and you feel this little tightness in your chest and you might
just say I wasn't warmed up or give another excuse but pay attention to those symptoms.
It can be made worse with cold weather, it can be made worse by having a full stomach
but it's generally no more than three to five minutes in duration. Sometimes it's accompanied
by nausea, sweating, shortness of breath but hallmark is it gets better with rest. If it's
unstable angina it occurs even at rest, it lasts longer and if your physician has prescribed
medication often times the medication becomes ineffective in terms of reducing the symptoms,
the pain and the discomfort. Well what does this have to do with nutrition? It's most
common cause is coronary artery disease. As plaque in the blood vessels builds up, blood
flow is restricted and deprives the heart muscle of oxygen. Now atherosclerosis on the
other hand is that the walls of the arteries become damaged in some way, shape or form
and some people believe it can be cigarette smoking, chronically poor diet but in particular
the oxidation of LDL cholesterol and remember we're going to continue to explore LDL cholesterol.
The oxidation of LDL cholesterol may indeed be one of the damaging factors in terms of
the damage to arterial walls. So what happens after this arterial wall is damaged? Well
our immune system comes to the rescue. It sends white blood cells or sometimes known
as leukocytes to correct the problem and help to absorb the oxidized LDL. Most specifically
this is under the direction of monocytes and macrophages, two types of white blood cells
which actually trigger a cycle of events that involve inflammation and ultimately the development
of plaque. And I will remind you of this when we come to cancer and other diseases. This
level of inflammation, this inflammatory process is a major disease risk for the development
of heart disease. So as we go through how do we treat this? We'll talk over and over
again about anti-inflammatory compounds in your diet. Things such as nuts, dark berries
all have natural anti-inflammatory properties. Certainly omega 3 fatty acids have natural
anti-inflammatory processes. So once we've got this damage the LDL cholesterol readily
enters the arterial walls and stimulates the production of something known as cytokines.
And cytokines again are another kind of inflammatory compound. So I want you to think about this
process as there's damage to that arterial wall and the damaging sends in this rescue
team of white blood cells and the whole process of inflammation begins. Once the arterial wall
becomes inflamed, cholesterol plaque is deposited in the walls of the artery and causes the
smooth muscles of the artery cells to enlarge and form what is known as a fibrous cap over
the affected area. Inflammation is a key finding in many chronic illnesses. There are some diagnostic
tests that your physician can do to see how much inflammation you have. And again we'll
talk about this in further lectures. Well as this plaque builds up, it reduces blood
flow and increases blood pressure. Think about that just like the pipes in your house. We've
all had the experience when our sink is backed up, we've all had kind of a rotor-router person
come out and clean out our pipes. Well in reality that's what's happening in our arterial walls.
As the blood flow becomes constricted, the pressure to pump that blood through the arteries
becomes increased, high blood pressure increases, and it's kind of like the sludge that builds
up in your pipes, increasing the pressure within the arterial walls. Again, oftentimes
this is going to start in childhood and studies done with adolescents, it's found in most
arterial walls even as early as adolescents. The problem is early on, the early stages
of this game, other than looking at some blood cholesterol markers, there are no symptoms
and it's not generally detected by most diagnostic tests. Of the 24 million individuals in the
United States diagnosed with heart disease, unfortunately, oftentimes the first symptom
is a heart attack or sudden cardiac death. Again, that's tragic when we've got all these
warning signs coming along the way, letting us know that there's trouble coming. When
you get your blood work done, you have a high cholesterol or your triglycerides are high,
any of those other warning signs, I want you to think about that as a warning sign that
you would have that something's wrong in your car. You wouldn't ignore the flashing
red light saying you're out of oil or you're out of gas, you'd pay attention because you
don't want to deal with the consequence. Here's another great time to pay attention.
Dietary interventions here are unbelievably effective and again, exercise and diet oftentimes
go together like peanut butter and jelly, good apart, much better together, so diet and exercise
play a key role in the prevention of cardiovascular disease. Well, what happens when you actually
have a heart attack? Severe damage and death occurs in that arterial wall causing death
to the heart tissue. The blood supply to the heart is interrupted and due to the blockage
of an artery, oftentimes what happens is you have a rupture of that fibrous cap, it ruptures
and as it ruptures, these white blood cells come in, so now the plaque has actually exploded
and we've got this collection of white blood cells that move in like an army and what they
actually do is cause the platelets to aggregate, stick together. These platelets are coming
in to deal with the injury and as they stick together, they actually form a clot within
your arterial wall. Some estimates suggest that a major cause of heart disease is not
just the actual constriction of the pipe, the constriction of their arterial wall, but
actually what's happening is that fibrous cap that's on that top of that plaque ruptures,
white blood cells and platelets come in, they form a clot and that clot is what's
restricting blood flow. So what about a cerebral vascular accident, oftentimes known as a stroke?
It's the same kind of process, it's damage to the brain tissue and subsequent loss of
brain function due to an interruption in the blood supply to the brain. So if you think
about a myocardial infarction as a heart attack, a stroke is a brain attack. And again, most
often due to the formation of that blood clot within a vessel, an embolism or a piece of
that plaque breaks off somewhere and causes a blockage. Now this type of stroke is known
as thrombitic, it forms a thrombus, a thrombitic stroke. Hemorrhagic stroke is different, hemorrhagic
stroke is simply defined as bleeding into the brain, think of a hemorrhage, in this case
the hemorrhage is in the brain. Well a great example are the Greenland Eskimos. The Greenland
Eskimos as a population are obese and they smoke. You would think that's not good for
heart health, that's not good for the prevention of cardiovascular disease. They eat a high
fat diet of marine protein. Now remember they're fishing for their own cold water fish, key
point, cold water fish and so they may be eating whale or seals or other marine protein
that they're harvesting from the seas. Now Greenland Eskimos have an increased risk of
hemorrhagic stroke. Why is that the case? That high marine protein diet is high in omega
3 fatty acids and we've discussed in previous lectures the role of omega 3 fatty acids that
they can interfere with blood clotting. So the Greenland Eskimos don't die of heart disease,
they don't have a heart attack, they don't die of thrombitic stroke, what they die of
is hemorrhagic stroke. So that's why I will remind you that a large dose of omega 3 fatty
acids should be ordered by a physician. Currently most recommendations for omega 3 fatty acids
include somewhere in the range of 2 grams of fish oil per day. If your dose is larger
than this or if you're taking any other blood thinning agents please discuss this with your
physician. The key message here is that omega 3 fatty acids can be both helpful in the prevention
of the most common forms of heart attack and stroke and harmful because they can increase
the likelihood of hemorrhagic stroke. So what are your symptoms of a stroke? Well it includes
things like dizziness, severe headaches, nausea and vomiting and often times unfortunately
this doesn't necessarily get our attention. Why is that the case? Well if you think about
it how many times in your life have you had a headache? Every time you have a headache
you're not necessarily thinking stroke. However if it becomes numbness in the limbs, slurred
speech, the inability to speak, vision loss, lack of coordination or the inability to walk
that really is your warning sign. So if you're working with a colleague or you're out somewhere
with your spouse and all of a sudden someone cannot even communicate with you and it's
almost this blank look on their face they've lost the ability to speak you really need
to think about calling 911. Early intervention can be life saving. Now certainly there are
interventions that we can use to discuss how to treat that high blood pressure and dietary
interventions are going to be included in the lecture on the DASH diet. Well there are
other forms of cardiovascular disease probably most notably congestive heart failure and
this is structural or functional problems within the heart that impair its ability to
provide adequate blood flow to the rest of the body. So think about your heart as a pump
and that pump becomes less effective. It's not pumping as hard or it's pumping at irregular
rates and often times this prior heart damage, something that's happened in the past, cardiovascular
disease, impairs the functioning of the heart. When the heart can't pump nutrient delivery
is compromised and fluid is retained because the pump can't pump the blood. It cannot deliver
blood to the tissue so what ends up happening is the fluid accumulation is pretty significant
and often times sodium restriction must be added to minimize the fluid retention and
congestive heart failure. Well what are the nutritional causes of congestive heart failure
because the causes are many. The nutritional causes of congestive heart failure include
long standing atherosclerosis and high blood pressure. So the prevention from a nutritional
standpoint of congestive heart failure is consistent with the other major causes of
heart disease. The caveat that we add to that or the addition that we add to that is sodium
must be restricted and often times physicians will prescribe diuretics to decrease that
fluid volume. So I'm going to refer you back to the lecture on hydration. Individuals who
have congestive heart failure are often times extremely thirsty because it isn't the intent
to make them fluid depleted. It is the intent. So now we're going to look at some risk factors.
Things that you might be aware of or not aware of. Non-modifiable risk factors are things
that we really can't change but we need to be aware of them. Age. Well if we're all
lucky enough we're all going to live to a ripe old age. Some of the statistics suggest
even individuals at age 55 who have normal blood pressure are going to develop high blood
pressure in their lifetime. In fact some estimates suggest up to 90% of people who are normal
intensive have normal blood pressure at age 55 will develop high blood pressure. So keep
in mind get that checked on a regular basis. Certainly along with age can often times increase
in blood lipids. Glucose intolerance, the likelihood of metabolic syndrome and diabetes
that we'll refer to later. So I think after age 35 in men and after age 45 in women the
probability of dying of cardiovascular disease increases. But that's not all gloom and doom
because there's so much that we can do to prevent that. Lifestyle modification is effective
at reducing some of the health risks that are associated with aging. Gender. Well I
have to tell you there's good news and bad news here. We've paid a lot of attention to
cardiovascular disease in men. So actually they are improving in terms of early identification
of treatment. But it's women. It's women who often times have a higher risk of death because
symptoms go on diagnosed or untreated. And often times have more lethal or more severe
first time heart attacks. Women often believe that heart disease is a man's disease and
they'll do everything within their power to take care of their sons, their husbands and
other men in the family. But they may be reluctant to seek care for chest pains. They may ignore
symptoms of chest pains and often times the symptoms feel a little bit different in women.
And so often times they are reluctant to go. And some studies also suggest that the treatment
of these symptoms in women is often times attributed to something else like anxiety
or stress. And again more women are fearful of breast cancer than heart disease. Statistically
you're more likely in your lifetime to develop heart disease and you are breast cancer. But
often times breast cancer is where more the fear is associated. Now what we know from
the National Nurses Study and nurses by definition are almost all women. About some of the range
of 80 to 90% of nurses are actually female. That in the National Nurses Study the incidence
of heart disease decreased about 20% over the study period from 1980 to 1994. So what
was driving this decrease in heart disease? Smoking cessation was thought to contribute
about 13% of the decline in heart disease. Improvement in diet about 16%. Now keep in
mind these percentages are not necessarily additive. But what we're looking at is we've
got more evidence to suggest that making a change anytime in your life can really improve
your or decrease your likelihood of developing heart disease. The key finding here is that
heart disease is an equal opportunity killer for men and women. Women just generally have
their heart disease expressed a little bit later than men but it's an equal opportunity
killer. Now there's even a higher risk for women who have diabetes. Some estimates suggest
that with diabetes the risk of heart disease is 5 times normal. So please don't ever say
I've just got a little touch of sugar or my doctor says my blood sugar is a little bit
high. This is one of your red warning lights in your car. This is coming up on the dashboard.
Every single light that you've got in your car telling you got something is wrong is
wrong if you have diabetes, particularly type 2 diabetes. Other things such as metabolic
syndrome which we'll discuss in future lectures. Polycystical variant syndrome. Polycystical
variant syndrome, PCOS is thought to be an insulin resistant disease. And often times
in PCOS what happens is women have few periods, they have problems with fertility, they can
actually have some expression of too much testosterone so they can end up with facial
hair, male pattern baldness and they often times end up with a male distribution and
body fat. Some of this is going to be driven by estrogen, some of this is going to be
driven by the imbalance between estrogen and testosterone. The pattern of coronary artery
disease blockage is different between men and women. Men tend to have more isolated
blockage and women have a more scattered blockage pattern that occupies longer portions of
the vessel. So what we know is although it's an equal opportunity killer clinically it
isn't expressed the same way. So I think the tragedy is if you have diabetes you often
times ignore those warning signs. If you have PCOS we're not connecting infertility
with heart disease but there is a connection there. Now certainly family history is really
important because keep in mind that your liver is this cholesterol making machine as we've
covered in previous lectures. It's a cholesterol making machine and if you have a heart attack
risk at an early age you really need to pay close attention to that. So your genetics
play a role in developing or dying from cardiovascular disease. People who have a known predisposition
should be aware of their dietary choices and physical activity. Personally my father had
his first heart attack at 36. Well I can look at that in two ways. One that's obviously
very bad news but the good news for me is I know because he had early heart disease that
I'm at increased risk. So I have my entire life worked very diligently to manage my
cholesterol and had my children tested at a very early age to see if they inherited
that genetic risk. The other tragedy is my father-in-law has had cardiovascular disease
and recently passed from cardiovascular disease so now my poor children have that genetic double
whammy from both sides of the family. Early heart disease before the age of 50 increases
the likelihood that this is a genetic cause and not necessarily diet. So think about my
football player at age 27 having a heart attack. Well if he went back and traced his
family history his brother had a heart attack at 38 and his father was in his 40s. So it's
that genetic expression. Keep in mind if you have elevated cholesterol members of your
family should be tested and please include those under the age of 18 like I have done.
As I told you my three children have all had their cholesterol tested my daughter had
a cholesterol of 190 at 16 despite eating well and being athletic. Very petite girl
but because she's related biologically to me and her dad the challenge that she has is
her cholesterol was elevated. Keep in mind the values of cholesterol are lower the recommended
values of cholesterol are lower in children than they are in adults. So 190 is actually
relatively high for someone who is 16. Please please please don't assume that if you exercise
and watch your weight and your blood fats that you're immune. Some of our probably best
examples are going to be from the athletic world because they tend to be publicized more
in the media. Pete Marovitch was a fabulous basketball player that played at my alma mater
of LSU and he actually died on the basketball court in his mid 40s playing a pickup game
a basketball in a gym. If you've ever seen Pete Marovitch play unbelievably lean physically
active guy he just was unfortunate to be related to the wrong set of parents. Jim Fix
who really popularized the running movement in the United States and the word jogging
really didn't exist before Jim Fix came on the scene died of cardiovascular disease in
his 50s. He lived a little bit longer than his brother and his dad did but the bottom
line is he still had that genetic expression. Arthur Ashe one of the best tennis players
who ever graced a court. Arthur Ashe died of AIDS. He died of HIV disease from a blood
transfusion he got in a coronary artery bypass surgery. So I think the tragedy is we see these
individuals but how many more individuals don't we see. Now certainly NFL linemen and
depending on whose research you like or believe have a shortened life expectancy secondary
to heart disease. Some estimates suggest that lo and behold an NFL linemen may have a life
expectancy in the mid 50s. Well why is that. What kind of diet do you think was promoted
for these young men. What kind of diet was promoted. Now I've had coaches tell me you
know what I need my players to gain weight they all need to gain weight and I actually
had a coach say to me I told my player in order to gain weight he needed to eat a tube
of cookie dough uncooked cookie dough every single day to add extra calories. So to me
the abuse that has occurred in the NFL and again the promotion of these high fat diets
throughout their whole entire life really has now led to an increased risk of heart
disease and diabetes. So I always say football players don't die from their orthopedic injuries
the orthopedic injuries make them less physically active they die from heart disease and diabetes.
So again we've got multiple examples here of where physical activity and being physically
active can undo all the issues with with diet and lifestyle that we encounter. Now certainly
ethnic background can make a difference what ethnic group do you belong to. Well for reasons
that are really unknown African Americans have more severe hypertension and as such have
a greater risk of heart disease they're more likely to have an elevation and blood pressure
with increasing sodium and so we'll explore this relationship between sodium and high
blood pressure when we talk about the dash diet. The risk of heart disease is higher in
Mexican Americans and Native Americans some Hawaiians some Asian groups. Now the driving
factor for this is obesity and diabetes. Genetically these ethnic groups are much more likely to
have type 2 diabetes and again diabetes can oftentimes drive the prevalence of heart
disease. Okay so what are the modifiable risk factors. These are things that you should
and can change. Well the modifiable ones the major ones include cigarette smoking, controlling
blood sugar preventing diabetes, controlling your high blood pressure, controlling cholesterol
and getting moving and eating less foods. Controlling these risk factors can provide
a guide to reducing your heart disease. Now I want to again encourage you to think about
diabetes. Diabetes itself is considered a heart disease equivalent. So what that means
is that individuals who have type 2 diabetes should be treated like they've already had
a heart attack. They should be aggressively managed. So again there is no such thing as
a touch of sugar or you know I've got a little bit going on here. So oftentimes the goals
for individuals who have type 2 diabetes in terms of their blood fats are much more
aggressive. So again if you've been recently diagnosed with type 2 diabetes go and ask
your physician should my cholesterol be lower than it should have been prior to this diagnosis
and I will tell you the answer to that is going to be yes. Now we've got some frequently
asked questions. Many members of my family are diabetic so what good does it do to diet
and exercise? Aren't I doomed? The answer is absolutely known. We've had some landmark
research to show that diet and exercise always count. This is the best example of the diabetes
prevention program that took people who are all high risk of diabetes and put them on
intensive lifestyle modification. And again estimates vary but the estimated disease risk
reduction was about 58% of individuals who got out and exercised, they got out and exercised
and watched their calories and lost some weight. So I'm going to tell you that that
piece of pivotal information really leads us to believe that you know what it is never
too late. I can always do something to modify my risk factors. Now keep in mind if you've
got pre-existing diabetes or you've got pre-existing heart disease your physician may have to modify
your exercise program for you based on medications that you're on. But don't ever say you know
what I'm behind the genetic eight ball there's nothing I can do because I'm going to tell
you there's always going to be something that you can do. Now the next frequently asked
question is the one that's really unfair. My sister doesn't watch her weight, gets very
little exercise yet I'm the one with heart disease. How come? Why is it me? We all know
people who can eat whatever they want and we talked a little bit about this when we talked
about calorie balance. They can eat whatever they want and yet you're the one with high
triglycerides or high cholesterol. Why is that the case? Well there's this concept called
genetic expression and again if I happen to get the wrong end of the gene pool I can end
up with a disease that you know my biological relative didn't get. So in my particular family
when we talk about genetic expression I'm five foot four and my two sisters are five
nine. I got the short genes, they got the tall genes. The same kind of process can happen
when it comes to the genetic expression. In my three children two of them have high cholesterol
and the two out of three that have high cholesterol are the two that are very athletic. My older
son's cholesterol is perfectly okay, he's a little heavier than his siblings and he
eats a whole lot of red meat. So unfortunately we don't always get to pick A our parents
can't pick our parents and we can't predict what kind of genes are going to be expressed.
But the take home message with all of this is regardless of what your family history is
regardless of what your risk you can always make a difference with exercise, diet and
lifestyle modifications. The other caution here is make sure if you have a preexisting
disease any of the ones that we've discussed that you are actually going to your physician
saying how do I modify this to make this unique and special to me. So stay tuned we'll have
more on these diseases coming up in the next lectures. Thank you very much.
