Music
Welcome.
I started out by telling you a story.
I had an elderly woman who came into my clinic
who had high blood pressure,
and she was really fearful of making a mistake,
making a wrong food mistake.
And so she was limiting her portion sizes,
she had cut out salt,
but she came in and shared with me a great strategy she had,
and she was modifying her favorite meatloaf recipe.
Well, she'd given up the salt in the meatloaf,
but actually what she was putting in was Worcestershire sauce,
she put in ketchup, she put in barbecue sauce.
All of those were really high sodium foods.
We talked about modifying her meatloaf
and talked about the hidden sources of sodium in that meatloaf.
We modified it, we increased her portion sizes,
and quite honestly, we had a better outcome.
She was eating a little bit more of what she needed to do.
She was eating more and she ended up having an improvement
in her nutritional status.
Well, hypertension or high blood pressure
is one of the most pervasive chronic disorders facing Americans.
According to the National Center for Health Statistics
and the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
the prevalence of hypertension in the United States
varies by ethnic group.
It's an unbelievably prevalent disorder
with millions of Americans being affected,
and over one billion people worldwide every year
are diagnosed with high blood pressure.
Now, here in the United States,
that equates to one out of three Americans.
Really very pervasive disorder.
What are the consequences?
Well, uncorrected high blood pressure
can lead to congestive heart failure, heart attack, stroke,
arterial aneurysm where the walls of the blood vessel
become dilated, and it is the leading cause
of chronic kidney or renal failure in the United States
leading to dialysis.
Even a moderately elevated blood pressure
can lead to a shorter life expectancy.
And I'm going to remind you,
not everybody has signs and symptoms of high blood pressure,
so you really have to monitor.
Well, there is a solution out there,
and the solution is called the DASH diet.
DASH stands for Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension.
Now, there are many dietary strategies
to control high blood pressure,
and that's good news for all of us,
because now we're armed with lots and lots of tools.
We've got weight management, adequate potassium,
calcium, and magnesium are central
to managing your blood pressure.
Now, remember, those are the nutrients
that we're going to concentrate on,
but we're also going to integrate that with food.
So, what constitutes high blood pressure?
For adults, normal blood pressure is considered 120
over 80 millimeters of mercury,
and that's your normal blood pressure.
What is blood pressure?
Blood pressure is the force of the blood pumping
against the arterial walls.
Sometimes this is defined as cardiac output,
how hard the heart is pumping,
and peripheral resistance.
What kind of resistance does that blood meet
when it flows through the blood vessels?
Even slight elevations above this number
can cause health problems.
Well, that systolic number is the top number,
and previously it was thought,
you know what, this is not a very important number.
We don't really know the magnitude
or the effect of high systolic pressure,
but that's the force of the blood when the heart beats.
Most recently, multiple studies suggest
that decreasing that systolic blood pressure
by 12 to 13 millimeters of mercury
over a four-year period of time
can reduce the incidence of stroke by 37 percent.
So, the take-home message is that top number matters.
It matters, and it matters in a big way.
Diastolic pressure is the bottom number.
It represents the force in between heartbeats.
It's a more important risk factor
for those under the age of 50.
According to the American Heart Association,
the pattern and significance of high blood pressure
changes depending on your age.
So, under the age of 50,
you may focus in on the diastolic number
over the age of 50, the systolic number.
So, both of these numbers are important.
Now, the systolic number
oftentimes represents the stiffness of those blood vessels.
So, again, as we age,
as we end up with plaque in our arteries,
all of those risk factors
stiffen that blood vessel slightly
and, again, increase that systolic number.
Those individuals who have normal blood pressure at 55,
so if you're 55 or older and you said,
oh, I've had normal blood pressure,
I don't have a risk factor,
I'm going to encourage you to continue to monitor
because you still have a 90 percent lifetime risk
of high blood pressure.
So, you might be lulled into this false sense of security.
I'm good to go because my systolic number is great.
I'm 57 years old.
Monitor, monitor, and monitor.
This stress of monitoring
is according to the seventh report
of the Joint National Committee
on the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation,
and Treatment of High Blood Pressure.
Their suggestions are
that for every 20-millimeter mercury rise
in systolic pressure
and 10-millimeter mercury rise in diastolic pressure,
you double the risk of heart disease.
So, again, that's why this monitoring makes a difference.
We now have a new category
that's not really a disease,
but it's, again, that's kind of early warning sign
that your body's giving you that flashing light
on the dashboard that says,
Pay Attention.
Prehypertension is defined as a blood pressure
from 121 over 81
to 139 over
89 millimeters of mercury.
Not a disease category,
but it tells you who's at risk
of developing hypertension.
I'm going to suggest to you follow the science on this
because as the science emerges,
this category may become more relevant over time.
Okay, what are the risk factors?
Well, the risk factors for high blood pressure are numerous.
Ethnicity is one.
Depending on the estimates that you read,
up to 40% of African-Americans have hypertension.
They oftentimes develop as an ethnic group,
hypertension earlier,
and it's a more severe and often more difficult to treat form.
And we don't really have a good reason
why African-Americans are more vulnerable.
So again, if you are African-American,
please make a note that not only do you need to check
your blood pressure, but your children's blood pressure,
regardless of their weight, regardless of other risk factors.
Certainly we know about age.
According to the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
again, over the age of 55, normal blood pressure,
you can still have an increased lifetime risk.
Hypertension, or high blood pressure,
itself is defined as when your blood pressure
is consistently higher than 140 over 90.
Now, we've all had experiences when we're anxious or nervous.
You're going to a new doctor for the first time,
and they say, oh, your pressure's high.
Well, remember that isolated one blood pressure
is not what we're looking at.
We're looking at a pattern over time.
Physical inactivity can increase the risk of high blood pressure.
So how much exercise do you need to have?
Well, a major study looking at 54 individual studies
on the reversing of aerobic exercise
demonstrated that at all levels and all intensities,
regular aerobic exercise can lower that top number,
the systolic number, by 3.8 millimeters of mercury,
and the diastolic by 2.6.
Keep in mind, however, if the exercise goes away,
so will the beneficial effects.
So we've all heard the adage,
an apple a day keeps the doctor away.
Well, I'm going to suggest we have a new one.
Okay, diet and nutrition is risk factors.
People who are obese are at five times greater risk
of developing high blood pressure.
According to one study, obese women are more likely
to have an increase in systolic pressure than men,
so it appears that there may be some gender discrimination there.
Central obesity is a key finding.
Well, are we seeing a trend here yet?
The trend is that obesity is going to contribute
to most of our chronic diseases,
but in this case, I'm going to encourage you
to get out your tape measure.
So we can get this up close and personal.
So here's what you do.
Take your tape measure,
and you measure around the level of your belly button.
If you are a male and your waist circumference
is greater than 40 inches,
you're going to have an increased risk of high blood pressure.
For women, if your waist circumference is greater
than 35 inches, you have an increased risk.
So it's not only are you overweight,
it's where is your weight clustered.
Sometimes you'll see this as the difference
between an apple body shape, abdominal obesity,
and a pear body shape,
where you have your weight in your hips and thighs.
So we know that overweight or obesity is going to be
a risk factor in terms of diet nutrition.
People who consume diets high in sodium and low in potassium
are more likely to develop hypertension.
Now here again, what we're seeing is a trend
that we have in this case two minerals
that act in opposition to one another.
We've seen that with insulin and glucagon
in terms of hormone,
and this is going to come up over and over again
in clinical nutrition.
So that high sodium diet versus a low sodium,
or diets low in sodium,
are also going to contribute to high blood pressure.
Vitamin D may play a role.
Individuals with vitamin D deficiency
are found to have a higher than average
systolic and diastolic blood pressure.
So who would have thought even five years ago
that having adequate amounts of vitamin D
may also have a risk,
reduce your risk of having high blood pressure.
And certainly individuals who have a family history
of high blood pressure are more likely
to develop high blood pressure.
So a lot of the chronic illnesses that we're exploring
have not only a dietary and environmental cause,
but have a genetic cause as well.
Sleep apnea, however, is a common
and oftentimes overlooked cause of high blood pressure.
Sleep apnea occurs when you can't get
adequate oxygen delivery
and you are waking up multiple times during the night.
Now, you might not actually be aroused from sleep,
but the key finding here
is ask your partner whether or not you snore.
If you snore, you're much more likely to have sleep apnea.
Of course, I would never snore,
so my husband would say absolutely not.
Cushing syndrome, kind of an unusual cause
of high blood pressure,
occurs when you have an over-secretion
of the hormone cortisol,
and that can cause high blood pressure.
Now, other atypical causes include certain popular drugs,
such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
such as aspirin or ibuprofen,
can cause high blood pressure.
But keep in mind that's not a typical cause.
Now, other individuals are at risk
of developing hypertension,
and those are individuals who are pregnant,
individuals who have polycystic kidney disease,
kidney tumors, insulin resistance.
And again, this is a recurring theme.
Too much insulin, remember,
insulin's an anabolic hormone,
and in this case helps us to retain
or hang on to that additional sodium.
And certainly we all know
the stress of everyday life
can also cause elevations in your blood pressure.
So a holistic view might be
that you not only need to walk
and you need to monitor your diet,
but you also need to integrate strategies
to reduce stress in your life.
Now, what about the dash diet?
Do we have any solutions here?
Well, again, many dietary strategies
can be implemented to control high blood pressure,
and oftentimes the combination
of one or more strategies
can lead to a better result.
This total dietary approach
of managing food, not necessarily supplements,
but managing food,
is one of the best methods
to communicate a health and nutrition message.
The dash diet is one example
of the whole food approach
that's being endorsed
by the American Dietetic Association.
Okay, now the question is,
does it work?
Well, the original dash diet
did not stress
sodium restriction,
or even body fat management,
and the results were equivocal.
Some studies would say yes, the dash diet works,
and others said no.
But aha, with the addition
of sodium restriction
and weight management,
there is evidence that this approach
can and does work.
Research using the dash diet
to treat hypertension
shows it can lower blood pressure
in some people.
Not those that have very resistant high blood pressure,
oftentimes not as effective
in African Americans.
It can lower blood pressure
to the same extent as drug therapy does.
It can also lower blood pressure
often more than other lifestyle changes,
and again, more than one
so the bottom line here is
combining all these strategies
and not just picking one,
not just focusing in on sodium restriction,
is more effective
than a combination of other
lifestyle strategies.
Now, after two months on this diet
when individuals are put on the dash diet,
what have we seen?
We've seen a reduction of systolic pressure
by an average of 11.4
millimeters of mercury
and a diastolic decrease
by 5.5 millimeters of mercury.
Very significant.
So for every 2 millimeters
of mercury reduction in systolic pressure,
it reduces your risk
of heart disease by 5%
and your risk of stroke by 8%.
Now, I'm not a gambling woman
but I tell you I will take those odds any day
that if I can introduce
a dietary approach that's going to be helpful,
I'm really going to get on board with that.
Other results of lowering
your blood pressure can include
the risk of reducing the risk
of progression of dementia
and other cognitive impairments
and these disorders are more common
in those individuals who have high blood pressure.
Now, again, this
moderation of alcohol comes up
just like it has come up in the prevention
of cardiovascular disease.
But any more than moderate
amounts of alcohol
can actually have the reverse effect.
It can increase pressure.
So again, we've got to define moderate.
Moderate means
one glass of wine for women,
two glasses of wine for men,
but portions always
rule. So a portion is,
again, if we're using wine as an example,
we're looking at about a 5 ounce glass.
So you have to kind of think
of what is the size
of your wine glass at home.
So if you're not sure, measure it.
And if your standard wine glass is 8 ounces,
that's more than
one glass of wine according
to the science on standardized portions.
Further research
has shown that the standard
dash diet combined with dietary
sodium or salt restriction
is going to be even
more effective. Now I'm going to tell
you, the science will suggest
if you combine that with 1,500
milligrams of sodium or less,
you can get really even more
significant reductions. I have to tell you, though,
that's a little bit of a difficult challenge
for most Americans as we're going to explore.
So again, adding
in some sodium restriction
can be helpful. But just like
my elderly woman, if it gets to the point
where you cannot tolerate
the way your food tastes, adding
a little bit more salt may actually improve
your nutritional status, because
we've got lots of tools in our toolbox
in terms of controlling high blood
pressure.
In general,
the dash diet focuses in on
a high content of fruits,
vegetables,
low fat dairy products,
and a low fat composition.
I'm going to suggest to you, however,
we're not just talking about low fat,
we're talking about right fat.
And remember those right fats tend to be
the essential fatty acids, omega
6 and omega 3 fatty acids.
Well, what's the role of potassium, the major
mineral in fruits and vegetables?
Well, sodium and potassium, again, are the
yin and yang of blood pressure nutrition.
And again, I'm going to suggest that you
listen to the lecture
on those minerals.
For every
increase, one unit increase
in the ratio of sodium-potassium excretion,
how much you're getting rid of, there was
a 24% increase in the risk
of heart disease.
So lowering the sodium intake while
increasing the potassium intake is the
best stroke defense.
So the analogy I use is
bodies like to be in the middle of the road.
We really like the middle of the road.
We can go to the wiggle room.
We can go left or right a little bit.
But when I have a high sodium intake
and a low potassium intake,
I've got an imbalance here.
My body is forced to live in the ditch
and we don't do very well as human beings
when we live in the ditch.
We're designed to go down the middle of the road.
So keep in mind what we're trying to do
is really balance those minerals.
The hard part is
the average American
consumes about 3.6 grams
more than the federal guidelines
of 2.4 grams of sodium per day.
American Heart Association
again gets a little bit more aggressive
and recommends under 2 grams
of sodium per day.
Now however, sodium and salt
are not really the same thing,
but we use those things interchangeably.
Salt by definition
is sodium
times 2.5.
And many of us again use these terms interchangeably.
A teaspoon of salt
is equal to
2.3 grams of sodium.
So again, just a teaspoon
of salt in your diet a day
is going to be close or exceed
most of our public health recommendations
on sodium consumption.
Now the other challenge is
that most Americans consume less
than the 4.7 grams
of potassium that's recommended per day.
There are lots of estimates out there
but current estimates are that Americans
only consume about 3 grams per day.
So again, we've got this imbalance
of sodium potassium and what we're trying to do
is bump those up.
So here's a key point for you.
Diet should include less processed
food to decrease the sodium.
Because keep in mind when we're talking about
high blood pressure,
we're really talking about the sodium
and not just the salt.
So the more processed a food is
in general, the more instant a food is
the higher the sodium content.
And again, that food may not taste salty
but there's sodium built in.
Again, diet should increase
the amount of fruits and vegetables.
Well here's another great question.
How can I make my food taste good
without salt?
The challenges as we age
our sense of taste evolves
and some people would say it actually diminishes.
And so in essence
to taste the food
we need more sodium
to flavor and taste our food.
So again, my elderly woman who is trying
to make the content of her meatloaf
didn't like it without the salt
and part of that was because of her age.
However, most of us believe
less salt equals
less delicious.
Well there's some things that you can do
to improve the flavor.
Certainly you can use lots of different
spices and herbs.
And one of my favorite is using hot sauce.
You can use Tabasco and hot sauce
and yes there's sodium in that hot sauce
but practically speaking
you don't want that to be a significant sodium load.
Foods can be spicy
if you like spicy food.
They just can't be salty.
Again, one of my favorite things to do
is take liquid crab boil
and when I'm boiling potatoes
I put a little crab boil in the potatoes
and it gives it this wonderful season flavor
but not salty.
Now what about other minerals
besides sodium and potassium?
Does that make a difference?
Well some recent studies suggest
the risk of heart disease and stroke in older women.
So wait a minute here.
Isn't the DASH diet focusing in
on low fat dairy products?
The answer is yes.
Aren't dairy products a great source of calcium?
Yes. However, I'm going to suggest
that this study was in the case
with those who had emerging kidney failure
and it's almost always
in individuals who are taking calcium supplements.
Not calcium from food.
It's really difficult
to get too much calcium from food.
So again, when the American Dietetic Association
stresses a whole food approach
and not a supplement approach
here's the reason why.
Because I can with a supplement
very easily get my calcium intake
above what is practically
going to be consumed in diet.
So again, the bottom line here
is that too much or too little
with calcium can affect blood pressure
and I would encourage you
not to consume an excessive amount of calcium
from supplements which will be defined later.
Certainly we know
that limiting saturated fat
is also a great idea
in the management of high blood pressure.
Why is that the case?
Keep in mind saturated fat
helps you to deposit plaque in arterial walls
because it triggers the synthesis
of cholesterol.
So if high blood pressure
is cardiac output
times peripheral resistance
the combination of those two
the more plaque in my arteries
the more resistant to that blood flow
my body becomes.
Increasing omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids
may also help to control your blood pressure
and remember both of these are essential.
In our American Diet
we tend to eat too much omega-6
and not enough omega-3
but remember our bodies crave
balance.
Okay, can we give you an example
of a dash diet?
Yes, there's a wonderful example
of how you can implement this
work. Again, I'm going to suggest to you
that the dash diet is based on calorie levels
and quite honestly
you really need to match your calories
because the portion sizes that are recommended
on the dash diet are almost always
going to be linked with energy balance.
So again, if you're more
physically active you should boost your portion sizes
or the number of items to maintain your weight.
If you're looking to
lose weight you might have to adjust your calories.
So keep in mind these
guidelines are going to be based on
calorie balance but the general
recommendation is that you should not
consume less than the minimum number
of servings that I'm going to give you
in terms of portions for
the dash diet. Again, depending
on your calorie needs it's going to vary
but the key point is
a significant increase
in fruits and vegetables. This is
how we're going to drive that potassium
intake up. So in general
again, depending on calorie balance
we're looking at 8 to 10 servings
of fruits and vegetables a day
and you're going to think, oh my there's no way I can do that.
Keep in mind that a serving is a half
a cup and if you're trying to
estimate a half a cup is about the size
of the palm of your hand.
So if you have a big bowl of grapes
that could honestly be 2 servings right there.
6 to 8 servings of grains
and I'm going to ask you the question
what kind of grains are we talking about?
Of course the answer is whole
grains. 2 to 3
servings of dairy. Again, what is a serving?
It is an 8 ounce glass.
So if you're not sure how much
how many ounces you have in a standard glass
in your own home, measure it.
2 to 3 servings of dairy.
Now this is generally fluid milk
skimmer low fat or skimmer low fat
yogurt. Technically speaking
cheese is going to be considered a dairy
portion but because of the high saturated
fat content it really is going to
get bumped to the side on the dash diet.
Somewhere in the range
of 6 ounces of lean protein
and that's going to be chicken
fish. Remember any meat
that has the word loin in the name
is going to be considered a lean protein.
3 ounces of meat
again is about the size of the palm of your hand
or size of a deck of cards.
So you could very easily
get 6 ounces of lean protein in a meal.
So again when we talk about
servings, they're standard servings
it's not necessarily what you're serving yourself
on your plate. And somewhere in the range
of 2 to 3 servings of oil
or other fats.
But please always remember
what we're looking for are mono
or polyunsaturated fats.
So olive oil, peanut oil
safflower oil, sunflower oil
would all be good examples
of how to add fat to your diet.
Also aim for 4 to 5
servings of beans, nuts
or seeds per week, not per day.
So I think the challenge here
is can we integrate this?
And the answer is yes.
So if you think about the DASH diet
with the exception of the addition of the
sodium restriction and really trying to amp
up the fruits and vegetables.
This really fits most public health
guidelines. We're tweaking this
to take the science of what we know
about these individual minerals
and what we're now trying to do
is combine that into an eating
plan that you can enjoy.
Ok.
Frequently asked questions.
My food doesn't taste salty
so that means I have a low sodium diet?
I can't taste the salt in my food.
And that's the hard part
because the answer to that
is no. Keep in mind
instant or processed
generally means higher levels of sodium.
I'll give you one of my favorite examples.
Two or three years ago
there was a brand of pudding on the market
that you could add just water to
and shake it. Now remember
you can make pudding by using
skim or low fat dairy products.
You can make it homemade. You can make the pudding
that takes 24 hours to set up
or you can make this instant pudding.
The sodium content from the
homemade pudding at about
120 milligrams of sodium
to the middle of the road at about
300 milligrams of sodium
to the instant pudding
590 milligrams of sodium.
So it's a great example
as I go from less processed
to more processed what's going to happen?
The sodium content in my diet
is going to rise.
Also, just because
the food tastes salty
just because the food tastes salty
doesn't mean it's a high sodium food.
The salt could be on the outside.
Now this one may surprise you.
A small little vending machine
size bag, not the grab bag,
not a bigger bag, but a small individual bag
of potato chips has in the range
of about 150 milligrams of sodium.
So it's actually significantly less than that instant pudding.
It tastes salty
because the sodium is on the outside.
That is the reason it tastes salty.
So again, sometimes you can be
a little bit misled.
So again, go back to that nutrition facts panel
and look at the sodium that's added.
Because remember, the sodium can be
sodium chloride, table salt.
It can be sodium propanate
as a food additive.
It can be baking soda, sodium bicarbonate.
There can be lots of places
where the sodium sneaks in
and the food doesn't necessarily
taste salty.
So again, it's the sodium content that rules.
Again, we think sodium and salt are interchangeable terms.
They are not.
And so you want to look at the label for sodium intake.
Now, if I have to eat
8 to 10 servings of fruit,
can I just drink more juice?
Well, keep in mind
what we're really trying to do here is an integrated approach.
And yes, by drinking more juice,
I can get more potassium in my diet.
And that may be a strategy
for some people that you just can't tolerate the volume.
But again, what we're really looking for
is this integrated approach.
So if I need to lose weight,
if losing weight is going to be
an effective intervention to control my blood pressure,
I don't necessarily want to
over-drink juice
and not pay attention to portion size.
So portion size rules, portion sizes
are king, and so I think that's
a really key strategy.
Yes, you can drink more juice,
but in my world, I'd much rather have you
eat the whole fruit,
because again, I'm getting fiber and I'm going to get
other things that are going to make that diet
a little bit more integrated and holistic.
Now, is the dash diet
something that my whole family can do,
or is there anything that I can do
to make the food preparation easier?
And the answer is yes.
Your whole family can be on this diet.
Keep in mind you want things
that are less instant.
So say for example, most days of the week
you take a meal for your family
and you're using whole ingredients.
But a couple days a week,
you really need to go out and get fast food.
You think, okay, I'm going to go out and get fast food.
I'm going to go out and get a burger.
Well, I kind of know that's probably going to be
relatively high in sodium.
But maybe in this fast food restaurant
I'll look for a fruit or vegetable option.
This might be a great time to see
whether or not they're selling orange juice on their menu.
Can you get sliced apple?
Think fruits and vegetables
Also keep in mind that your body
remembers what you do most of the time.
Just like in the management
of high blood pressure, it's not that singular
value that we're concerned about.
We're looking at changes over time
and your body works the same way.
So if you have to have a higher sodium meal
because of your family demands,
so be it.
Keep in mind, because this is a whole food
approach and certainly
most Americans are going to develop
high blood pressure in their lifetime.
Why not put your three or four year old
daughter, son, grandson,
granddaughter on this diet.
Perfectly great for you to do.
So it is a wellness approach for your whole family.
Most of the time
we consume more sodium than we need
and so teaching our children
that fruits and vegetables and grains
can be delicious without salt
is a gift that only you can give them.
Are there cookbooks out there?
Are there any cookbooks that are out there?
And I'm asked that question all the time.
I'm going to suggest to you
anything from the American Heart Association
whether it's online
or whether it's an American Heart Association
cookbook really integrates
all this science and puts it
into a usable form for consumers.
Another great place
to get great information other than
the American Heart Association
is the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute and they actually have
dash pamphlets, dash recipes
and some other ways that you can quickly
get on board with this dash approach.
So monitoring your high blood pressure
realizing that you can be
an integral part in controlling
your high blood pressure
takes you on that road to wellness.
Thank you.
