Welcome back. In this lecture we're going to explore the intricacies of metabolic syndrome
and type 2 diabetes and give you an example of the severity of this illness. I had a man
who came into clinic to see me and he was referred by his physician because his blood
sugars were really high and he had uncontrolled diabetes and we were sitting there visiting
a little bit and in addition to being a dietitian I'm a diabetes educator and he said well the
doctor said you're going to give me a diet to follow and an exercise program and I had
the forethought to say I wonder if anybody's ever checked this man's feet so I asked him
to take off his shoes and actually what he had was gain green of his baby toe and had
I recommended an exercise program for him I would have made his condition worse. Because
this is such a complex set of disorders metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes we have to be
really vigilant in our understanding as well as management. As Americans we've seen an
explosion in our girth and this is partly due to our affluent society. Metabolic syndrome
and type 2 diabetes are consequences of the way we eat and the way we manage our exercise
programs. Many people believe metabolic syndrome is actually not a disease but it's a clustering
of risk factors. The risk factors for metabolic syndrome include an increase in blood sugar
maybe not high enough to have diabetes, undesirable changes in blood fats that we've explored
in other lectures, most notably an increase in triglycerides and a decrease in HDL, an
increase in blood pressure and the accumulation of what's called visceral or belly fat and
we've explored ways that you can figure out your own risk. So other people will say you
know what it's not really disease so what is it? Many people believe it's our early
warning system, our radar system that type 2 diabetes is on the way. And certainly the
Centers for Disease Control cite the third national nutrition health and examination
survey sometimes abbreviated NHANES and that says that the estimates in the United States
are about 47 million Americans have metabolic syndrome. So it's not an occasional person,
this is really a public health epidemic. Also according to the CDC they estimate that 24
million Americans have type 2 diabetes and many experts believe this is really under
diagnosed. So this lecture is going to look at the tidal wave that we have that these
diseases represent and the prevention and the treatment of these all too common disorders.
Okay, what are the causes of metabolic syndrome? Well like everything else we can be genetically
predisposed. We certainly know that individuals who have that central obesity, that pear shape,
the apple shape, the apple shape that they have can really influence the development or
maybe it's an early warning sign and again in your guidebook we have ways of you calculating
that. The fat cells in abdominal or visceral fat behave badly, they don't behave like other
body fat and they actually increase the level of inflammation in the body. In the Jupiter
study that we've referred to in the past we know that individuals that have an inflammatory
response even if they're LDL cholesterol, they're bad cholesterol in a normal range
are at an increased risk of heart disease. So these badly behaving fat cells that increase
inflammation really do have a significant disease risk associated with them. Excessive
insulin resistance. Well we've talked about insulin in the past but how do you know if
you have insulin resistance? First and foremost you can look at where your body fat is stored.
Secondly you can look for something called acanthosis nigra cans and what this actually
is is excessive pigment where the skin bends. Okay, where the skin can fold back so you
can see it on knuckles, most commonly you see it around the neck, you can see it under
breast tissue, under fat folds and it's a hyperpigmentation. It's not a hygiene issue,
it actually looks like a ring around the collar. So you see this hyperpigmented area around
the neck. Had a young lady who came into clinic, she had metabolic syndrome, she had acanthosis
nigra cans and you know what, she thought I'm just not cleaning myself well enough.
She actually took a brillo pad to her neck and tried to scrub off the pigment. It's pigment,
it's not dirt. And why do we end up with this hyperpigmented area? Well insulin, that wonderful
anabolic hormone, insulin stimulates the melanocytes, the pigment produced in cells,
to make more color. So certainly if you're a person of color, if you're African American
or Hispanic, it really looks like a dark or black ring around the collar. In lighter skinned
individuals it can almost look like a brown discoloration, most predominantly on the back
of your neck. So are there any other things that we should be concerned about in terms
of this metabolic syndrome? What else is going to cause it? Well certainly inactivity and
again that's a recurrent theme, bodies are designed to move. So the American College
of Sports Medicine in its wisdom has come up with a campaign called exercises medicine.
They want every physician in the United States to be comfortable in terms of writing and
exercise prescription. Estimates vary, but most experts will say that the effects of
exercise, the beneficial effects of exercise in the prevention and management of metabolic
syndrome and type 2 diabetes last between 19 and 24 hours. So what that means is you
need exercise every day if you either A, have metabolic syndrome or type 2 diabetes or if
you're at risk. Inactivity in itself makes the cells more resistant to the effects of
insulin. So again remember the body has to crank out more and more and more of this wonderful
anabolic hormone and again too much of a good thing in this case is not a good thing.
Okay, how do we prevent metabolic syndrome? Key themes, you've got to have a moderation
of your weight. This is an example where you must, must, must exercise every single day.
I want you to think about that as as important as taking high blood pressure medication,
as important as taking your statin resin if you have high cholesterol or any other medication
that you're prescribed. I want you to start to reframe the way you think. Exercise is
as effective as medication so I must take it every day. Choose this wonderful anti-inflammatory
diet. Certainly the Mediterranean diet which has a lot of vegetables, monounsaturated fats,
nuts, seeds, olive oil, all are important. Don't ever step over the need to control calories.
Calories are really important and as we explored in the lecture on carbohydrate, the value
of choosing carbohydrates based on the glycemic index and again whole grains being rich in
magnesium are all pretty essential. Type 2 diabetes. It is the most common form of diabetes
and again estimates vary but between 80 and 90 percent of diabetes is this type. What is
type 2 diabetes exactly? Well it can be diagnosed by your physician and there are diagnostic
criteria. In this case the body makes insulin but it's not being effectively used by the
body. So it's not an insulin deficiency here at least in the early stages. It's not
insulin deficiency. It's inappropriate use of insulin by the body. This is diagnosed
by having a fasting blood sugar you've had nothing to eat of greater than 126 milligrams
per deciliter or an oral glucose tolerance test of greater than 200. But like with most
metabolic parameters over the last 20 years we've seen numbers drop. When I first started
in practice diabetes wasn't diagnosed until you had a fasting blood sugar of greater than
140. So stay tuned you're going to see these targets probably decrease in the next five
or six years. Other factors that can raise blood sugar are often times not accounted
for we don't think about them. First and foremost medications can raise blood sugar and they
can actually interfere with an appropriate diagnosis. Some high blood pressure medications
can cause your blood sugar to be high. Niacin for high cholesterol this is one of the reasons
why you don't want to take niacin unless a physician knows you're taking it. Steroids
and that could be steroids that you're using to control an illness. If you're taking estrogen
or testosterone your blood sugars can be higher and an anti-seizure medications dilatin can
also raise blood sugar. So there's lots of other factors that can complicate or give an
inappropriate diagnosis. So you can imagine if you're taking niacin on your own and you're
at risk of developing diabetes and now you go in your blood sugars high you're going
to get an inappropriate diagnosis that was actually medication induced. Illness will
raise your blood sugar. Fever raises your blood sugar. So what that means is independent
of food physical stress not the emotional stress of a challenging job but physical stress
or an insult to the body can raise blood sugar independent of food. Well a lot of people
refer to type 2 diabetes as adult onset and what I hear more often in my clinical practice
you know it's not a problem I've just got a little bit of sugar. I'm going to try and
raise the bar on that and get you to think about it in a different way. Although we think
of type 2 diabetes or adult onset is less dangerous it's actually now being increasingly
more common in children. And again estimates are going to vary here but the complications
of diabetes are estimated to occur 10 to 15 years after diagnosis. So I want you to think
about that when we explore children in type 2 diabetes. Historically the type of diabetes
that we've seen in children is type 1. This type of diabetes is insulin requiring. They
must have insulin to survive. However recent estimates from the CDC suggest that type 2
diabetes now accounts for between 8 and 46% big range there of all new cases of diabetes.
And part of the difference in the ranges was how old was that study. You know what was
the target at the time was it 140 for a fasting blood sugar 126. But again I think the most
important take home message is many experts now believe that prevalence is underestimated.
Part of that is the signs and symptoms of diabetes are not things that are going to
get your immediate attention. Well certainly we know in type 2 diabetes is it in your genes
and again the recurrent theme is absolutely. Twin studies give us the best look at the genetics
of diabetes. If you're an identical twin you share an identical gene pool. If one twin
gets diabetes the chance that the other twin gets diabetes is 3 out of 4. So you have a
significantly greater risk. So we now have identified multiple different genes, loci
on genes that will suggest that yes there are some higher risk individuals. However the
environment must be conducive to the development of type 2 diabetes. So estimates vary using
CDC data but the Pima Indians are an ethnic group with the prevalence of diabetes that's
estimated to be about 50 out of a thousand subjects. Relatively high prevalence. Ethnically
Pima Indians rarely marry outside of their genetic gene pool so they tend to preserve
their gene pool. A great example is diabetes in the Rio Grande Valley. Diabetes in the
Rio Grande Valley one of the highest prevalence in the United States is down in the Rio Grande
Valley down in Star County and part of that is the influence of the Pima Indian gene pool.
So we know we have a really high genetic component here in type 2 diabetes. Again the human genome
project has identified over 17 genetic loci strongly associated with type 2 diabetes.
The marker on the gene. So does the environment contribute to diabetes? The clear answer is
yes that jury is in. Genetics can be against you but I want you to think about I've got
this genetic susceptibility but I do have the ability to control my environment and
prevent it. I used to say we're all going to get something and if I know genetically
I'm set up for diabetes now I can again get myself loaded. I can get myself ready to go.
I can bring out all my tools to prevent diabetes. But the great news for us is there have been
some major prevention studies that indicate lifestyle style changes even in the face of
genetic susceptibility can prevent diabetes. Probably the most predominant one is something
called the diabetes prevention program. They assigned people, participants with blood sugars
that were just below the level of pre-diabetes to one of three groups. Placebo kind of standard
care. Metformin which is a medication that is used to control diabetes for lifestyle
intervention. The lifestyle intervention included two and a half hours per week of physical
activity. So I'm going to say overall that's not going to be a huge amount of activity
and a healthier, low fat, low calorie diet. Also this intervention was actually delivered
by registered dieticians and so there was some education as well. Lifestyle intervention
and to me this is the aha moment. Lifestyle intervention reduced the incidence of diabetes
by 58 percent where traditional pharmacology that is used for the same kind of circumstances
reduced it by 31 percent. So it's not that it was reduced to nothing but lifestyle ruled
the day. The weight reduction in the lifestyle intervention group as initial weight loss
was 7 percent. After almost three years of follow up the total weight loss was about
5 percent so they did regain weight but they still had a significant reduction in the development
of type 2 diabetes. So a key message here is even if you can't lose a substantial amount
of weight any weight loss matters. If you have a family history of diabetes, if you have
metabolic syndrome this is the really great news. Other dietary factors. Diabetes control
is more than just controlling calories. The type of fat can influence diabetes in genetically
susceptible individuals. Studies such as the national nurses study which is also going
to be mentioned in the lecture on heart disease was a long term study taking a look at a large
number of subjects and that gives science the best look at long term risk factors. Those
who had the highest trans fat intake had a much greater risk of developing diabetes than
those who had a lower intake. So again there's a possible link between trans fats and inflammation
so again think of that Jupiter study. Also those who had the highest intake of polyunsaturated
fats omega 6 and omega 3 had a decreased risk of developing diabetes so the type of
fat matters. However when we look at poor intake of omega 3 fatty acids when you don't
have a good balance between those two major types of essential fatty acids poor intake
of omega 3 fatty acids have been linked with insulin resistance. So keep in mind you want
a nice balance. The amount and type of carbohydrate can influence the development of disease. Diets
rich in whole grains and cereal fiber have been shown to reduce the incidence of diabetes.
Okay what's our case for fiber? Those soluble gumming fibers make food leave your stomach
slowly and you get a slow post-prandial or after meal rise in blood sugar. So your body
doesn't have to work as hard it doesn't have to produce as much insulin to metabolize those
sugars. Okay magnesium that's found in whole grains. Some research suggests that magnesium
may be the missing link between whole grains and diabetes. So could it be that it's really
the magnesium content that's lost in the processing of the food that really helps to protect
our bodies from the development of type 2 diabetes. Certain studies have shown that
increasing the intake of whole grains can decrease the risk of diabetes by 40%. I also
want you to think about that for just a second. That simple switch of buying a different type
of bread or a different type of breakfast cereal particularly if you're genetically
behind the eight ball. This is a really great strategy. Other protective compounds include
the glycemic index. Certainly if you review the lecture on carbohydrates we know that
individuals that have a high glycemic index diet can actually increase the workload of
the beta cell and the beta cell is part of the body that makes insulin. This eventually
can contribute to beta cell fatigue. The beta cells just can't keep up with that environmental
demand. Okay is there anything else? Well the answer is absolutely yes. Iron. We know
or we've heard of the word antioxidant. We think of antioxidants as being good things.
Iron is an oxidant. Iron may actually worsen insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Now
I have to tell you there's not a real clear answer here. Is it the iron or is it the meat?
In the Iowa women's health study a relationship emerged between heme iron. Now this special
kind of iron is only found in meat and an increasing risk of diabetes. So again I want
to remind you when we talk about controlling the portion sizes of meat like we did in the
dash diet there is a reason beyond hypertension and there may be a link between heme iron found
in meat and diabetes. The association was stronger in this study in those who consumed
alcohol. Iron overload is actually thought to contribute to damage to the beta cells
and I have to tell you in my world of professional football I see many athletes who have iron
overload because we have so many fortified foods. Certainly we also know that the type
of meat particularly if it's processed with sodium nitrate may also contribute to the
damage to the beta cells. So again plants tend to rule the day and in this case excess
amounts of meat, highly processed meat, those with sodium nitrate can actually damage the
beta cell. Eating meats with nitrates almost every day and where do those come from? Well
think bacon, think ham, think bologna. Had a greater than 40% chance of developing diabetes.
Ok, so dose is everything. Now most of us don't think of dose when we talk about meat
but I'm going to suggest to you that the American diet has more animal protein than
it needs and here's a good reason to try vegetarian. Certainly in the women's health
initiative there's been found to be a relationship between vitamin D and the development of diabetes.
Part of the problem was they didn't really find a protective effect with vitamin D and
the problem was the dose probably wasn't high enough. A lot of estimates are out there
now that our current recommended amount of 400 international units is not enough to keep
blood levels normal. Other studies suggest that yes vitamin D in a higher dose is protective
against the development of both type 2 and type 1 diabetes. Vitamin D in and of itself
is anti-inflammatory and it reduces insulin resistance. Now here's a hard part though.
If I am over fat, vitamin D is actually sequestered or stored in body fat making it less biologically
available. So I'm consuming the vitamin D, it gets stuck in my body fat and it's not
available to the blood. Now the beta cell itself, that insulin secreting cell in your
pancreas is a direct consumer of vitamin D and it can convert it to its most active form.
So again the beta cell really relies on vitamin D. What about beverages and diabetes? Coffee.
Now again you're not hearing caffeine here nor are you hearing energy drinks but we're
talking again about a whole food. Coffee both decaf and regular are associated with a decrease
in diabetes. Again this dose related phenomena. Increasing consumption from 1 cup to 3 cups
provides some additional risk reduction. A review of the coffee consumption, great review
was in the Journal American Medical Association in 2005 and it concluded that regular coffee
consumption can substantially reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes. So now when someone
questions how much coffee that you're drinking you can be relatively smug and say I'm on
my type 2 diabetes prevention program. Coffee is a very rich source of antioxidants and
actually outperformed tea which really had no effect. So again another great reason to
have that sugar-free non-fat decaf latte. Getting some vitamin D, you're getting some
calcium and again you're getting those rich antioxidants. What about alcohol? The Physicians
Health Study indicated for those consuming light to moderate amounts of alcohol which
we've defined there was a subsequent decrease in the incidence of diabetes. And it may again
not be the alcohol per se but the antioxidants that are found in alcohol. Alcohol can actually
reduce the production of glucose by the liver. But if you have diabetes or you're taking
medications for diabetes always check with your physician to see whether or not alcohol
is going to be part of your diet. So now let's think about this. What about sugared drinks?
So now we've got a double whammy here. Beverages don't promote satiety or fullness like solids
do. High glycemic index foods which include juices are probably something that you want
to avoid. This includes soft drinks, sweet tea, lemonade and fruit punch. Now as we switch
gears and talk about type 2 diabetes in children I'm going to tell you this is a relatively
new and for me as both a clinical dietitian and a diabetes educator it's relatively disturbing
to me. This is directly related to the increasing levels of obesity in children. Now again I
work in Houston and we have a very high Hispanic population and we know African Americans and
Hispanics have that genetic predisposition. But it's been estimated that close to 600,000
youth in the United States have some degree of glucose intolerance. And the incidence
of type 2 diabetes has significantly increased in the last 15 years. Well since I've been
a dietitian for 30 years I have to tell you in my first employment at Tulane Medical Center
in New Orleans never saw a child with type 2 diabetes. Now at Texas Children's our
diabetes clinic sees more children with type 2 diabetes than type 1. Our youngest patient
is 4. So I'm going to remind you to think the complications of type 2 diabetes start
to occur 10 to 15 years after the diagnosis. So that means for our youngest patient what
does that mean for her? The complications are going to occur for her in her teens or
her 20s. What kind of complications do we see? Well we see this general classification
of what I call apathies, a disease state. Neuro apathy, issues with the nerves, retinopathy,
eye, nephropathy, kidney. So remember my man who had the gangrene in his toe? You might
have been thinking why didn't he feel that? Why didn't he have pain? He had significant
neuropathy where he couldn't feel his feet. So he didn't know he had gangrene. He had
enough abdominal fat where he couldn't see his toes. So a strategy always is if you have
type 2 diabetes please, please, please check your feet. Because again if I can't feel
the pain I've lost that ability to have my early warning system. What about the economic
cost of diabetes? Can we afford it? From a population standpoint can we afford it? According
to the American Diabetes Association the cost of care for those with diabetes in 2007
was 2.3 times higher than for those without diabetes. So as we all struggle with controlling
health care costs it would be wonderful if we actually paid for prevention. We don't
pay for prevention usually in this country and so what we're ended up doing is paying
for it on the back side. As type 2 diabetes becomes a predominant type of diabetes in
youth we can expect to incur greater costs. Remember there's another type of diabetes.
What about type 1 diabetes? It's similar in the fact that blood sugars are high but it's
different. In type 1 diabetes that individual ends up producing no insulin. Their beta cells
are not functioning any longer. They are going to be obligated to take insulin for the rest
of their life. Most people believe it's an autoimmune disorder and certainly there are
things called diabetes seasons where you actually see more diabetes being diagnosed in the winter
month, cold and flu than other times during the year. But it's represented by the ultimate
destruction of the beta cell. So the cells of your body that make insulin can't make
insulin anymore. Individuals that have type 1 diabetes are on insulin for the rest of
their life. At this point there's no other option. Certainly in the future we'll look
at stem cell transplants, beta cell transplants and ways of seeing if we can control or correct
type 1 diabetes. These patients are usually lean and usually young. Now we certainly do
know that many people can develop type 1 diabetes really anytime in your life and so you've
got to kind of be on the lookout. Usually in people who are developing type 1 diabetes
because they've lost their anabolic hormone they lose weight very quickly at the early
stages of their diagnosis. Now is there going to be a best case scenario for people with
metabolic syndrome or type 2 diabetes? I'm going to suggest to you the answer is yes.
The reason is if indeed type 2 diabetes is you know what I'm resistant to my own insulin.
Insulin's an anabolic hormone. It promotes the deposition of body fat. What's the biggest
trigger? What's the foot on the gas pedal for insulin secretion? The foot on the gas
pedal is carbohydrate. Carbohydrate stimulates insulin production more than protein and certainly
more than fat. So this would be an example of taking a lot of the great public health
guidelines saying you know anywhere between 45 and 65% of your diet should be carbohydrate.
This is where you'd modify it. If the biggest gas on the pedal is carbohydrate this might
be an individual that I'll take the carbohydrate lower than 45%. I've actually taken it down
to as low as 30% in individuals that I just couldn't get the metabolic parameters to fall
into place. So I'm going to say reducing carbohydrate in individuals with metabolic
syndrome type 2 diabetes really is a good management strategy. Not zero carbohydrate
but reduced carbohydrate. You can also understand that the type of carbohydrate would need to
be low glycemic, whole grain in getting carbohydrates from healthy choices and not necessarily the
processed carbohydrates. Another question I get all the time other than these pigment
changes are there any other symptoms of insulin resistance? The answer is yeah. It's that
belly fat. It's that big belly that you see that we've all seen. Hopefully none of us
have that but just in case that big belly that we've all seen that again is an outward
sign as not only are you storing body fat but that type of body fat doesn't behave itself.
It's a more inflammatory body fat and again inflammation and insulin resistance go hand
in hand. Another unbelievably common question is does sugar cause diabetes? And the answer
really is no. It doesn't cause diabetes unless it's contributing to obesity. So sugar in
of itself in a lean individual is not going to cause type 2 diabetes. Sugar does not cause
type 1 diabetes. Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disorder and so there should be no guilt oh
my goodness I drank sodas when I was 10 and that's the reason why I've got type 2 diabetes.
That's not true. I've heard there are herbal therapies that can be used to treat diabetes
and this answer is actually a yes and a no. There is some science to suggest that actual
cinnamon can help to lower butcher. The problem is if I take cinnamon as a supplement we have
no true standards for the purity, safety and efficacy of dietary supplements in the United
States. Tragic in many instances. So I can go to the science and say yep there are science
studies out there that suggest cinnamon is an effective strategy. The question is what
brand am I going to recommend? If you're going to take it as a pill is there a brand
that I can guarantee and the answer unfortunately is no. But if you like cinnamon in your sugar
free oatmeal in the morning and you really like cinnamon added to different foods by
all means. The challenge is when you're talking about herbal therapies to treat diabetes or
any chronic illness it's generally more of the herb than you would ever naturally get
in your diet. So the challenge is I can't get this and like my food so the reality is
many herbal therapies are going to fall a little short. Now is there a cure because everybody
wants a cure? I will tell you that I don't think you can say cure. Your insurance company
is not going to say cure. Your physician might not even say cure. But I think from the diabetes
prevention study I think what we can learn is that if I can control all the comorbidities
if I can control the hypertension and all the things that lead to poor outcome I would
consider that a cure. I'm going to consider that a cure and I've seen individuals whose
blood servers have normalized, their lipids have normalized and their blood pressure has
normalized by losing weight and exercising and following some of the other dietary recommendations.
So again in the medical world they probably wouldn't call that a cure. In the nutritional
world I'm going to tell you I would. Another question, will the dash diet help to prevent
metabolic syndrome or is it only meant to treat high blood pressure? How do I combine
all these dietary recommendations? And I think that's the bigger question. So does the diet
from the American Cancer Society, the dash diet, the diet from the American Diabetes Association
are they all that different? And the answer really is no. They share some common themes.
You're always going to hear controlling weight, you're always going to hear exercise. But
the key is can we tweak it a little bit for our individuals with metabolic syndrome and
again my strategy is I'll reduce the carbohydrate probably lower than the dash diet would recommend
because I'm trying to treat all of that. That would be a really good time to go see a registered
dietitian so they could assess your own risks and come up with the best plan for you. So
thank you very much.
