Greetings and welcome back.
I had a football player I was working with and he was tired and lethargic, out of energy.
And I took his diet and he was a traditional American football player, he was a carnivore.
And as we explored some of his dietary habits and the medications he was taking, looked
at his blood work and he was profoundly anemic.
He had iron deficiency anemia despite eating large amounts of animal protein.
Well, how did that happen?
He had an alteration in his digestive tract because he was taking a lot of pain medication.
So in this lecture we're going to integrate the normal process of digestion, the way your
body is supposed to behave, with the most common digestive disorders.
Now nutrition is a key player when it comes to discussing digestive health.
And what we can, what we eat can make a difference.
With many of the disorders we're going to look at, there may be no cure per se, but
rather than control through nutrition and dietary choices, lifestyle changes, and again
possibly medication.
I'm going to start out and orient you.
We're going to divide the digestive tract into two sections, the upper GI and the lower
GI.
And in the upper digestive tract we're going to look at the mouth, the esophagus and the
stomach.
So let's get started.
Let's start taking a look at oral diseases.
Well nutrition does begin in the mouth.
We know that saliva is required for digestion and for moisture.
In conditions such as radiation for head and neck cancer, saliva can be compromised and
the food must be moist because when you lose the natural ability of saliva to moisten food,
you're going to have to replace that moisture with moist foods.
This might include things like applesauce, soups, mashed potatoes with gravy, and yes
I did say gravy or margarine.
What we're trying to do is integrate the disease with again replacing some of those missed
substances like saliva with moisture in the food.
Now what about dysphagia?
Dysphagia occurs when there's a disruption of the normal swallowing mechanism.
As food passes through the esophagus, there's a complex mechanism to make sure that the
food is propelled into the esophagus rather than into the trachea or the windpipe.
Sometimes food accidentally makes its way to the trachea, probably due to an incomplete
closure of the vocal cords.
For most of us, this is occasional and it's uncomfortable, but it's the experience of
choking on our food.
Now when this becomes chronic, it's not the occasional episode, but when it becomes chronic,
it is called dysphagia and it can occur when any step of the swallowing mechanism is disrupted.
When the food ends up in the trachea, you're breathing in your food, aspiration pneumonia
can occur and it can be life-threatening.
Some of the most common causes would include stroke, head injury, and Parkinson's disease.
Well how does nutrition help here?
Think about this, liquid foods leave your mouth quickly.
If the nervous system is disrupted, like in stroke, liquids are going to be the most
commonly aspirated food.
So what can we do to prevent that?
Well there are special thickeners that exist to thicken commonly enjoyed liquids, such
as coffee, milk, and juice, without ruining the taste.
Again in healthcare we always have partners and in dysphagia speech therapist and speech
pathologist can assist in the swallowing mechanism and actually can help patients to develop
positional changes, changing the way their head is when they swallow, which can aid in
the swallowing response.
Now after food reaches the stomach, it is acidified and this is so key and we've covered
this in the lecture on digestion.
With the acidified stomach contents, reflux, or backwash into the esophagus, we have what
is known as gastroesophageal reflux disease and you see this advertised in magazines and
in television as GERD.
Now your stomach is protected against acid, but the soft tissue of the esophagus has no
such defense and you can experience a burning sensation in your chest that we call heartburn
and actually what it is, it's the acid that is backwashing into that soft tissue and causing
pain and irritation.
Many causes of GERD include changes in the pressure of the lower esophageal sphincter
known as LES and our bodies are designed with a series of one way valves to help food go
south and the LES is one of the first valves that we encounter.
So an example here might be a heidel hernia where there's changes in that esophageal sphincter
pressure.
Normally your stomach is below your diaphragm, but when it protrudes into the thoracic cavity
GERD can occur.
There's less of the ability to keep that LES closed and so what ends up happening is that
there can be a leakage of stomach acid on a continual basis.
This is because of the protrusion of a portion of the stomach into the thoracic cavity after
passing through an opening in the diaphragm.
Now sometimes an unthought of consequence or cause of GERD is obesity, particularly central
obesity.
Remember that central obesity is the fat that accumulates in our abdomen.
Another uncommon cause but uncommonly thought about is your clothing.
If you wear tight clothing around your midsection or if you pull your belt tightly, you can
put undue pressure on that LES and cause reflux.
We can alter LES pressure and also contribute to GERD so again we're talking about some
environmental lifestyle changes that you might want to have.
Now managing GERD centers around the reducing acid production and preventing the reflux.
It is usually recommended that individuals with GERD consume a low fat meal as a thought
that fat helps to delay gastric emptying time.
The food hangs around too long, more likely to reflux.
Although food affects each one of us differently, if you suffer from GERD you may want to wish
to consider avoiding some of the following foods.
Many of these recommended food omissions are due to either effect on gastric secretions
and or LES.
Common offenders include chocolate, onions, juice and carbonated beverages, peppers,
mustard, tea and real peppermint or spearmint.
So think about this, many people take peppermint candies in order to minimize GERD and actually
if it's real peppermint it may actually make it worse.
Coffee may or may not be a culprit.
Although research has not shown that coffee is a risk factor for GERD, sufferers are often
advised to avoid coffee consumption primarily due to the amount of caffeine in coffee.
Eating high fiber bread rather than low fiber white bread can significantly reduce the risk
of reflux.
Why is that?
It's promoting that food leaving the stomach a little faster.
Alcohol shows no real significant difference in GERD symptoms, however many individuals
will find if they have alcoholic beverages or symptoms deteriorate or you have enhanced
symptoms and the bottom line is if it bothers you don't eat it or drink it.
Your lifestyle strategies to try for GERD include losing weight, regular physical activity,
avoid the known gastric irritants as well as those that bother you.
Eat small meals to reduce pressure on LES.
Eat slowly enough to allow adequate trance of time for the food.
Sleep with the head of your bed elevated to keep the stomach contents where they belong
in the stomach, particularly if you have a hyaluronic acid and control your intake of
aspirin or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
What about medications?
Are there medications that you can use?
Anacids and medications designed to reduce acid production are popular, but I want you
to think about this.
Any medication you take chronically may have a nutritional complication.
In the case of anacids, buffering the stomach can reduce the acidification that actually
does improve the bioavailability of thiamin and iron, so thiamin and iron must be acidified
to be absorbed.
Bacteria also that we all eat in our food are more likely to grow and survive in this more
neutral or buffered pH.
Some of the medications that are used actually have the potential to reduce the release of
intrinsic factor, which is needed to unlock vitamin B12 from food.
So again, any medication you take chronically may have a nutritional complication.
Now we get to the stomach and to ulcer diseases.
Symptoms include burning stomach pain, black tarry stools, nausea, vomiting, indigestion,
heartburn, and weight loss.
Now ulcers can occur both in the stomach and in the small intestine, however the dietary
and nutritional management for both are similar.
So what causes ulcer disease?
Rich pylori is a bacterium, and early in my clinical practice ulcers were thought to
be solely caused by stress or poor diet.
As such the thought was will coat the stomach and protect it from acid, and this diet was
called the sippy diet.
It consisted of cream and milk, and as the science evolved bacteria emerged as the major
cause of ulcer disease, and it causes 90% of this disease.
Ulcers ulcers can be secondary to other diseases.
For example, if a person has need to take nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, say
for example, significant arthritis.
So arthritis may be the disease that now contributes to ulcers because of the role of these medications
on stomach lining.
Actually what will happen is the lining of the stomach fails or weakens and allows the
acid in the stomach to erode the lining, and that's actually what happened with my football
player.
And when it's H. pylori must include antibiotics and again avoidance of medications that might
contribute to the erosion of stomach lining.
Now certainly dye can be supportive and aid in the healing process.
Each patient has a very individual diet, but some nutritional choices that might improve
this condition include, avoid consuming large meals to reduce acid production, consume soluble
fiber that helps to normalize gastric emptying time.
Soluble fiber also stimulates what is known as the production of short chain fatty acids
which are associated with actually the regeneration of that damaged mucosa.
Consuming omega-3 fatty acids and omega-6 fatty acids, they may also help to regenerate
mucosal cells.
Keep in mind omega-3 fatty acids are most commonly associated with cold water fish.
Now there may be some things to avoid.
Peppers have been shown to increase acid secretions.
Coffee and caffeine may also do that as well.
But the bottom line is if it causes you individual distress, avoid it.
Now as we move on down the GI tract we actually come to the lower GI system.
There are many diseases and conditions that affect the small and large intestine.
In this section we're going to cover the following disorders as they are often the
most common.
And they include irritable bowel syndrome, lactose intolerance, celiac disease which
sometimes is referred to gluten-induced anaeropathy and diverticular disease.
So let's examine irritable bowel.
Some of the symptoms are abdominal pain, chronic diarrhea or chronic constipation and
sometimes these are alternating so you actually get a combination of both of them.
Well what causes it?
Well if you're looking in the medical literature the word that you're going to see is visceral
hypersensitivity.
But sometimes I just refer to this as fussy gut.
You feel more discomfort with the presence of gas in your GI tract than normal.
You feel more sensation associated with the presence of food in your intestine.
So again you actually have a hypersensitivity to food as it transverses through the intestinal
tract.
Certainly individuals with irritable bowel can have altered intestinal motility.
Sometimes it's faster, sometimes it's slower.
They can also have the abnormal trance of time of gas and stool.
Sometimes it's fast, sometimes it's slow.
Another contributor to irritable bowel is stress or chronic anxiety.
So I would think in most of our lifestyles we do have some degree of stress and anxiety.
The problem is as with many GI disorders irritable bowel can oftentimes be confused with a dietary
or lactose intolerance.
Celiac disease, again an intolerance to gluten in foods may be confused with irritable bowel
or actually maybe the actual cause of irritable bowel.
So what kind of treatments exist for irritable bowel?
Well sometimes you can consume a lower fiber diet if diarrhea is the presenting symptom
and a higher fiber diet during periods of constipation.
You eliminate the foods to which the patient is sensitive and this comes up over and over
again.
If you think well every time I eat fill in the blank I end up having problems with my
gut then you might be sensitive to that food just because you're you.
And a way to manage this is you might want to think about keeping a food diary to track
foods along with symptoms to see if you can figure out what's unique about you.
Certainly things like probiotics such as yogurt might be helpful and we cover that topic
in another lecture.
These are foods with healthy bacteria that can help to balance gut function and normalize
bowel motility.
And in my practice I find that's a really very viable solution for many is to try probiotics.
Especially since stress may be a cause lifestyle changes might be recommended to lessen the
stress.
I have a lot of patients for example who participate in yoga that have irritable bowel.
And again as with most chronic GI disorders medications may be prescribed.
So I want you to think if a medication is prescribed ask the question of your pharmacist
is there a nutritional consequence of this that I should be aware of.
Now what about lactose intolerance?
This is one of the most common conditions and it can affect people of all age groups
but it is more common in African Americans.
Now what are the symptoms?
Discomfort after consuming milk products and it's usually within a couple hours of consuming
milk products and it can cause nausea, cramps, bloating, gas and diarrhea.
So physiologically what causes this?
Why do you have a lactose intolerance?
It is an insufficiency of lactase and you remember from the lecture on carbohydrates
lactase and digestion.
Lactase is the enzyme that helps you to digest lactose.
It can also be caused by an infection or an inflammation of the intestinal tract.
Or it can be a secondary to another disease including anything that's going to damage
the villi in the small intestine such as occurs in celiac or Crohn's disease.
So that lactase enzyme is going to sit on the tip of the villi, the absorptive part of
your small intestine and if you have any damage to your small intestine the lactase enzyme
can temporarily go away.
So what's the treatment?
Being somewhat deficient in lactase is normal for most people, however most of us can tolerate
even with a mild lactose intolerance up to a cup of milk or 12 grams of lactose per day.
What it shows that avoiding milk will probably make individuals less tolerant to consuming
milk products because the bacteria and the colon never learn to adapt to it efficiently
and again when you demand that your body make lactase your body is going to respond up to
its biological capabilities.
Now there's some key points here.
You can buy reduced lactose products in the dairy section or you can take over the counter
lactase pills.
They can be placed in the liquids to counteract the lactose before the consumption so most
symptoms are not felt but timing is everything here.
So if you decide to take the lactase pill 20 minutes after you had milk you've waited
too long and that's actually too late.
Those individuals avoiding milk may actually need to take a calcium supplement because
remember you've created a nutrient hole because you've eliminated a food group.
Note that fermented products such as yogurt are better tolerated because they have the
enzyme lactase in the food and that's actually produced by that wonderful probiotic bacteria.
Now what about celiac disease?
Celiac disease patients are sensitive to gluten and gluten is a protein in grains such as
wheat, barley and rye.
It is thought to be one of the autoimmune disorders.
In fact, those with type 1 diabetes, another autoimmune disorder, are more likely to develop
or have celiac disease.
Some estimates indicate that celiac disease is underdiagnosed and the actual prevalence
may be as high as 1 in 133 people.
So this is one that if you have one of those things that we call fussy gut you may actually
have undiagnosed celiac disease.
Adults may occur in the digestive tract or in other areas of the body.
Infants and young children are more susceptible to the digestive symptoms.
Adults may experience iron deficiency anemia, osteoporosis and an actual skin condition
called dermatitis herpetiformis.
What causes it?
Well certainly we know that with celiac disease there is a genetic predisposition.
Consumption is higher in relatives of persons with celiac disease so if someone in your
family has it you have an increased likelihood because of the genetic predisposition.
Consumption of foods containing wheat, barley and rye causes irritation and discomfort.
Actually what the gluten does is it damages the villi and the small intestine.
Now studies show that oat consumption is a little bit more controversial.
Some studies are going to suggest that yes if you consume oats you may have some exacerbation
of your gluten intolerance and other studies say no.
When individuals with celiac disease eat gluten their immune systems attack and damage and
destroy the villi and their small intestine that help their body to absorb nutrients.
So again remember this is an autoimmune disorder.
For a true diagnosis you have to have a biopsy of the small intestine to test for the presence
of certain antibodies.
50% of celiac patients however have few or no obvious symptoms.
So what's our recommended treatment here of celiac disease?
100% gluten free diet adherence.
If you're able to do that and again manufacturers have made this so much easier in the last few
years they label products gluten free not just wheat free but gluten free.
If you're on this gluten free diet most major symptoms are going to disappear within 2 to
8 weeks and what's happening is the villi and your small intestine are actually regenerating.
Read labels to avoid things like wheat, rye or barley.
Check labels on seasoning and often times you're going to have to actually call the food company
for a clarification.
Again please remember wheat free doesn't mean gluten free.
Damage to the villi and the small intestine this diet may make you deficient in other
nutrients so again think about it this way if I'm eliminating grains I may be eliminating
for example magnesium, other minerals as well.
So here are some strategies.
Have adequate calcium and vitamin D in your diet to prevent osteoporosis and osteomalacia
which is also known as adult rickets.
You may need to increase the amount of iron in your diet to account for the exclusion
of iron fortified foods made with wheat, rye or barley.
Include folate rich foods such as fortified breakfast cereals but again remember you want
to stay away from those they're going to be made from suspect grains so maybe you want
to have a fortified rice breakfast cereal and again you could also go to green leafy
vegetables as a source of folate rich foods.
As fatty acid malabsorption can cause a decrease in the absorption of fat soluble vitamins.
Focus on foods rich in these nutrients to include cantaloupe, carrots, nuts and seeds
as tolerated.
Some patients may find that a low lactose diet might be useful in controlling symptoms
at first.
Keep in mind once the GI tract returns to normal though you should always try and add back
a little bit of lactose.
So again celiac is an example of a disease where due to damage to your small intestine
you can develop a temporary or a secondary lactose intolerance.
Now what about diverticular disease?
Diverticular disease and diverticulitis is actually an inflammation of the diverticulum
so we're going to explore that in a little bit more detail.
Some symptoms are abdominal pain, particularly tenderness in the lower left side.
What causes it?
Caused by the infection of the diverticular and what are diverticulitis?
There are little outpouching in the intestinal tract so the lining of your intestinal tract
is supposed to be smooth.
When you have diverticular disease you get a little bit of an outpouching in the wall
of that intestinal tract.
And as it outpouches what ends up happening is food can get trapped.
It's often thought to be associated with constipation.
So if you are constipated and you bear down or strain to have a bowel movement the increased
pressure in that intestinal wall can cause an outpouching in the intestinal wall.
So again this is often times associated with our traditional American diet of highly processed
foods.
So if you think I really would like to prevent this disease this is where eating whole grains
and a lot of fruits and vegetables and the avoidance of constipation is really pretty
key.
Keep in mind we've talked about constipation in another lecture but I'm going to remind
you constipation can be caused by inadequate fiber, inadequate hydration and poor exercise
happens.
These diverticula then can often times be obstructed by fecal matter causing inflammation
and pain.
And if it ruptures it can actually spread bacteria into the peritoneal cavity and cause
a true bacterial infection.
What are the treatments?
In the acute phase the phase with significant amounts of pain antibiotics are going to be
one of the mainstay treatments for diverticulitis to reduce the inflammation.
Often times as part of that recovery you might want to begin with a low residue diet.
And keep in mind residue means anything that is not completely digested so certainly fiber
would contribute to residue but other foods such as milk that are not completely digested
may also contribute to residue and would be avoided on a low residue diet.
So you may start out there but then you're gradually going to return to a higher fiber
diet to again prevent the constipation.
Most high fiber diet may promote soft bulky stools that require less straining.
With less straining there's lower intracalonic pressures and for patients who didn't have
a high fiber diet before please always know that you have to gradually increase the fiber
in your diet.
This is an example where you can't go from low fiber to high fiber because you can have
significant GI upset.
Certainly ensure that there's an adequate amount of exercise and get adequate amounts
of fluid to avoid that constipation.
And if you are sensitive or you experience pain with nuts and seeds keep in mind they
can get trapped in that diverticulum and cause inflammation or irritation.
Avoid them if you are sensitive.
Now certainly there are other GI disorders and so in our frequently asked question one
that I hear quite often is my daughter has been recently diagnosed with Crohn's disease.
What is it and where can I find out more about it?
Keep in mind when you search the internet there can be unbelievably reliable sources
and some not so much.
So what is Crohn's disease?
Crohn's disease is an inflammatory bowel disease.
In Crohn's disease all of the multiple layers of the intestinal tract become inflamed.
As such the intestinal wall becomes damaged and also causes the malabsorption of vital
nutrients along with significant diarrhea.
Now here's an example where diet is supportive but it's not curative.
It is not curative.
So many people who have Crohn's disease believe as they follow a prescribed diet that's going
to cure Crohn's and unfortunately I think we're years away from a cure.
Now to find out details about Crohn's and other digestive related diseases among your
best sources on the web is the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease.
It's going to give you details about the disease including symptoms, how it's treated and other
useful information.
Another concern about Crohn's disease is as the intestinal wall becomes damaged and
becomes inflamed often times there's a narrowing of that intestinal lumen or tube and often
times individuals have to have bowel resections or they may not be able to tolerate high fiber
foods.
So this is a great example where you must partner with your physician and again with Crohn's
as well as other kinds of GI disorders often times medications are going to be part of
the mainstay of treatment.
Another frequently asked question, I've always heard that I need to increase the fiber in
my diet and to do so gradually but how do I do this?
Well certainly fruits and vegetables are an easy fix and here's an example.
If you normally have orange juice in the morning maybe what you want to do is have a sliced
whole orange or if you're hard pressed to give up that orange juice in the morning maybe
you purchase one with a higher pulp content.
Fruits and vegetables are going to be an easy way to add more fiber to your diet.
Another thing that you can do is choose high fiber breakfast cereals but again because they
have so much fiber per serving here's a tip for you.
You take your regular breakfast cereal the one that you've grown up with and love and
you add a couple tablespoons of the high fiber breakfast cereal.
You're enriching it with fiber but you're not going from 0 to 60 in your fiber intake.
As your body becomes accustomed to it every few days add just a few more tablespoons and
maybe you go to a point where you're looking at half of your regular cereal and half of
your high fiber one.
Keep in mind that nuts are also going to be a great source of fiber whole grains are
a great source of fiber but bodies need time to adapt so the one of the biggest barriers
I see in clinical practice are individuals who go too quickly they start out they switch
from their regular morning breakfast cereal to a high fiber version they're on it for
a day or two they have significant GI upset and they think my gut can't tolerate this
and my response is yes it can but you gave it too much too quickly and again remember
your digestive tract is this wonderful complex machinery but it needs time to adapt to something
new.
A companion question to that is what about fiber supplements aren't fiber supplements
beneficial can I just go to a pill and I always say be careful with the fiber supplements.
Keep in mind a lot of fiber at a particular meal particularly in a supplement form can
alter your body's ability to absorb many minerals so that would be the first concern
that I would have.
If you're using a fiber supplement for constipation have you explored the other causes of constipation?
Are you dehydrated?
What is the color of your urine remember if your urine looks like pale lemonade you're
probably hydrated if it looks like apple juice you're not.
So the real tragedy that I see is individuals can take a fiber supplement without adequate
amounts of fluid and actually make their constipation worse.
Also you want to think about the type of fiber supplement if you're really trying to treat
constipation bran is going to be better than a commercially available supplement that has
psyllium in it so keep in mind bran is going to be great you can go to your health food
store and buy bran very inexpensively and you could add bran to apple sauce you can
even add bran to mashed potatoes but remember go slowly for the best GI outcome and thank
you very much.
