Greetings and welcome back.
You've been in the grocery store recently, you've noticed exotic berry juices being exploded
into the American food supply.
Foods such as mangosteen, acai and goji berry have caught the attention of the American consumer.
Well are these functional foods worth the extra money or would any dark blue or purple
juice be just as good for less money?
We're going to explore that a little bit in this lecture on functional foods.
Many consumers believe that food is medicine and as a dietitian to a certain extent I believe
it can be.
Foods are designed to nourish us and part of that nourishment should be wellness focused.
However consumers must be educated on what foods are really worth the extra punch that
they seem to be packing and foods that you might have heard of these foods are called
functional foods.
In the beginning functional foods were thought of as preventing deficiency diseases yet today
functional foods have taken on a whole new meaning.
So this lecture is going to explore the definition of functional foods.
Give you some examples of popular functional foods.
We are going to explore some of the terms used in functional food marketing and then
take a look a little bit at the regulations and policies regarding functional foods.
So let's start out with a definition.
You have to know that there is no legal definition of the term functional food in the United
States.
So there is no governmental regulation saying a functional food must be defined this way.
But it's rather more of a marketing strategy than it is a regulation.
Well my professional organization the American Dietitian Association has a definition and
a functional food is a food that moves beyond necessity to provide additional health benefits
that may reduce disease risk or promote optimal health.
Now we have got some functional food categories to explore.
There is going to be foods that are conventional.
Foods that have been modified by the manufacturer, a manufacturer has added in a functional ingredient.
Certainly there are medical foods that would fall into this functional food category and
foods for special dietary use.
So let's start out with a whole food approach.
Let's take a look at conventional foods that are unmodified.
Now research has shown that fruits and vegetables were the top functional foods identified by
consumers.
In part this is because fruits and vegetables have compounds and pigments with a high antioxidant
capability.
Now there is a scoring or a ranking system called ORAC that gives a number to a food
based on its ability to scavenge free radicals.
Keep in mind what we are looking at here is we talk a lot about antioxidants.
Our job is to scavenge or attack these free radicals and neutralize them.
ORAC stands for Oxygen Radical Absorbance Capability.
So it is given that term ORAC and again you can do a Google search on the internet and
you can find ORAC ratings of foods.
Now when we look at the ORAC rating tables, spices score high on this rating but I want
you to think about this.
The amount that you use is so small that it adds little to the antioxidant intake.
So again it is not that they are not powerhouses in terms of the ORAC rating, you just don't
use enough.
But given typical servings, my favorite foods such as dark chocolate, apples, pomegranate
juice all add relatively more to the antioxidant intake.
But all fruits, vegetables, nuts confer antioxidant capabilities.
So I want you to think about this, you are going to the grocery store and you are thinking
should I spend the significantly higher premium on an exotic juice or could I get something
else that has a similar ORAC score.
So I would encourage you to look at the ORAC scores of foods again if you are going to
spend a significant amount of money.
So we can now take a look at examples of real foods with functional benefits.
Cruciferous vegetables such as kale and broccoli are part of the reason why plant focused diets
are needed for cancer prevention.
Naturally they contain foods that have a significant functionality to them and there
is reduced risk of several types of cancer.
It protects against carcinogenesis in experimental animals and has been shown effective in the
management or prevention of stomach cancer, cancers of the esophagus, mammary glands or
breast cancer, skin and lung.
There are numerous studies pointing to the need for increasing all fruits and vegetables.
So again a key point for consumers is don't follow the new functional food of the day
because I will tell you next year it is going to be a different fruit or a vegetable.
So always think more fruits and vegetables, all fruits and vegetables are going to have
a relatively high ORAC score and I might want to include all of those.
So is there another group?
Well let's take a look at tomato products.
Lycopene which is part of that red pigment in tomatoes has mixed effects in reducing
certain cancers.
As I mentioned before large epidemiological studies show a relationship between low levels
of lycopene in the blood and prostate cancer but studies have not demonstrated the prevention
of prostate cancer with lycopene.
So the FDA looked at this and said there is little evidence to support an association
between tomato consumption and the reduced risks of prostate, ovarian, gastric and pancreatic
cancers.
However study results are still positive enough.
There is an association that is developing not necessarily cause and effect but an association
developing that is enough to say increase your risk or increase your intake of tomato
products.
Now what about citrus fruit?
Citrus fruit may reduce the risk of stomach cancer and again it has functional ingredients
in citrus fruit that confer that benefit.
One study showed a 28% reduction in the risk of stomach cancer was associated with a high
intake of citrus fruits.
Pooled results from observational studies show a protective effect of high citrus fruit
intake and the risk of stomach cancer.
So again if you don't incorporate citrus fruit into your diet it now might be a good
idea to do so.
So again things like oranges would be a great example of a citrus fruit.
Certainly in this functional category are fermented dairy products.
Yogurt and other fermented food products have been shown to improve the symptoms of irritable
bowel syndrome.
Studies show that the short term effects of IBS may be improved through the use of antibiotics
and then treating and using probiotics for symptoms.
Probiotics are a great example of a functional food and again in our conventional food category
they are there naturally to ferment the yogurt.
However there is caution here.
The addition of probiotics to foods where they do not naturally occur may reduce their
effectiveness.
So you go to the grocery store and you hear all about probiotics and you know that it
occurs in yogurt naturally.
But now you see probiotics being added to a dry food like a cereal.
You have to ask the question when I've removed it from its parent compound and dumped it
into a different food where it doesn't occur is it going to have the same effectiveness?
And again I think that's a consideration as we look at this functional food category.
Generally speaking if IBS can be caused by bacterial overgrowth then killing the bad
guys with an antibiotic and then turn around and replacing them with the good guys a probiotic
may be an effective strategy.
More studies are always going to be needed to prove these results for digestive conditions
in the future.
But again if you're looking for a great source of a natural probiotic think fermented foods.
Another food that gets a lot of press as a functional food is cranberry juice.
And again I'm going to caution you that taking the active ingredient in cranberry juice which
we'll explore in a second and dehydrating it and putting it into a pill may not have
the same kind of beneficial effects.
So there's a lot of dried fruit and vegetable products that are on the market that you can
mix in with food.
But remember there may be a change in the functionality of that ingredient when I change
its form.
Certainly we've read and heard about that cranberry juice can reduce the amount of bacteria
in your urine.
And so how does this work?
What is the active ingredient?
The proanthocyanidins or the dark red pigments in cranberries have been shown to inhibit the
docking or the binding of bacteria in tissues in vitro in a test tube.
So basically what it does it prevents that bacteria from binding and proliferating in
the bladder and reducing the risk of a urinary tract infection.
The use of cranberry juice and extracts as an agent against recurrent urinary tract infections
is well documented in women.
So if you are someone that is prone to urinary tract infections, this food may be a valuable
adjunct to your diet.
Now again, keep in mind that cranberry juice is a pretty high calorie source.
So indeed if you're trying to do two things at the same time, you're trying to prevent
urinary tract infections and control your weight, look for a reduced sugar version where
you're still getting the wonderful red pigments but you reduce some of the sugar.
And now we have another category of functional foods called modified foods.
These are those that are modified through fortification, enrichment or enhancement.
So they've taken a conventional food and they've added something with again that functional
food enhancement to the food to improve its overall nutritional value.
So let's look at some examples.
Calcium fortified orange juice is a great example.
They've taken a food where calcium doesn't normally reside orange juice and because it's
a popular breakfast item they've added calcium to it and again that's a great example of
a modified food that's been again enriched with some additional calcium.
You can also see vitamin D being added to orange juice as well.
Certainly folate enriched breads, now part of that is mandatory by the federal government
but again manufacturers can add more folate to breads and again increase their nutritional
value.
One of my favorite ones in this category are actually margarines that have been enhanced
with plant stanols or sterol esters.
And what these actually do is they prevent the absorption of cholesterol from your gut.
So these stanol or sterol esters bind to the cholesterol receptors in your gut and prevent
the cholesterol from being absorbed.
So this is a really nice example of taking an ingredient, a stanol or sterol ester, putting
it in a margarine and now again reducing cholesterol.
There are certainly beverages out there with ingredients to promote energy and we've all
seen the energy drinks on the market.
Things like ginseng or guarana and guarana actually is a caffeine source or they might
add taurine and taurine is an amino acid.
So they're taking these compounds and actually just enriching or adding an ingredient to
provide additional energy.
So what do we know about the research on calcium fortified orange juice if we're going to explore
this one in a little bit more detail.
The bioavailability of calcium from different fortification methods was tested in calcium
fortified orange juice.
Results indicate that the calcium content on the labels doesn't necessarily indicate
the amount of calcium that's absorbed and this is a problem with most minerals.
Just because it's on a nutrition facts panel or just because it's in a nutrition database
on your computer doesn't mean that's exactly how much you absorb.
So the challenges, the conclusion of this study is the information on bioavailability
of fortified products should be provided to educate the consumer on the actual amounts
of the nutrient they're receiving.
Now controversial topics regarding functional foods include those that are genetically modified.
This is using biotechnology to modify the food to improve the nutritional value and hopefully
the health.
Okay, so let me give you a couple of examples.
The first comes from tomatoes.
There's a type of tomato called flavor saver and this was one of the first genetically modified
foods introduced into the American food supply in 1994.
The purpose of this genetically modified food was to improve the flavor, the shelf life
and to even reduce spoilage.
So this is an example where the food was modified so again consumers would enjoy the flavor
or the tomatoes will last a little bit longer either at the grocery store or in the refrigerator.
Now keep in mind as we start talking about these genetically modified foods we have embraced
genetically engineered hormones such as insulin and growth hormone.
Certainly when insulin was first discovered there are two amino acids different in pork
insulin than human insulin and so we've now gone in and genetically modified insulin to
make it bioidentical to human insulin and some of the consequences of pork insulin obviously
have been eliminated and for those who have diabetes and must take insulin this was a
real boon.
But when it comes to food consumers are skeptical and have not embraced genetically modified
foods and in terms of the flavor saver the product is no longer available for sale.
But as we think more globally about nutrition, golden rice is a great example of taking a
look at worldwide poverty and worldwide malnutrition and genetically modifying a food.
Golden rice is a rice that's modified to contain higher amounts of beta carotene that precursor
to vitamin A to implement in developing countries where vitamin A deficiency is a problem.
Vitamin A deficiency is one of the leading causes of childhood blindness worldwide so
adding beta carotene to a non perishable food is one of the best outcomes of genetically
modified foods and again if you think about it beta carotene is going to come naturally
from carrots and cantaloupe and anything that's going to be orange and pigment.
Well these are perishable foods and so we cannot airlift in to regions of the world where starvation
is prevalent.
We can't airlift in perishable foods so golden rice is a great example of a genetically modified
food and it is used by relief organizations now in developing countries and again it can
contribute to the eradication of vitamin A blindness.
Another category that we're looking at is medical foods.
Now medical foods do have a definition and they're defined by the orphan drug act.
Medical foods are a food which is formulated to be consumed or administered entirely.
Now technically it means by mouth but in this case it's really implying a tube feeding.
Under the supervision of a physician and which is intended for the specific dietary management
of a disease or condition which has distinctive nutritional requirements and this is going
to be based on recognized scientific principles and are established by medical evaluation.
So again that's a long legal definition and basically what it's saying is that they've
modified a natural food to provide unique nutritional balance for someone who may have
a disease that has different nutritional requirements.
So examples might be oral supplements that are designed for specific medical purposes
such as increased need for arginine and wound healing or preventing muscle breakdown in
cancer.
We also have a category called foods for special dietary use but they really don't require
any medical supervision.
This is a particular use for a food that's purported or represented to be used and things
such as infant foods would be a great example of foods for special dietary use, gluten free
foods, foods for special dietary use, lactose free and foods that are being offered for
reduced weight.
Again these are foods that don't have to be used under medical supervision.
Okay let's have a little focus on consumers now.
What do consumers believe?
Eighty-five percent of consumers believe that certain foods may have health benefits
that are going to reduce the risk of chronic disease or other health concerns.
It's again that belief that food is medicine just like Hippocrates taught us centuries
ago.
There is an increase in consumer awareness of their own health and health care costs.
Evidence based science is emerging linking diet to chronic disease reduction and other
health problems or concerns.
Certainly there's a striving for a personalized approach to nutrition and the new wave of
the future food for the treatment of health conditions.
Well do we have any regulation of functional foods?
Now certainly the primary goal of the FDA is to provide information on labels to consumers
about their diet and health but there is no specific regulatory framework for foods that
are being marketed as functional.
This movement is just too new.
Now again keep in mind however if a claim is made, a drug claim is made, for example
the company that is marketing functionality would be prohibitive from saying cranberry
juice prevents bladder infections.
They can't say that but again as long as they're just marketing or advertising that
cranberries are a great source of these wonderful plant based pigments, again they're not going
to be prohibitive from doing that.
So it is confusing for the consumer to sort through the information and decide whether
it's accurate or not or is it worth the additional money.
This is because claims for the health benefit things such as now a low glycemic cereal or
contains resveratrol which is going to be found in red wine and grape juice or enriched
with DHA and omega fatty acid, omega 3 fatty acid is on the front of the package labeling.
That's not a part of the food label and again defining the nutrient so again if I'm going
to the grocery store and I see a margin that says now has stanol esters, all they're doing
is defining a nutrient that's in the food that's not required to be part of the food
label and again defining a nutrient and making a health claim are distinctly different claims
on that front of the package.
A survey has found that consumers regard the scientific evidence and other positive
aspects of the product containing an unqualified claim similar to those that have an actual
qualified valid structure function claim.
What does this mean?
This means that the average consumer can't tell the difference between fact and fiction
and this is why consumers need to understand the concept of a qualified health claim and
it's also why the FDA must scrutinize the claims as well.
So again if a company is going to make a claim, a qualified health claim for a food, the FDA
will step in and make a claim or make again some kind of ruling on it.
The challenge is again if I just define the nutrient that's being added and stop short
of making a claim, there is no governmental regulation.
So currently there are three claim categories that can be used and some we've explored in
other lectures.
There's certainly the nutrient content claim.
Claim on a food that directly states or implies the level of a nutrient in a food.
However this doesn't make it a health claim but rather states the nutrient content.
So things like low fat, reduced fat, sugar free are all examples.
Certainly there can be a structure function claim.
It gives the role of a nutrient or a dietary ingredient in affecting normal structure or
function in humans.
Remember there's a key distinction that has to be made here.
A structure claim does not imply disease prevention.
So for example, this structure function claim could be something like calcium build strong
bones.
That is true.
But they cannot say calcium prevents osteoporosis.
Certainly a company can say fiber enhances bowel regularity, true.
But they can't make the jump to a disease, fiber prevents constipation.
Very conventional foods and conventional food manufacturers are not required to notify
the FDA about their structure function claim.
For example, milk ads can claim calcium benefits of milk.
Health claims on food packaging and probably there's going to be more controversy seen
in this category.
Health claims are ways to entice health seeking consumers to purchase foods and so companies
are routinely petitioning the FDA regarding a new qualified health claim.
So again, if a consumer really wants to know if I buy this product, can calcium prevent
bone loss?
Can it prevent a disease?
And so when the Nutrition, Labeling and Education Act was passed in 1990, the FDA initially
authorized seven health claims on foods.
Consumers today can petition the FDA for any health claim that the company believes is
valuable and the key point here is that the current science is going to support.
So a sample of such claims would include calcium and osteoporosis, sodium and high blood pressure,
fruits and vegetables and cancer, folate and neural tube defects, dietary sugar alcohols
and dental caries and soy protein and heart disease.
However, to make this claim and have this appear on a package, the companies have to
provide and the FDA has to review the strength of the evidence for the claims that are based
on all studies that are significant as well as expert opinions in the field, things such
as clinical trials, meta-analysis.
So again, it can't be that one study suggested that calcium promotes body fat loss.
There really has to be the strength of evidence through a clinical trial or a meta-analysis
to very rigorous research design tools to say, yes, the strength of evidence supports
this.
Certainly they can provide in vitro and in vivo studies as well.
Numerous literature reviews and searches on well-known and reputable studies related to
the topic.
So when you see these kinds of claims on packages that says 25 grams of soy protein can aid
in the reduction of cardiovascular disease, please know that that manufacturer as well
as the FDA partnered to review the strength of evidence to say, I can actually make that
claim on food.
Some of the petitions submitted to the FDA for review are accepted and you might be happy
to know that some of the claims are actually denied.
So for example, claims related to lutein, and remember lutein is going to be one of
those pigments, yellow pigments that are going to be found most visibly in corn.
It's in spinach, but it's masked by the chlorophyll.
So claims relating lutein to age-related macular degeneration have been denied in recent years,
not because there's not some studies saying that they work, but they've been denied based
on the strength of the evidence.
Again, it's not that the evidence doesn't exist, but rather it's the type of research
study and the determination of a successful endpoint.
So for instance, what would this be for age-related macular degeneration, the prevention of blindness
and the progression of disease?
So are we looking at, okay, what's my successful endpoint here?
So again, if I'm looking at age-related macular degeneration, do I have to prove that it actually
prevents blindness or would a reduction in the progression of AMD be acceptable?
So again, that agreed-upon endpoint is very important.
If you want to keep current on the status of these claims, and again, some claims are
approved and some are denied, you can visit the FDA website and type in Functional Foods
or you can type in Qualified Health Claim.
Okay, cause and effect, controversial issues arise with functional food in establishing
a cause and effect relationship.
And why is that the case?
It's because many factors can influence food behaviors and mechanism in the human body.
It is hard to determine if the food causes the positive effect because it could be related
to something else.
It could be related to genetics.
It could be related to environment.
It could be others that have played a role in disease prevention.
So for example, would a food prevent diabetes in someone who's lean versus someone who's
overweight?
Lots of other confounding variables that make this a little bit difficult to do.
Stricter guidelines should be in place to determine whether these health claims are really
helping consumers or if they're adding to the confusion.
In addition, will these functional ingredients all behave the same way?
Omega-3 fatty acids, for example, are susceptible to oxidation.
So are they going to behave the same way in a margarine versus juices versus a cereal?
And again, I think that science is yet to be evolving.
As consumers begin to buy into these functional foods, it's the job of the FDA nutrition professionals
like myself to ensure that they're provided, that the consumer is provided with the correct
information.
And again, always, always think about a whole food approach.
Okay, frequently asked questions.
As a health care professional and a mother, do you buy foods with functionality in mind?
How much weight do I as a dietitian give claims to these food?
Well, first and foremost, I tend to look at the whole food and not an individual ingredient
because we eat foods and not ingredients.
But let me tell you what I may do.
Say for example, I have a client who absolutely does not like cold water fish.
Cold water fish, as you might remember, is a great source of Omega-3 fatty acids.
Or they have a seafood allergy and they can't consume cold water fish.
I might help them discover in the food supply some of these functional foods where they've
actually added some Omega-3 fatty acids to them.
So for example, you can manipulate the Omega-3 fatty acid content of eggs by what you feed
the chicken.
So I might have them turn towards a DHA modified egg in order to get some of their really beneficial
Omega-3 fatty acids.
But keep in mind, since the science doesn't tell us, is it going to behave the same way
in an egg as it would cold water fish, I probably would direct them to more than one different
source to make sure that we don't have an over-reliance on a food where the bioavailability
of DHA may not be as strong.
How do I integrate functional foods into my family's diet?
Is there a good place to begin?
Well, although it seems like sometimes we need to eat mounds of food, the bottom line
is you can actually think, okay, I'm going to go back to simple plate organization.
What I'm going to do is choose my fruits and vegetables through the colors of the rainbow.
And that is a really great place to integrate naturally occurring functional foods into the
diet.
Again, if that's not something that your family is going to buy into, you already eat a lot
of fruits and vegetables, is there something else that you can do?
And again, sometimes you can look at margarines and other cereals to see whether or not they
have some functional ingredients added to them.
Again, I hear all the time, do I really have to eat mounds of healthy food to acquire all
the nutritional benefits?
And you know what?
Here's where common sense has to prevail.
Keep in mind that your body needs to have a wide variety of nutrients, and we can't
cram all these nutrients into a 24-hour environment.
So what do we do?
Maybe one day you get something that has yellow in it, and your plate's dominated by yellow.
Well, the next day you just pick another color.
Or even more importantly, maybe what you're doing is picking what's seasonal in your area.
And keep in mind that over a period of time, maybe not within that 24-hour window, but
over a period of time, you're going to get enough of these wonderful good nutrients in
your food.
Because keep in mind, we have to watch our calorie intake.
And so I think the challenge is, that does the advent of functional foods help our situation
or does it muddy the waters?
I always say, whole foods first, and then if you want to fortify your food supply with
some functionality, that's great.
So let me go back and answer the question.
Should you go out and buy those really expensive, exotic berry juices?
Well, here's a tip for you.
If the blues and the reds are what confer the benefit, maybe you want to have grape juice
or cranberry juice at a meal and save your money for that greater whole food approach.
And thank you very much.
