I'll tell you a story about a family that I had that was really trying to make a good
decision but it was better defined as a good decision gone bad.
I was talking with a family who we were really trying to promote a plant-based diet and the
mom came in and told me, she said, you know what, I stopped buying produce.
And I said, well why did you stop buying produce?
And she said, because I can't afford apples that are $3.50 a pound that are organic and
so if it's not organic I won't eat it and gave up buying fruits and vegetables.
So what did she substitute it for?
Well she was buying more snack foods and more processed foods and again the intent was I want
to provide healthy food for my family but kind of miss the boat.
So we're going to explore a little bit about the world of organic products and a little bit on
should I use organic or conventional.
Well let's take a little bit of a look at organic products and what consumers are doing.
Consumer purchases of organic products have increased by 20% each year.
Pretty significant.
These organic foods have been introduced into many grocery stores worldwide.
So you used to only be able to find them in specialty stores or health food stores and
now almost every grocery store chain is going to have its own line of organic.
The Food Marketing Institute estimates that about 50% of all shoppers in the United States
have bought at least one organic product.
So again keep in mind as this becomes mainstream the sales actually go up because you can get
all your food in one store.
Even more so 81% of consumers surveyed buy organic foods because they believe it has
a higher nutritive value than conventional foods.
And we'll explore does it really or is that marketing.
Many consumers believe that these foods can help to prevent certain diseases and reduce
health risks so they are willing to pay the extra price for organic.
What are their significant health benefits to choosing organic foods.
Are there nutritional concerns and qualified research supporting organic versus conventional.
And this will ultimately come down to your personal choice.
Which way do you want to take your family.
Well these questions are they must be answered as global organic sales increase.
Although the numbers indicate that sales are going to continue to increase.
Do consumers have any idea what they're actually putting into their shopping carts.
Or are they going to make the same kind of error that my client did.
If it's not organic it's not for me.
This lecture will explain the terms of what defines an organic product.
What has the current research discovered regarding organic foods in the marketplace.
So again let's start out with our basic definitions.
What is an organic food.
Organic is actually a legally defined term.
And it describes the way farmers cultivate and process agricultural products.
It is also designed to support soil and water conservation and reduce pollution.
So for you as a consumer that may be enough of a reason to choose organic produce.
It also will not allow for a radiation or genetically modified foods that cannot be
certified as organic.
Additionally farmers do not use conventional methods to fertilize or prevent crop diseases.
They use natural fertilizers such as manure or compost.
Keep in mind that manure can contain E. coli and if they're using a true manure product
you have to wash organic products just like you do conventional.
Additionally organic products use beneficial insects to reduce pests and diseases.
Animals are provided with organic feed and no antibiotics or growth hormones can be used
in the raising or cultivating of that crop.
Allowance of free range.
Animals are not cooped up in a pen but I want to caution you here for a second.
We have to sort out is this marketing or is this science.
When you look at what happens with chickens, chickens at birth need to be imprinted and
what that means is that they follow along with what the rest of the crowd does and that
becomes their behavior.
So if a young chicken is not allowed to be out of the coop or is not out of the coop
very early in life they're actually afraid of going out into the yard and so they're
allowed free range.
That's the key word they're allowed free range but it doesn't necessarily mean they
will be free range.
And additionally organic animals that are processed in an organic way must be humanely
slaughtered.
Okay the term organic cannot be applied only to produce and meat and dairy foods and poultry
but also to process foods that include breakfast cereals, crackers, baby foods and the like.
The USDA has guidelines for its organic certification program.
Before a label can be given a government approved certifier must inspect the farm to make sure
that the farmer follows all the rules.
So again this is our first guarantee.
The symbol or label is a green and white circle with the words USDA organic and so that's
what you're looking for.
Again this is often times front of the package labeling.
The USDA gives regulations on how foods are grown, handled and processed so it makes sense
that they're involved with this process.
Any organic food manufacturer or farmer that claims to sell organic products must have it
labeled as USDA certified unless there's always that exception to the rule unless they sell
less than $5,000 per year in organic foods.
So again you may have a wonderful organic farmer in your neighborhood that you buy from
on a regular basis but none of his or her products would have to have that label if they sell
less than $5,000 a year in organic foods.
So what about the labels?
What kinds of words can we look for on those labels?
Well 100% organic what does that mean?
That means it's a completely organic product and made from all organic ingredients and
this can bear the green and white USDA label.
Organic is another thing that you can see on the label and at least 95% of the product
is organic and again it can bear the same green and white label.
Well how does something become 95% organic?
This is usually a product with more than one ingredient like a bread or a pasta.
You also might see it on a mixed fruit dish or something like a yogurt.
So again there might be almost everything's organic but not quite.
Then we have made with organic ingredients.
The product contains at least 70% organic ingredients and a lot of the energy bars that
are on the market are going to have this seal so you can go and say well I'm going to buy
a sports bar to go run and you see the 70% organic ingredients.
The organic seal cannot be used on this package so you won't see the white and green circle.
All natural free range and hormone free.
These labels should not be confused with organic.
Those aren't necessarily legally protected terms so be careful with that.
Only the foods that meet the USDA standards can receive the organic label.
Now there are no national standards for organic seafood at this time and part of it's because
we import seafood from other parts of the world.
Well what about the nutritional value?
Remember that's what drives consumers interest.
Consumers believe the nutritional value of organic produce particularly is going to be
greater than its conventionally grown counterparts.
Well the debate continues to rage whether organic produce is more nutritious and the
focus of the research has been on the following ingredients.
So we don't have all the science sorted out but we focused in on these following ingredients.
The nitrate content.
Nitrate is actually a salt of nitric acid and it's naturally occurring compound in
some foods.
The main contributors of nitrate in the diet include green leafy vegetables and often times
drinking water.
Nitrogenous fertilizers may also contribute to the higher nitrate content of some foods
and again this is going to be something that's going to be regulated by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
So again sometimes the nitrate can occur naturally in foods or it can be a byproduct.
Something that is not designed to be there.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency says an acceptable daily intake is less than 10
parts per million.
High nitrate content can have negative effects.
Now that does not mean if you're eating a green leafy vegetable with a higher nitrate
content that you need to stop.
It really is implying those things that become runoff in water.
So what does a high nitrate content cause?
It causes methyl myoglobinemia which can occur when nitrates that are not supposed to be
in your food supply directly interact with hemoglobin making it unable to carry oxygen
in infants.
So here's an example when I remove nitrogen fertilizers and remember organic food can't
be using, can't be, have crops grown in conventional ways.
When I remove it I'm removing some of the source of what's considered to be undesirable
nitrate in my diet.
Well certainly this nitrate can also be linked with cancers of the digestive tract, bladder
and ovaries.
So again the nitrate fertilizers or the nitrogenous fertilizers may be that initiating event
in cancer.
It's also linked with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
And several studies have been conducted on the levels of nitrates in organic versus conventional
foods.
There have been mixed results and again science usually yields mixed results with some showing
that organic foods have significantly fewer nitrates.
And does that make sense?
That should make sense because they're not using these forms of fertilizer.
However other studies have shown that conventional has fewer nitrates.
But overall if we're going to cut to the chase most studies give evidence that organic foods
do have lower numbers or are quantities of nitrates present on the foods.
Well another nutritional debate in organic versus conventional is the fatty acids in milk.
And most of us think that the fat in milk it's an animal fat it's really not desirable.
So the fatty acids that have been studied include polyunsaturated fats and particularly omega
3 fatty acids which we know from previous lectures have positive benefits.
When they compare that and take a look at the omega 6 fatty acid content of milk which
is linked to more negative health outcomes and often times considered to be an inflammatory
fatty acid.
The fatty acid profile in milk has been linked to eczema as organic milk has a higher level
of omega 3 fatty acids than omega 6.
Conventional milk has higher omega 6.
Well isn't milk milk?
We'll explore that a little bit more detail.
Organic dairy products have been studied and are associated with a lower risk of eczema
in the first two years of life as a child.
A research study used milk samples from 19 conventional milk sources and 17 organic dairy
farms and here were the results.
Organic milk from cows that are mostly grass fed had a higher percentage of total omega
3 fatty acids versus conventional milk.
The conventional milk from corn fed cows had significantly lower percentages of omega
3 and therefore had little impact on skin disease.
Remember omega 6 fatty acids are inflammatory, may contribute to dermatitis or skin disease.
So again the final verdict here is the fatty acid content of milk or meat of any animal
is dependent on how the animal was fed.
And in the United States most conventionally raised meat and milk, most conventionally
processed meat and milk are going to be corn fed not grass fed.
American consumers are often times a little bit fussy they don't really like the way
grass fed milk tastes or grass fed meat tastes and again this is an acquired taste.
Well what about other things other than the fatty acid content?
What about vitamin C and other nutrients?
All examples of foods that have been studied to compare conventional versus organic include
lettuce, spinach, kale, shard, cabbage and radishes.
The results of one study showed that organic crops contain more of the following than conventional
crops, more vitamin C, more of those wonderful polyphenolic compounds that are linked with
potential health benefits.
For example the polyphenols and dark chocolate make it a healthy treat in moderation.
So again organic compounds, organic foods may have more of these wonderful polyphenolic
compounds.
Essential amino acids and total sugars are also going to be different in organic versus
conventional.
Another study analyzed matched pairs of organic and conventional samples and determined that
the vitamin C, the alpha-tocopherol or a form of vitamin E and phosphorus were higher
in organic samples as much as 63, 62 and 63 percent respectively.
The conventional food samples had equivalent amounts of beta-carotene, that wonderful vitamin
A precursor, yet higher levels of potassium compared to organic food samples.
The conclusions to be drawn from these studies as to one theory as to why organic foods may
have more nutrients is that the shelf life is shorter for organic foods and therefore
they might be fresher.
Keep in mind organic foods are also not going to have that waxy coating on the outside so
they don't last as long.
Organic produce also may be locally, more likely to be more locally grown and I can
tell you at the stores in Houston they'll also talk about Texas grown organic foods
to let us know that that organic food didn't have to travel all throughout the United States
and again the longer it sits on the shelf you might have some deterioration of nutritional
value.
Crude protein can also be different in organic versus conventional.
Wheat protein quality and composition of organic versus conventional foods have been
compared and what are the results of wheat protein quality.
Crude protein was significantly higher in the conventionally grown wheat product and
why might that be?
Why would that scratch our heads and say okay what's the cause of that?
Well the thought is that when plants are treated with a nitrogen rich fertilizer their protein
production is enhanced.
If you remember back to the protein lecture what makes protein unique as opposed to carbohydrate
and fat is its nitrogen content.
So if I'm processing a plant with a nitrogen rich fertilizer it should make intuitive sense
okay nitrogen equals protein and the protein content might be higher in conventionally
grown wheat.
Organic products also appear not to take up nitrogen as fast as the conventional ones
do.
Now although organic products are lower in crude protein their amino acid profile remember
an amino acid is a building block of proteins may actually be higher than conventional ones
making them a higher quality protein but less total protein.
Now what about flavonoids?
Wonderful group of antioxidants wonderful subgroup of this polyphenolic compounds.
These are a group of compounds often associated again with the pigments and plants.
Dried tomato products have been looked at conventional versus organic and they've been
studied over a 10 year period and so what do we know what are the results?
There were significantly higher levels of three particular flavonoids, kyrsatin, camphorol
and arginine were found in the organic tomato samples so again higher amounts of polyphenolic
compounds.
Now certainly what about pesticide concerns we're always concerned about pesticides.
Pesticide consumption has controversial effects and has been shown to be linked to but not
causative solid tumor cancers, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and leukemia as well as some childhood
cancers.
Well what about breast cancer and pesticide use?
Research has concluded there's really no connection between breast cancer incidents
and women living in high and living in areas with high levels of agricultural pesticides.
So again when we're thinking about should I or should I not the question remains is this
a major cause of cancer and I think the jury is still out on this.
Organic foods have lower levels of pesticides when compared to conventional foods.
Keep in mind however that trace amounts of pesticides may be in the soil even though no
pesticides were used so again organic products may have trace amounts of pesticides not because
the farmer is breaking the law or breaking the standard but because the soil is going
to retain some of those pesticides.
Early dietary intake food is the most common source of pesticide levels in the human body.
The overall amount of pesticides on any fruit or vegetable whether it's conventional or
organic actually poses a very small health risk to adults but keep in mind the result
is not zero.
The risk is not zero and therefore the reason many consumers would like to reduce the risk
and get it as close to zero as possible and possibly increase the nutrition and think
I'm going to buy organic.
Now certainly children can be a concern with high levels of pesticides particularly their
organophosphate pesticides and so organic products may be beneficial in this at risk
population.
So you're at the grocery store you're thinking okay I understand it's controversial pesticides
may not pose a huge risk organic food may be a little bit more nutritious but not for
every nutrient so are there foods that are going to contain more pesticides than others
how am I going to refine my grocery list.
Well the foods that contain the most amount of pesticides residual pesticides on the fruit
are going to be things like peaches apples sweet bell peppers celery nectarines strawberries
cherries pears grapes spinach lettuce and potatoes so those are the big 12 now keep
in mind what makes those things so unique is often times you eat the whole plant foods
on the other hand that contain the least amount of pesticides in part because most have skin
and outer layers that you don't eat are things like papaya but then broccoli we eat almost
all of the broccoli so that's not universally true cabbage you can always peel off those
outer layers on the cabbage plant bananas certainly most people don't eat the peel kiwi
mangoes pineapple avocados and onions so if I'm trying to look at my grocery dollar and
think how can I maximize my dollar and do the best job of protecting my health I'm probably
going to stay away from the big 12 but I might buy conventional onions because I'm not concerned
as much about the risk.
Okay organic farming I think one of the issues is that you can still have a pest and pathogen
problem you can combat this and farmers can combat this by using crop rotations and organizing
appropriate crop planting times to minimize pathogens and crops with the use of raw animal
manure for fertilization human consumption must wait at least 120 days between the manure
application and the harvest of the crop now I'll tell you this is a little bit difficult
to enforce because the farmer could use raw manure and there's not going to be a certifier
that's going to come out and inspect to make sure that they waited 120 days and I think
we've had some incidents where organic lettuce has actually been tainted with E. coli probably
because they didn't wait that 120 days well what about the research on the presence of
other pathogens reports indicate that there was no statistically significant difference
in E. coli prevalence in certified organic versus conventional produce so where does
this leave us nutrition information the USDA does not claim that organic products are more
nutritious than conventional some of the science says yes some of the science says no there's
a lot of contradicting evidence and research as seen from the studies we've explored on
organic versus conventional food products more extensive long term research is needed
in order to determine significant nutritional claims can be made about organic products
what about health concerns really no conclusive evidence to suggest that organic foods are
beneficial in the preventing of diseases or common health concerns so we can't say if
you eat organic produce you're less likely to have diabetes so there's really no conclusive
evidence there's no long term data analysis that have proven these results to be a conclusive
across the board and what about quality we do know organic foods may spoil faster such
as fruits and vegetables because they have no preservatives I have children for example
who will look at an organic apple and it looks a little modeled and they don't like the way
it looks it's not shiny and as red as the normal apples that they get and so they reject
it so the bottom line is all of this is based on personal preference and your own opinion
what which direction do you want to go certainly when we talk about pesticides the overall
levels of pesticides are lower on organic foods than conventional now what about the
cost and this is oftentimes again my family that made the wrong decision organic produce
can cost 10 to 30 percent more than conventional foods and animal products and processed foods
may be up to 100 percent more so again I think in families that are trying to pinch pennies
you might want to say I'm going to avoid the ones that are most likely to be contaminated
with pesticides and I'm going to buy conventional with the other produce that is least likely
to be contaminated so why are these products so much more expensive well they're much
more labor intensive you have to have expensive tools to control weeds rather than buying pesticides
it's very easy to spread a pesticide it's not so easy to put in beneficial insects
or other other kinds of barriers to pathogens and overgrowth of weeds taste is taste a difference
well there seems to be really no difference in taste among consumers when comparing the
two products so again it all depends on the taste preference of the consumers so I look
at this and think it's more a visual issue with consumers than it is a taste issue so
do we have any tips for consumers buy fresh produce in season to receive the highest quality
and the best price visit local farmers markets to support local farmers and receive the freshest
produce possible I'm very fortunate on Tuesdays and Thursdays the local farmers in south Texas
actually have a farmers market at rice so all I have to do is walk into the parking lot
and I can get organic peaches remember peaches are high in the pesticide I can get organic
peaches that are absolutely mouthwatering so if you have a local farmers market in your
area visit the local farmers market make a relationship with the local farmer and ask
if they're providing you with organic produce start your own garden or participate in a
community garden project as well read labels has that not been a consistent theme read
labels carefully and know what you're buying organic doesn't necessarily mean healthier
especially when we're talking about processed foods why I can think I'm buying an organic
macaroni and cheese for example but that product still could be high in total fat or
salt and depending on the product it could be high in sugar and calories so you must
read the label keep in mind that organic doesn't mean that it's lower in calories you have
to read the label one of the things that you can do with both organic and conventional
produce is thoroughly wash it wash it scrub the outside if you're going to eat that outside
peel and if you're concerned about conventional fruits and vegetables peel them so if you're
concerned that your family is eating a conventionally grown apple high pesticide concern peel
the apple and if pesticides are an issue for you buy the organic produce that is listed
on the highest pesticide content list okay our frequently asked questions other than
infancy and early childhood which I've mentioned are there certain times in the life cycle
when eating organic is particularly important what about pregnancy chronic illness and old
age in general the more vulnerable the population the greater the advantage to choosing organic
so I would say bottom line is if you're concerned in pregnancy and again we don't have any long
term studies on pesticides and pregnancy outcome but if you're concerned and you want to do
everything possible go ahead and choose organic keep in mind even though the research isn't
there it might give you the psychological relief to know that you've done everything possible
same thing with your children you might want to do that again there is some link between
pesticides and certain forms of cancer children can be vulnerable mostly because of their body
weight so children are going to have a higher amount of pesticide per pound of body weight
than an adult because they weigh less so maybe with your children you think I would
really like to make sure I'm using organic produce with my children now what about the
vegetable washes and sprays that are available don't they remove all pesticides well you
know what that's the claim but a small study suggests that it's the mechanical action of
scrubbing fruits and vegetables with water for at least 30 seconds that's just as effective
as the washes now tell you early on in my clinical practice I had the very fortunate
experience of working with an HIV population and in this population we actually in addition
to scrubbing we actually suggested that to kill the bacteria because that was a bigger
issue for an HIV population to kill the bacteria on fruits and vegetables that you could take
about a teaspoon of bleach now I know that doesn't sound delicious but a teaspoon of
bleach to about a gallon of water and that will kill the bacteria that are on the food
so that may be a tip for you as well so again another question that I get is I like to buy
organic but I just can't afford it so shouldn't we just skip the fresh fruits and vegetables
and make sure we all take a multivitamin the answer on this is please no don't do that because
again remember what fruits and vegetables have that a pill will not is the wonderful
phytochemicals that are in the the polyphenola compounds the kyrsatin the anthocyanidins all
these wonderful pigments that are in fruits and vegetables that are not going to be found
in a pill again if you're concerned and budgets an issue peel the ones that are the most
suspect the ones that are on the big 12 list peel those and then again choose organic for
the other ones again choose the ones that are most likely to be contaminated peel them
and it's a great way to remove the residue and the wax but please don't ever stop eating
fruits and vegetables so the take home message on this lecture and this one again is a little
bit different than the other ones we don't have all the science that we need to make
a definitive conclusion so it comes down to your budget your personal beliefs how many
vulnerable populations do you have in your family and again your own psychological relief
by choosing organic versus conventional and thank you very much.
