Hey everyone, Dr. Z, welcome to the ZDoggMD show.
Today I'm doing something incredibly self-indulgent
that I hope you will love as well.
We're diving into the philosophy of reality.
What is reality?
And my guest today is Dr. Bernardo Kastrup.
He's a little bit of a gunner, as we say in medicine.
He has two PhDs.
One is in computer science and is specializing
in artificial intelligence and reconfigurable systems
and things like that.
The second is in philosophy of mind.
And it turns out Bernardo's written a bunch of books.
One of them is called Why Materialism is Baloney,
which is probably the greatest title of all time.
And we're gonna dive in why he thinks,
and I tend to agree, but I'm gonna challenge him
a little bit, why he thinks that our entire paradigm
of reality is wrong and why that matters,
not just for healthcare, but for everything.
Bernardo, welcome to the show, brother.
Great pleasure to be here.
I'm looking forward to this.
So you're in the Netherlands right now, right?
Yeah, south of the country, yeah.
And you guys are having a bit of a third surge,
I understand, your ICU's are filling up?
That's right, we are still in a lockdown
and under curfew after 9 p.m.,
stringent measures here.
I'm not sure we will have a holiday summer this year.
Again, we'll see.
Well, are you guys still slow
in getting the vaccines spun up?
Very slow.
There is no prediction about when people my age
will get a vaccine.
Right now, they're just vaccinating people
at very high risk and older people.
So I don't know when my turn will come, we'll see.
Well, I hope it comes soon
because I think that's our way out of this mess,
as you know, but, so okay, let's dive into this
because I think I have been following your work
and I'm fascinated by it.
And I've been interested in consciousness
ever since I was very young when I sort of looked
at the world and thought something's not right.
I'm really fascinated by science,
really interested in medicine
and in people and in relationships,
but something always felt a little wrong in our paradigm
because even though I didn't, you know,
classically believe in God or anything like that,
religion didn't quite feel right for me
but neither did the materialist paradigm
meaning there's stuff as the fundamental truth of reality.
There's matter and atoms and somehow awareness and love
and the taste of chocolate and a headache
and the bitterness of disappointment arise from dead matter
and the universe at one point had no awareness.
It never felt right.
And recently I've been more and more disabused of this notion.
So help me understand first of all
how you got interested in this
and then walk us through the materialist paradigm.
In other words, our dominant scientific
and cultural worldview right now
and then we'll talk about why it may be wrong.
Well, I think I was born sort of a philosopher
because since I was a kid, I liked to ask the big questions.
My father died when I was 12,
which sort of propelled that tendency
that was already latent in me forward big time,
you know, asking the big questions.
But that journey was interrupted by, you know, university.
I went to university, I had just turned 17
and then you're busy, you know, discovering the world
and creating a space in the world for yourself,
you know, how that goes.
So this question sort of went to the background
until at some point I started working a lot,
even in my personal life as a hobby
with artificial intelligence.
And then you come across the question, you know,
if you can build an intelligent machine,
do you have any reason to believe
that that machine will also be conscious?
That it would not only perform calculations,
but that there would be something it is like
to perform those calculations.
And then I came back to the old philosophical questions
that I always asked myself.
And when I looked more deeply into those questions,
I realized that although materialism seems to be
very intuitive at a superficial level,
when you scratch the surface only a little bit,
you don't need to go deep at all.
Just ask the next question in the chain of questions
you can ask and you quickly realize that it is
rather easy to reduce materialism to absurdity,
as we say in philosophy, which is to disprove it.
It seems intuitive because it tells us
that there is an objective world out there
independent of our individual minds.
Now, I agree with that.
Of course, there is a world out there
that doesn't care about whether I think it's nice or not.
Because if it did, it would be different right now.
I would have already imagined it to be something other
than what it is for starters.
There would be no COVID pandemic
if I could change the world by a mere act of volition.
So there is an objective world out there,
but materialism goes one step further
and it says, and that objective world
is fundamentally distinct from mentation, from mind stuff.
And by the way, mind stuff somehow is created
or generated by specific configurations
of that other kind of stuff that we call matter.
Even though nobody in the history of philosophy
or science has had any clue about how this miracle
of the creation of consciousness
from something non-conscious is actually performed.
And then if you go even a little bit deeper than that,
you realize that what most of us understand
as materialism is not materialism at all.
Most of us think that the colors of the world
are really out there.
The flavors are really out there.
The melodies are really out there,
but materialism will tell you that none of this is true.
Color as a quality is something mental
that is created by your brain inside your skull.
And so is melody and so is flavor and so is aroma.
The real world out there has no colors.
You can't visualize it because if you visualize it,
you're bringing mind into the picture.
And according to materialism,
that world has nothing to do with mind.
So it's a pure abstraction that I think most people
would intuitively reject
if they actually understood what materialism was.
So I think what's interesting here
is you're describing a dualism.
You're saying, to this degree,
you're saying that we have our mind stuff,
which is the materialist would say is created by dead atoms
and material that configure themselves
in some mysterious way that somehow emerge
our internal subjective world.
And that the real world out there,
according to materialists,
is something that has no qualities like that
because we create the qualities in our mind.
And so our current worldview is this.
It's saying there's a world out there that's dead
that is just stuff and energy and vibrating fields
and things like that.
We turn it in through our own dead vibrating fields
and somehow magically into the look of a red apple
with a glistening water on it because you've just washed it.
And that, okay, that's the dominant paradigm.
That's what we think right now, correct?
That's correct, yeah.
Now, when did we start thinking this way?
Because I think it helps people understand
how mankind has come to this conclusion
in violation of what the intuition might be,
which is, oh, if there's a green leaf,
then that green is the real thing.
What are my experience is the real thing?
Yeah, not according to materialism.
According to materialism,
the world of your experience is entirely within your head.
So there is a literal sense in which,
according to materialism,
the inner surface of your skull is beyond the walls
of the room you see around you
because the walls, as you see them, are qualitative
and therefore they're mental
and therefore they are somehow created
by your brain inside your skull
and your real skull is beyond the walls,
beyond the ceiling of the room you're in.
This is what materialism actually says.
Now, where did it start, which was your question?
Some would claim it goes back to the democratist
over 2,500, yeah, over 2,000 years ago
because that was the birth of atomism,
the idea that you can divide things
into ever smaller pieces
until you get to something that cannot be divided anymore.
I don't think that is accurate.
I don't think this dichotomy mind
and non-mind was present in those times.
It's much more accurate, I think,
in the Western world, at least,
to go back to the carts
and the great partition of the world between mind,
which was left for the church,
so scientists wouldn't be burned at the stake,
so they would leave something for the church,
that the church themselves
considered to be all that matters, mind, psyche, soul.
Mind and soul are two translations
of the same Greek word, psyche.
So the carts left the psyche for the church
and he invented this other thing called matter,
which was supposed to be totally distinct
from the psyche, from the soul, from mind,
and that was what scientists would then do.
And this sort of carving out of the political space
allowed scientists to not be burned at the stake,
which was a very good thing at the time,
but it sort of snowballed.
It grew beyond proportion.
It became something that is, on the face of it, absurd,
and it became the dominant paradigm in the Western world
in the second half of the 19th century or so,
and what may have propelled it,
there are many different opinions about it,
but what may have propelled it is that,
at some point, scientists began to reject anything
that could smell of putting human beings
in the center of the universe,
because they've tried to do this before
and they got disappointed multiple times.
They fell flat on their faces
and something in the collective psyche of scientists said,
we are never going to make that mistake again.
We are nothing.
Humanity is nothing.
We are irrelevant in this immense universe
that is not even of the same nature that we are.
Clearly, we are mental beings,
and this universe is not even mental.
And so this sort of prejudice
became mainstream in the late 19th century,
and it has been mainstream ever since,
although since the turn of the 21st century,
science itself is beginning to, I think,
irremediably weaken this because it just doesn't stand up
to reason or thorough empirical investigation.
This is really fascinating because the origin of this,
let's assume that what you're gonna say is correct,
this delusion, this idea that we are separate
from the universe and we're made of,
mental stuff is different than physical stuff
and physical stuff is primal.
And we are just a rounding error
on a dead, impersonal universe.
We're nothing near the center
and certainly completely expendable.
And it's a very borderline nihilistic view.
Why, what, what's the meaning, what's the purpose?
But that became mainstream for the reasons that you say.
Now, and then you mentioned,
which is a perfect segue to this,
in the 21st century, science itself is going,
but wait, materialism has some problems.
So maybe tell me, what are the,
what are the posits of materialism
that you think are compelling as a case
and then where are the holes emerging scientifically
in the case that the universe is dead stuff
that emerges consciousness?
Well, I think materialism has played a role
in the early days of science
because it sort of isolated the investigator
from the investigated and it led to a sort of
built-in objectivity in the scientific process
because of the assumptions that were made from the get go.
But at some point, it became just a way for the tough people
to distinguish themselves from the wishful thinkers,
from the gullible populace who wanted good news
while the scientists were the tough guys
who stared at facts in the face.
And there is some ego building around that notion.
Today, materialism is, I would argue,
it's untenable unless you adopt absurd hypothesis
about what's going on.
I can mention them.
One of the key tenants of materialism
is that objects have standalone existence.
So whether you are looking at an object,
receiving it or not, measuring it or not,
that object exists and has its properties.
So it has a certain mass, a certain size,
it's moving in a certain direction,
regardless of whether anybody's measuring it or not.
And what the latest experimental results
in quantum mechanics are telling us
is that this is a false assumption.
What quantum mechanics calls observables,
things that can be measured, such as weight, mass,
charge, momentum, speed, frequency, amplitude,
all these things only come into existence
by virtue of the act of measurement.
They only exist when they are measured.
Before they are measured, they are just potentials.
The best you can say is to abstract whatever there is
out there when nobody's measuring,
to abstract it and say, well, it's a wave of probabilities
or something like that.
And smart experiments have shown us
that before measurement, the things you measure
don't really exist, they cannot exist.
They are not defined before measurement.
And well, if matter, as we understand it,
is not there until a mind sort of apprehends its properties,
then materialism cannot be right unless,
and this is the way out that many scientists are peddling,
unless you grant that there are casiliens,
countless new material universes,
popping into existence every fraction of a femtosecond,
and for which we have precisely zero empirical evidence.
So either you choose that or you admit that, okay,
what we call matter is not a standalone reality,
it is a representation, it is an image
of something else deeper, something that is really out there
that's not part of my mind or your mind
or my cat's mind, it's something that is really out there,
but it isn't material, it is likely mental
because mentality is all we know for sure,
it's what nature grants us as a given of existence.
So matter may be just a sort of a superficial appearance
of a deeper transpersonal extended mentality
that isn't your mind, isn't my mind,
but it is mental in nature.
And okay, so we're gonna dive into all the things
you just said in more detail,
but I think going back to this idea
that physicalism, materialism has a huge problem,
which is quantum mechanics,
and the idea that experiment after experiment very,
like you said, very clever experiments imply
that time is not maybe what we think,
that space maybe isn't even what we think,
and that things don't seem to settle
into a real position, spin, whatever it is,
until they are apprehended or measured.
And then they all try to squirrel out of that
and say, well, no, it's really a measurement issue.
It's a question of, or there's multiple universes,
like you said, where so we can explain that
because everything that could have happened
actually happened in some universe,
which again, we have no evidence for.
So you're making these very complex theories
out of something that could be solved
quite parsimoniously and simply by saying,
well, maybe then there isn't matter
because we've never found matter.
The more we look, the more weird stuff we find.
It's kind of like looking at your computer screen
and going, oh, the image of Bernardo there.
He's got cool glasses.
He's in a cool room with a lot of books.
He used to work for CERN,
which is the European sort of big physics thing.
He's worked in quantum mechanics,
he's worked in computer science,
so he's kind of been in this world.
But then I look at that computer and I go,
what is Bernardo?
Let me look closer.
I look closer and I see a colored pixel vibrating
and I go, well, he's made of colored pixels that vibrate.
I look even closer.
Oh, there's little, even smaller pixels in there.
And then I get to the limit of my instruments ability to look
and I assume that everything is made
out of those colored pixels.
Whereas in reality, you exist in a space
and a time completely different
than my ability to apprehend it
based on my interface with reality.
Is it something like that that's going on here?
It's precisely like that.
Precisely like that.
I think you just nailed it.
We got used to think of images as the thing in itself.
Although Kant already warned us 250 years ago, more or less,
and Schopenhauer after him 200 years ago,
they already warned us that the phenomena,
what appears on the screen of our perception,
whether it's aided by instrumentation or not,
the things we call matter,
extended matter in space and time,
these are representations.
These are how the world, as it is in itself,
presents itself to us upon being observed.
And of course, these representations are not there
if you're not looking,
because the world, as it is in itself,
is not the representation.
It is the thing that projects the representation.
And it is the only thing that has stand-alone existence.
So matter is representation, is the image and appearance.
And the more we zoom into matter,
the more we realize that it's just pixels.
There is nothing else that has stand-alone existence there.
Actually, if you look close enough,
even the pixels disappear,
and then you start having to talk
in terms of fewer abstraction, like quantum fields,
which are just mathematical tools.
So we have no reason to think of quantum fields
as existence, if you know what I mean.
And it's not only physics,
it's neuroscience of consciousness.
It's hitting some walls that outright contradict materialism.
And people are desperate to find a way out of it,
just like physicists have been desperate
to find a way out of these contradictions
from quantum physics.
And analytic philosophy itself shows that, you know,
even if you don't look at the empirical data,
even if you just reason things out with discipline,
applying logic consistently,
you are probably not going to choose materialism
because it leads to insoluble problems,
like the hard problem of consciousness.
There are better options on the table.
And I'm glad you brought up hard problem of consciousness,
because to me, this was the thorn in my mind,
as Morpheus said, that is constantly digging there.
I mean, I consider the matrix a documentary.
So it was this discomfort,
like how is it that these three pounds of wet goo
are generating my rich inner life, my imagination,
my appreciation for music and comedy
and whatever it is that I'm into?
How on earth?
Yes, the brain is the most complex entity
that we know of in the known universe.
It has more connections between synapses
than, you know, the stars in the universe
or whatever it is.
It's mysterious in many ways and very simple in others.
We can cut it open.
We can measure it.
We can measure ion gates.
We can measure EEG.
We have FMRI.
We can look at correlations between my internal experience
and what lights up in parts of the brain.
And we can do all of that.
And yet are nowhere even close
to understanding how that generates a headache,
the sensation of a headache.
I mean, it's to me, and this got me so crazy.
I was like, there's gotta be a way.
And the thing is, you can go in college,
and I'm just gonna rant for a second.
In college, maybe you do some LSD
or do some psilocybin, and you have these experiences
where what is shown to you feels like revealed truth.
You go, oh, wait a minute, this is all one consciousness.
What?
And you feel that, and then you bring it back
when you sober up and run it through
the materialist paradigm you were taught.
And you go, well, boy, isn't that crazy
when you mess with the gates and your ion channels
and how it messes with your experience?
And it never felt right, but yet that's the best we could do.
And the interesting thing that we've discovered since 2012
and now has been repeated multiple times over,
so this is established fact now,
is that psychedelics only reduce brain activity.
They do not increase brain activity anywhere.
So as you are having the richest
and most intense experience of your life,
your brain is effectively going to sleep.
And the materialist neuroscientists are scrambling now
to find any even seemingly absurd hypothesis
to try to make sense of this.
So they're talking now about the entropic brain.
So the hypothesis is that the level of entropy,
the level of disorganization in your brain
may explain the richer and intenser experience,
even though statistically that increase
in disorganization is minimal.
And no tripper who has had psychedelic trip
would accept that the coherence of the trip
is somehow created by an increasing noise.
A trip is not noisy.
I mean, it's noisy in the sense
that you cannot extract hard conclusions
about what's going on,
but it's not noisy in the sense that it's not incoherent.
It's not white noise.
Those are very coherent experiences.
So yeah, there's a desperate hunt
for a way out for materialism,
but I think the results of that desperate hunt,
if anything, they make materialism look absolutely silly
because the hypothesis that are being proposed
are ridiculous.
Look, none of this is to deny fact.
And it is a fact that if a neurosurgeon cracks my skull open
and start poking around my brain with an electrical probe,
he will induce experiences in me.
Obviously, there are very tight correlations
between brain activity and inner experience,
but correlation doesn't imply
a specific direction of causation.
If the brain is just what my conscious inner life looks like
when observed from the outside,
if the brain is a representation, an image,
of course, the image will correlate with the phenomenon
that it is an image of
because it's the image of that phenomenon.
And of course, if you're consistent in your worldview
and you are an idealist
and you think everything is fundamentally mental,
not in your mind alone, not in my mind alone,
but fundamentally mental,
then that surgeon with an electric probe
poking around your brain,
that too is the appearance, the image of a mental process.
And it is that mental process
beyond the boundaries of your individual self
that interfere with your own mental inner life
and that one mental process interferes with another
is trivial.
It happens every day.
My thoughts affect my emotions and the other way around.
Ah!
So, all right.
Basically, what we're doing is,
let's use Don Hoffman's metaphor,
which is what we see is like a desktop interface,
like a graphical user interface,
and brain is an icon.
So, brain is an icon on your desktop.
You take your icon seriously
because they point to something.
They point to, in this case, a rich inner life,
a discrete experience viewpoint.
And so, you can mess with that icon
and things will happen to the rich inner experience,
but you don't take the icon literally.
You don't go, that's a brain.
And it's the same when the neurosurgeon,
who is another icon,
who is exchanging experience with your icon of brain,
things change.
And they correlate quite directly
because just as the trash icon on your desktop
correlates directly to your ability
to delete files permanently,
the brain icon correlates directly
to your discrete conscious field of experience.
And you can mess with it in probably predictable ways.
And so much of neuroscience, as a doctor,
I'll tell you, so much of neuroscience
is trying to establish the easy problem of consciousness.
What are the correlates?
And completely sweeps under the rug the hard problem,
which is why are we, wait, how can stuff lead to this?
And medicine even reduces it further
and you're either conscious or you're not.
And we question vegetative states
and what's going on in that.
And I think we're, even anesthesia,
like are we aware during anesthesia,
all these questions arise from a materialist standpoint,
they become intractable and very simplified
and dangerously wrong
in that we're now we potentially induce suffering
in living creatures.
We reduce mental illness to gates and serotonin
to the correlates instead of
what's the fundamental root experience that's going on.
And so I'll let you comment on that.
And then I want to start to explore,
okay, if physicalism has failed,
what's your proposal that replaces it?
Yeah, look, I have compassion for sincere materialists
because it is not easy to evaluate the situation objectively
once you have grown up in an ecosystem,
in a culture, in a society that pedals materialism to you
from the get go, from the time you learn language.
So it's very difficult to think
and evaluate things in neutral terms.
You're always embedding hidden materialist assumptions
in your process of thinking.
And therefore, materialism becomes sort of
a self-fulfilling promise.
Give you a couple of examples.
A materialist will say that for an idealist,
somebody who thinks everything is mental,
that they think the whole world is in their heads.
Well, no, it's precisely the opposite.
It's materialism that says
that the world you experience is entirely inside your head
because it's generated by your brain.
And what is really out there,
you have no direct access to.
An idealist would say precisely the opposite.
An idealist would say your head is in mind
because your head is that thing that is perceived.
And if it is perceived, it's in mind.
Therefore, your mind is not in your head.
It's the other way around.
But a materialist will poo-poo an idealist
by projecting materialism, the absurdity of materialism
onto that other hypothesis.
And people do that very easily.
Sincere, intelligent people do that very easily.
Or they project dualism.
Like they say, well, of course, matter precedes mind.
Because if I go cutting around your brain,
I will alter your inner life.
Well, we don't even need to go that far.
Drink beer and something will alter your inner life
because you ingest the substance.
But they are thinking dualistic terms.
They are thinking of matter and mind as separate.
Therefore, the material process causally influences the mind.
But they forget that when you say that everything is mental,
then the beer and the scalpel are also the images
of mental processes.
There is nothing physical in an ontological sense.
And look, as I say all this,
I'm not denying that thing we call matter.
That thing we call matter is obviously out there.
I can hold a bottle of water right now
and it feels very solid.
But the color, the solidity, the feel of it in my hands
are mental things.
They are qualitative things.
So we are denying the interpretation
of what we call matter.
We are not denying that which we call matter.
So, okay, this is very important.
We need to dive into something that you said,
which is a lot of materialists will,
and again, I think they're, like you said,
they're well-meaning and they're actually conditioned that way.
And I was in that camp for many years, but unhappily.
And I would even go further and say they're ego-defended.
So in other words, so much of personal identity
and reality is invested in this idea
that we're stuff that emerges reality
that if you challenge that idea,
not only do they shut down,
they become violently opposed to the idea.
And I've had people scream at me
for my interview with Don Hoffman,
which they found very destabilizing
because he's basically saying a version of what you're saying.
The other thing I wanna say about that is
they'll then accuse the proposer of the theory
of either being a new-age woo-woo cuckoo,
or they'll say you're a solipsist,
meaning what you're saying.
You think you create the universe,
that you can manipulate the universe,
and that it's only you and everybody else is an illusion.
That is not what you're saying,
and it's not what I'm saying, right?
Absolutely correct.
Nobody's denying that there is something out there
beyond my personal might.
What we deny is the need to postulate something
other than mentality to explain whatever is out there.
So I have a metaphor to make sense of this.
Suppose that you're standing on the earth
and you're looking to the horizon,
and because of the curvature of the earth,
there is only so far you can see
because the rest goes below the horizon,
so you can't see the rest.
So you can only infer the rest.
An idealist would say,
up until the horizon, what I can see directly,
what I can experience and become acquainted directly with,
it's all mentality.
It's all I have.
It's my mind.
It's my conscious experiences.
Whatever is not within the sphere
of my conscious experiences is only a hypothesis.
It's an inference.
So up until the horizon, it's mental.
Now, if I have to grant that there is something
beyond the horizon to make sense of the fact
that we all seem to share the same world
and to acknowledge that other people
also have their own minds,
so I have to postulate or infer something
beyond the horizon.
An idealist would say, well,
if up until the horizon, it's mental,
then beyond the horizon,
we infer that whatever is out there is also mental.
A materialist would say,
up until the horizon is mental,
but beyond the horizon, it's something totally else,
completely abstract called matter.
And by the way, in ways I cannot begin to explain,
that abstract thing also creates the mentality
that goes until the horizon.
I don't think this is the most reasonable,
conceptually parsimonious way to go about things.
It's not, it violates Occam's razor,
which is a lot of times the simplest solution is correct.
There's no reason the universe has to be simple.
There's no reason it has to be parsimonious to be correct,
but materialism introduces dualism
and introduces these contradictions.
It fails to solve and by generating
the hard problem of consciousness.
Actually, it's not, it generates that.
It's not like this is an extant problem in the world,
like how do we generate consciousness from brain?
No, materialists have a theory that then generates the problem.
Like, well, then why are we awake?
The hard problem of consciousness
is the absurd implication of the materialist hypothesis.
If I can formulate it accurately, I would say,
there is nothing about material or physical parameters
in terms of which we could deduce
any of the qualities of experience.
There is nothing about a particular pattern
of brain activity in terms of which I could deduce
how it feels like to have a bellyache
or to fall in love or to taste a strawberry.
We know that there are empirical correlations
and we can catalog the correlations,
but there is nothing in principle about physicality
in terms of which you can deduce mentality.
So you are left with an impassable gap.
Now, under any other circumstances,
that would just be the point when you say,
this hypothesis has no future, let's backtrack.
We took a wrong turn somewhere in our line of thinking
because it has been reduced to an absurdity now.
Let's try something else.
But because we are culturally so committed to it,
instead of acknowledging the absurd implication,
we label it a problem and we say, one day we might solve it.
Well, good luck with that.
Pull a chair while you're waiting.
Good, so basically, and we're gonna get into your theory
in detail, but I wanna dwell a little bit more
on the absurdity of the current paradigm
because I want people to start to instinctually feel
the same discomfort that we feel
with the absurdity of materialism.
And again, because people are resistant to this,
I think building that case first before you go,
now here's a different idea of what reality might be.
And it isn't solipsism.
It isn't saying that it's just my mind
and nobody else's mind.
Your proposal is different.
It's very remarkable actually,
and I think people are gonna wanna hear it.
But it seems to me like physics and science,
whether it's astrophysics, et cetera, we're pushing.
So for the last three, 400 years, we've really nailed it.
I mean, quantum mechanics allowed us
to make the electronics that we're communicating with.
Medicine has advanced dramatically,
mostly through vaccines and public health,
the rest of it's mostly garbage,
except for some surgical stuff.
I firmly believe most of what we do doesn't work,
but it has a mental component to it,
which we'll talk about.
It applies a therapeutic alliance and a healing effect
and a placebo effect that we discount
in our materialist paradigm,
and yet is probably the majority of healing
for a lot of people.
But all this stuff has worked to a degree that it's worked,
but now we start to run into some problems.
Quantum mechanics, like the more we look down
with our large Hadron collider,
and we find the Higgs boson and this and that,
and then more contradictions appear,
well, why isn't it reconcilable with relativity
and how come when we keep looking down,
then we propose strings which are more abstractions
that are mathematical abstractions.
We seem to be running up against a wall,
particularly in physics,
where things really haven't advanced in a while.
Is that because we're hitting the pixel density
of our interface rather than actually looking at reality?
I think when you talk about foundations of physics,
I think we are most definitely reaching
the resolution of the interface itself.
So if you look closer, you only see bigger pixels
or things would disappear altogether
because you start looking in between the pixels.
Look, science is the study of nature's behavior,
not of what nature is.
So it is a misunderstanding to attribute
scientific and technological developments to materialism.
Materialism is just a way of thinking about that behavior,
but what empirical experimentation gives you
is information about the behavior,
not about the nature of the thing that behaves.
And this is a very important distinction
because it bears on the scientific method itself
what kind of, what questions can it answer fundamentally?
And the scientific method is based on experimentation
and what experiments tell you is how nature behaves,
how nature reacts to an initial set of circumstances
and an action imprinted on nature.
So fundamentally, it only tells you how nature behaves,
but that's enough for you to develop technology
if you have behavioral models of nature, predictive models,
and you know how nature will respond if you do this and that.
That's all you need to create mobile phones and medicine
and cars and spaceships.
It is irrelevant what nature essentially is.
That's why isness or being is the subject of metaphysics.
And metaphysics means literally the study of what is.
Only in the popular culture,
it has come to mean some spiritual woo-woo.
And well, that's not what the word actually means technically.
Metaphysics, the study of being.
Science is a study of behavior.
I can explain this with a metaphor.
Imagine, I don't know whether you have kids,
but imagine a seven-year-old kid playing a computer game.
The kid will inventorize the behavior of that game.
He or she will know exactly what the game would do
if he or she acts in this or that way.
So much so that kid can become the world champion
in that computer game.
The kid understands the behavior of that game
and has turned it into an art, a fine art.
You know, it's exactly what to do
to get the results he wants to get.
But to do that, he doesn't need to understand the first thing
about what the game actually is, all the software,
all the hardware, the processors, the memory,
the bus conflicts, you know, all that stuff
is irrelevant for the kid to learn the game and win
because it's all about behavior.
Science, and I don't want to put science down,
I mean science is the major thing in my life.
But I think it's healthy for scientists
to recognize what the scientific method
can tell you and what it cannot.
So you can do good science instead of bad philosophy.
And what science does is to learn how to play the game.
It does not settle questions of being
even though it can inform questions of being.
It can take some alternatives off the table
like arguably quantum mechanics is doing now.
It's taking materialism off the table,
but it doesn't tell you what is.
It can only tell you what cannot be
because of some contradictions.
So basically science in our current worldview,
in our estimation when we talk about your theory
is the behavior of the interface we're able to perceive
with whatever underlying reality there is.
So the metaphysics of is-ness, of being,
of awakeness, of awareness, whatever we want to call it,
that's one thing, but we can still play
the video game of life and win by manipulating icons
in this thing.
Like our child would play Grand Theft Auto
or my kids play Crossy Castle, like you said,
they're really good at it,
but they don't have the first clue
about the quantum mechanics involved
that generated the microprocessor.
By the way, I'm having Federico Fajin on the show
in a couple weeks and he's gonna talk about this stuff too,
but he could kind of father the microprocessor.
And the idea that that's science and it's important
and nothing that we are going to say now moving forward
impacts that in a way that lessens its brilliance
or the fact that it's crucially important,
what it will do is add a deeper layer of truth
to what science is and that will empower it
for the next phase of our understanding.
That's the way I like to think about it.
Yeah, yeah, so I mean, so now,
okay, it's not this stuff, this is just icon,
it's all mental, that makes no sense to me.
What do you mean?
What's the universe made of and what's it doing?
And how come I can't access your conscious,
there's a million questions here.
So hit me up with your idealism theory.
Okay, okay.
Let's start easy with a thought experiment.
Imagine that you're very sad, even despairing
and feeling we all are well acquainted with, I believe.
If you aren't, you haven't lived long enough,
you're going to be.
And then we go to the mirror in the bathroom
and we see that contorted face,
that image on the mirror and tears flowing down the eyes.
Do we think that that face contorted,
contorted muscles and the tears flowing down the eyes,
do we think that that's all the story,
that all there is to say about sadness?
We don't, we know that that's just a image,
a representation of what is actually the thing in itself,
the sadness we feel from within.
My contorted face and the tears in my eyes
are just what my sadness looks like
when it's observed from a certain viewpoint,
like in the mirror or when somebody else is looking at me.
From within, there are no tears,
there are no contorted muscles, from within,
there is only the thing in itself, which is the sadness.
Now, we all understand this,
we understand this distinction
between the external representation and the thing in itself,
which is the only standalone reality,
the thing that projects the external representation.
But we forget about it
when it comes to the rest of the world.
We think that the rocks and the moons and the volcanoes,
that we think they are the thing in itself.
We think that they are the whole story
about the external world,
which sort of requires an arbitrary discontinuity
in our story about nature.
When it comes to us, we know we have inner life
and that our body is just on the external appearance
of our inner life.
A problem we try to solve by saying,
well, inner life doesn't actually exist,
it's just the material stuff, it's just the image.
It's an illusion, as Dan Danik would say, right?
It's just an illusion, right?
Yeah, and never mind the fact
that an illusion is already a conscious phenomenon.
Yeah, right, right, right.
It's already the thing you're trying to deny.
So we understand that when it comes to us,
but our intuition fails us
when it comes to the rest of the world.
So my point is the following,
matter, all matter, including the tears in your eyes
and including the galaxies out there,
matter is the name we give
to the extrinsic appearance
of extended mental processes that may be out there
or maybe within here, in us,
but either way, matter is how these mental processes
look like when observed from a certain perspective.
And to be more technical,
that perspective means when they are observed
from across a dissociative boundary.
So for me, there is no arbitrary discontinuity in nature.
All matter is always what inner mentation looks like
when observed from across a dissociative boundary.
And then the question is, okay,
where are these dissociative boundaries?
We can talk about that as well,
but that is in essence what I'm putting forward.
We can explain and make sense of everything
by sticking to the one soul given of nature,
which is mentation.
We know mentation exists.
That's where it starts from for us.
Anything else we come up with
is a result of theoretical reflection.
The given is mentation.
And my point is we can explain everything
in terms of mentation, not my mentation alone,
not your mentation alone.
There has to be extended mentation out there,
but in all cases, the thing in itself is mentation.
And matter is just a representation,
the phenomena or what Don calls the virtual reality headset.
We have evolved to gather information
about the world surrounding us
in the form that we call matter.
Because if we would just mirror the states
of the external world within ourselves,
we would dissolve into an entropic soup.
We would not be able to resist
the second law of thermodynamics.
And this is a theorem that has been proven
by a group of neuroscientists, by the way.
We have to encode the information we get
about the outside world
in order to have a sort of at a glance view.
So instead of feeling bits of what is actually happening
in the mentation within which you are enveloped
and surrounded, instead of feeling those directly
by bits and pieces, you get a dashboard.
Evolution has given you a dashboard
that conveys the relevant information
in a very neat, compact way
that provides an overview at a glance,
which allows you to maintain your structural
and dynamical integrity,
despite the second law of thermodynamics,
and which optimizes your chances of survival.
Matter is that dashboard.
The problem is we tend to think about the dashboard
as a transparent windscreen.
Now, this is what we have to drop.
There is no transparent windscreen.
Evolution would have never done that.
We would be driven swiftly to extinction.
That's what Don has proven.
And that's what other neuroscientists have shown as well.
We would dissolve in an entropic soup.
There is no reason at all to think
that the screen of our perception
is a transparent windshield.
It is most definitely not.
It's a set of dials on a dashboard.
So are those dials the thing in itself,
the world as it is in itself,
is a pilot flying in the middle of a storm,
flying by instruments.
When he looks down to his instrument panel,
is what he sees, the storm outside,
the real sky, the clouds,
and the winds and lightning outside?
Of course not.
The dashboard provides critical, important information
to the pilot that allows the pilot
to fly safely and land safely.
But the dashboard is not the world.
When we say that the world is material,
we are basically saying,
well, the dashboard is the world.
Good luck trying to prove that.
Trying to make sense of that.
It isn't.
And we will make more progress understanding life,
the universe and everything,
understanding who we are
and what the meaning of life is.
If we drop this rather,
I think today we can say infantile idea,
which had a place in history.
But we are not there anymore.
There is no reason to stick to this infantile idea anymore.
We're no better today.
As Don says, we are making a rookie mistake
of confusing our interface with the real world.
We're making a rookie mistake
of confusing the video game with reality.
And I'm gonna dig even deeper into what you're saying.
When you say everything is mental or mentation,
another way to frame that is,
the universe is nothing fundamentally,
but mind stuff, consciousness, awareness.
That is all that is
and it manifests through experiences
that as you say are the thing in themselves.
So the taste of chocolate is real.
That's the experience in and of itself.
And the look of a chocolate bar
is the experience that you're having in and of itself.
But the bar itself is not reality.
In other words, there is no physical bar there
that you're manipulating.
And if everything fundamentally is awareness,
mind stuff in order for it to behave the way we're seeing it.
In other words, and I want you to correct me
when I'm wrong here.
So, okay.
And remember that the spiritualists and mystics
have been saying that everything is consciousness forever,
but then the questions arise.
Well, then why is it that I can't read your mind?
Why is it that if everything's mind created,
why is there so much consistency in the laws of nature?
In the fact that you and I both looking at a car
see the same car.
The fact that we're so afraid of death
must mean that our consciousness completely ends.
Where are these borders and distinctions?
Why is there only one consciousness?
All these questions arise
and you actually have thought through all of this.
And I'd love you to start to respond
to the mess that I just threw at you.
It's curious how in this kind of discussions
we become blind to things that we know.
And let me highlight that by just pointing them out to you.
A lot of people who are not idealists would say,
well, the world cannot be mental
because I cannot control the world at will.
I cannot just wish it to be different.
But let's remember, you don't control your dreams.
You don't control your nightmares,
otherwise you would not have them.
You don't control your obsessions,
otherwise nobody would be really obese.
You don't control your anxieties.
Gosh, you don't control your next thought.
Where does your next thought come from?
And now it's amazing how little
of our own individual mentation we have under control.
It's amazing how little we understand
about the internal consistency of our own dreams.
So when we say that idealism cannot be right
because the world is out of our control,
it's like, hey, where are you coming from
when you make that statement?
So my argument is the following.
Since the advent of neuroimaging in the 21st century,
we are in a position now to know that a certain phenomenon
that has been in the annals of psychiatry
for at least over 100 years,
we know that that phenomenon is real.
Now we know that, and that phenomenon is dissociation.
And there are many levels of dissociation.
Some types of forgetfulness can be considered dissociative,
but dissociative identity disorder is the big one,
is when a person claims to be many
and each of these dissociated personalities called altars,
each of these altars sometimes even denies
the existence of the other or denies being the other
and claims to be a entity in its own right
with its own dispositions, its own memories.
And we know that that's not fake.
Now we know that because neuroimaging experiments
have shown that dissociative processes
can be distinguished from controls,
measurements made on actors pretending to be dissociated,
pretending to themselves to be dissociated.
Actual dissociation can be distinguished
on the basis of neuroimaging.
And we know that dissociation is even blinding.
There was this case of this woman in Germany,
a study published in 2015, a woman who had several altars.
And what was peculiar about that woman's DID
or dissociative identity disorder
is that some of the altars claimed to be blind,
even though there was nothing wrong with the woman's eyes
and other altars could see perfectly well.
So organically, there was nothing wrong with her.
And the scientists had a brilliant idea.
The idea was let's hook her up to an EEG or an MEG.
I don't remember what it was.
I think it was an EEG and measure the visual cortex activity
while the blind altar is in control.
And guess what?
With the blind altar in control,
even though the woman's eyes were wide open
and things were happening in front of her,
there was no activity in the visual cortex.
No, you cannot fake that.
And when another altar would assume control,
then visual activity would come back in the visual cortex.
This was published.
So we know that dissociation exists
and it's strong enough to make you blind, literally,
even though organically, there's nothing wrong with you.
Now, here is nature telling us
that there is something in nature
that does exactly what an idealist needs to happen
in order to explain the nature of everything,
explain why I can't read your thoughts
and presumably you can't read mine.
We are dissociated from each other
and from the rest of the mental universe
within which we are inserted.
There is a dissociative boundary
between our inner mentation and the mentation
that's going on on the other side of that boundary.
And this dissociation has an appearance.
There is something it looks like,
just like the dissociative processes
in the mind of a DID patient look like something in an FMRI.
There is an image that can be used for diagnosis purposes.
Within the universe, there is something
dissociative processes in nature look like
and I would say we call it biology.
Biology, life, metabolism is what dissociation
in a sort of extended mind
is what the dissociation there looks like.
When that dissociation happens,
we say a living being was born.
And the boundary of that dissociative process,
the dissociative boundary, is our skin,
our eyes, our ears, our sense organs,
the surfaces through which we interface
with the world around us.
And what is neat about this is that it makes sense
of everything without postulating anything
but the given, which is mind itself.
And it doesn't incur in the impossible problem
of trying to wish mind out of existence,
which is what materialists have to somehow do.
And they are even taken seriously in this attempt
in academia, which reflects how deep the paradigm goes,
wishing the given out of existence.
But anyway, dissociation is something in nature.
We know it exists, we know it's there.
We may not understand all the mechanisms conceptually
in all precision.
There are gaps to be covered there
in our conceptual understanding of dissociation.
But whether we understand it conceptually or not,
we know it happens because it happens within us as well.
There is empirical abundant and empirical evidence
to settle the question of existence.
And that's all you need to explain everything
in terms of one natural underlying extended mind
of which we are just altars.
The whole time you were talking, I was just like,
let me reframe what you just said.
Reality is one mind, one consciousness
that has spun off dissociated little alter mini egos.
And there are a bunch of those
and they each don't access directly or consciously
either little alter egos maybe they're made of
or bigger things that they're a part of,
the universal mind.
And when they experience the only thing that's real,
which is more mind, other altars manifest
as other organisms, animals, humans, living organisms,
that's what an alter mind of the universal mind
looks like to itself from an alter vantage point.
So you and I are both, the universe is a one mind
that has multiple personality disorder.
And we won't even call it disorder,
we'll say it's just multiple personalities.
And that explains all of this.
Yeah, it's a disorder just for us.
We passed a value judgment and we called it a disorder,
but I don't want to imply that nature is sick.
No, nature's just nature.
The value of judgments are things we pass on it.
It itself is just what it is.
Yes, and look, the idea of unity, of oneness
is an important one in analytic philosophy
because it avoids all kinds of trouble.
If you postulate more than one,
what philosophers call ontological primitive,
more than one self standalone thing that exists,
if you postulate more than one of them,
you're running to the interaction problem,
you're running to questions like,
well, why are there then two
if they are completely unrelated?
It's like it's two miracles, right?
And how do they interact if they are completely distinct?
What's the space between them?
What are their borders look like?
Exactly, exactly.
So when you postulate multiplicity,
you run into very hard problems.
And that's why physics itself is also trying
to drive to oneness.
And we call it unified field theories.
M theory is the latest unified field theory.
It's not worked out yet,
but science itself drives to that
because it avoids all kinds of problems
that seem to be insoluble.
So it's no surprise that I'm driving to that as well
because it avoids, for instance,
the combination problem in philosophy.
Like if I postulate that my neurons are conscious,
how do I explain my unitary consciousness?
No, then the consciousness of my neurons
would have to combine in some way,
but it has been shown already analytically
that combination is incoherent,
that you cannot coherently postulate
a theory of combination.
Not to mention the fact
that there is no empirical evidence for it either.
So we avoid the hard problem of consciousness.
We avoid the combination problem by starting from oneness
and then explaining diversity through a process
that we know empirically to exist, which is dissociation.
So the answers, I think,
have been staring us in the face
for quite a while and we just have to have the eyes to see.
So start with one consciousness
to avoid all those ontologic primitive interactions
that we don't like.
Everything is one thing.
Then solve the problem of why I don't know your mind
and you don't know mine
by saying there's a dissociation,
which we have evidence for already.
Every time we dream, we create an altar
that lives in a world that is bigger than us that we create.
And then when we wake up,
we come back to the universal mind that is there.
So there's a mini version of that.
And then you have the dissociative personality disorder,
which we have examples that you can actually measure
real blindness correlates in a brain
when the altar is blind.
But you then, so then you can say, okay,
so there's precedent for this in the world.
So one thing alters, then answer this question,
why do us alters see the same general universe
with the same laws and the same physics
and the same interface?
At least let's stick with our species.
Why is that the same?
If everything's mine,
wouldn't it just be shifting like a dream all the time
as the mind changes?
What's going on?
Because we as alters are immersed
in the same mental content.
And the way this external mental content looks like to us,
the way we gather information about it
through our dissociative boundary as given by evolution
presents this common outside mental environment
as they animate the world,
as the stars and galaxies and moons and planets.
It's what our common environment of mentation looks like
when observed given the sensory organs
that evolution has equipped us with.
So yes, there is an objective world out there,
but it's not essentially material.
Matter is just what it looks like
when observed from across our dissociative boundary.
What it is in itself, it's mentation.
But we are all inserted, immersed
in these mental processes.
And that's why we agree with each other
that we are in the same world.
We are in the same world indeed.
It's a mental world, but we share it.
So we're living in the same dream of a dreamer
that is vastly us and also bigger than us
that we've forgotten we're a part of.
And this is a metaphor, of course.
But the metaphor is closer to reality
than I dared imagine in the beginning.
The research on the association is fascinating.
We'd encourage everybody to have a look at that.
There is research done, I believe it was at Harvard.
Back in the 90s, I think,
they've done research with patients of DID.
I mean, again, we call it a disease.
I don't mean to imply that it's a disease
at a universal level, it's just nature.
The association happens in nature.
But today started people suffering enough
from the condition to be treated.
And there was clinical research done
in a large group of patients with DID.
Clinical research done about their dreams.
How do dissociated people dream?
And a fascinating thing was that
about one quarter of the subjects,
for one quarter of the subjects,
different ones of their altars
would experience and report on the exact same dream
from different points of view within the dream.
And altars could see each other
as different characters within the dream.
Wow!
The dream was the common dream of that one person,
one mind, but the different dissociative personalities
would experience the dreams from different points of view
and see each other as different people within the dream.
And this is fascinating because it's so close
to what might be going on right now.
You just have to take the subject as the cosmos,
the universe, and we as its dissociated altars,
partaking in the same dream
and experiencing the same dream
from different points of view.
The analogy is surprisingly deep.
Oh my God.
I don't think it would need to be that deep
to settle the questions,
but that it goes that deep is only nice, right?
It's quite remarkable.
I mean, it makes you think of the fractal nature of reality.
If there's one mind that dissociates into us,
why can't we dissociate into sub-minds
that can interact with each other in a dream that we create
and then onwards and down with no end?
We have no idea
because you can't really explore it that well.
And it makes me think of something,
and this is gonna sound crazy,
but when you look at a human brain and you look at neurons,
they have the stellar appearance.
They even call the stellate ganglion and the Latin root,
they look like stars and they have certain things.
When you look now increasingly at the universe
through Hubble imagery and even new imagery
that shows billions of galaxies,
they are bound together by filaments of energy
that you can now perceive with new technology and science.
So they're saying there's these superheated gases
in between galaxies.
When you zoom out and look at that,
it looks like an effing brain.
It looks like neurons connect to each other.
And it makes me wonder when we look at a human brain,
we see a dissociated alter
and that's what it looks like to us from this vantage point.
When we look out there,
are we seeing a bigger mind that we are just a part of?
And it sounds crazy, but I mean, wrong.
Yeah, look, when this was sort of reviewed
for the first time back in 2006,
I think there was a New York Times article on this
showing two pictures, the brain of a mouse
and the superstructure of the universe
as had just been inferred through simulations.
Because of course we don't have a telescope
that allows us to get an empirical photograph
of the universe at that level,
but our computational models can give us a structure
of the universe at its largest scales.
And in that photograph comparison,
there was a lot of similarity,
but of course you always have to be very careful
with image comparisons because you know,
you can always cut and stretch and crop
and recolor an image in order to make
any two things look alike.
But what is significant about this?
There have been two studies now,
one at the University of California
and one done by an Italian physicist
and an Italian neuroscientist
who have been collaborating on this.
The latest paper I think was published last year
at Frontiers in Neuroscience,
if I remember correctly,
but they have done an information theoretical comparison.
So here they're not looking at images,
they're looking at the topology of those structures.
And there are very objective parameters
that can serve as a basis for comparison.
And indeed, the topological structure
of a nervous system, of a mammalian nervous system
is surprisingly and unjustifiably similar
to the superstructure of the universe
at its largest scales,
especially when you bring the distribution of dark matter
into the picture, which we know is there,
even though we don't know what it is.
So one cannot dismiss that.
We cannot say that,
well, it's just one of those things.
No, no, no, the similarity is too great
for us to just dismiss it as a coincidence.
And this is leading some scholars now
to suggest that even our cosmological theories,
the models we postulate,
should be judged on the basis
of whether they are consistent
with the topological structure of a brain
as a sort of litmus test to see whether they know.
So this is going far.
And what's remarkable is that we are growing used
to these ideas since 2006.
We are sort of getting settled into this fact
that, okay, there is this similarity,
even though nobody has a reasonable hypothesis
to account for this similarity on materialistic terms.
And it is just completely different laws coming into play
at completely different scales,
many, many, many orders of magnitude apart.
Why does the center of a galaxy look more like...
Nevermind, it would take too long
to make the argument I was about to try and make.
We got all the time in the world.
The crucial point is,
at an information theoretical level,
the similarities are striking.
The way I would go about it modestly is to say,
look, if our inner mentation when observed
from the outside, from across our dissociative boundary,
for instance, with a brain scanner,
if it looks like what we call a brain,
the core of our mentation,
you could consider the body,
just equipment we acquired
in order to maintain the dissociation
within our ecosystem.
But the core of our mentation is our nervous system.
If our nervous system has a certain topology,
because that topology is what inner mentation looks like,
and if the rest of the universe is also mental in nature,
then I think it's pretty reasonable
that the rest of the universe at its largest scales
would have very similar topology.
I don't think this is surprising at all.
Both are representations or images of inner mentation.
So why should they be different?
That's how nature behaves
when it produces these representations.
And these representations are images
of the same kind of thing.
So of course, they look alike
from an information theoretical level.
So basically that was a beautiful way of saying,
no, you're not crazy, Zubin,
that may actually be a thing.
So I hope the audience is starting to feel this understanding
that the invoking idealism,
which you've referenced several times,
this idea that the universe is primarily mental,
is very much simpler and more parsimonious
and more consistent with what we observe
than the materialist paradigm,
which generates tons of errors and problems,
tons of problems like the hard problem of consciousness,
what's going on with quantum mechanics, et cetera.
And actually let's find an intermediate point,
because then the materialists will come back and say,
well, okay, no, no, no, we'll grant you
that consciousness is unexplainable
and it's in the pure material paradigm.
But what about the panpsychist paradigm,
which says material exists,
but it has a property like spin, charge, mass,
which are also abstractions, by the way,
it has a property of consciousness.
So in electron, there's something that it's like
to be an electron.
And somehow these things combine
to form higher consciousness
that then can do math and play video games.
How do you think about this?
I might have two main points of criticism about it.
One is that nobody can give a coherent account
of how this combination might happen.
Actually, there are several papers published now
which provide a rationale for why any idea of combination
is fundamentally incoherent.
For instance, if one of your neurons is seeing blue
and the other is seeing red,
and then you say, well, the combination C is purple,
but how can that be?
Because one sees blue and the other sees red.
So unless these two things that have been combined
cease to exist and become a third,
which is a magical step,
you can't account for the combination.
So there are all kinds of thought experiments
that indicate that a combination
of fundamentally different fields of subjectivity
is always an incoherent idea.
And let's not even get into empirical evidence
because there is none for this kind of stuff
happening in nature.
Unlike dissociation for which there is plenty
of empirical evidence that it does happen in nature.
My other point against panpsychism
is that it doesn't solve anything.
It just avoids the need for a solution
because I am a naturalist and a reductionist
and you may say, well, these are prejudices, maybe,
but that's how I think.
I want to drive to reduction as much as I can.
I think the best theory of nature
is that which explains everything
in terms of only one thing
and not a whole series of things.
When a panpsychist says that matter really exists as matter
with the boundaries we attribute to matter,
so subatomic particles are the building blocks of nature,
elementary subatomic particles,
and then they say, well, but next to having mass,
charge, spin, and so on,
they also have this property that we call phenomenality.
There is also something it is like to be that particle.
So it's material, but it's also fundamentally mental.
And that solves the problem
because then mentality is fundamental.
It doesn't need to be explained.
Well, I think this is a cheat.
It's just throwing what you can't explain
into your reduction base and saying,
well, I accounted for it by saying
that I don't need to explain it.
I think it's a cheat.
I don't like this at all.
I think it's not promising.
I don't think it will lead anywhere.
It's what Don Hoffman says is invoking a miracle
late in your theory or invoking more than one miracle, right?
The miracle in idealism is consciousness is.
That's the only miracle you need to invoke.
It starts right at the beginning of the theory.
Indeed, and any theory of nature
has to invoke one quote miracle
because you see, explanation is a reduction.
So when you explain one complex thing
in terms of simpler things,
you're reducing one to the other.
So we explain our organism in terms of organ systems,
organ systems in terms of tissues,
tissues in terms of cells,
those in terms of molecules, atoms, so atomic particles.
At some point, you hit rock bottom
because you can't keep on explaining one thing
in terms of another forever.
Unless you adopt circularity and infinite regress,
which is a logical cheat, a logical fallacy,
you have to stop somewhere.
So the game is not to avoid all miracles.
The game is to find that one miracle
in terms of which you can explain everything else.
Now, that one miracle is not a whole menu
of elementary subatomic particles
because if we choose those,
we cannot explain experience in terms of those.
But if we say, well, there is one consciousness,
everything else are just patterns of excitation
of this one consciousness,
which is how you get multiplicity out of unity,
how you get variety out of unity.
It's just like the surface of a lake.
There's only one lake, but depending on the wind,
that lake can produce ripples and vortices
of different shapes and you can have endless variety
without having anything else other than the lake
because those patterns of excitation
are just the laking movement.
There's nothing to a ripple, but the water that ripples.
The same thing for this one consciousness,
the variety of empirical experience
can be explained in terms of the patterns of excitation
of that one field.
If you want to speak abstract scientific theory,
say, well, consciousness is the unified field
and you can account for the variety of natural phenomena
in terms of one dissociation
and two patterns of excitation of that one field.
So if you do that,
then you can explain everything in terms of one thing,
which is the best you can hope to have.
You cannot eliminate the last miracle.
You cannot eliminate that last thing that you have to say,
well, this simply exists.
It's simply what nature is and we cannot go beyond that.
That makes perfect sense.
You need one primitive truth
and if you can get to that rock basement
and build an entire world, as Don says,
if you can spin up quantum mechanics and relativity
and all our science from that one truth using a theory
that incorporates that as the base theory,
then you found an answer and you can test it
and you can go on and so let's play a game then, Bernardo.
In your, using this theory of idealism
that everything is fundamentally one consciousness
that has dissociated and that every phenomenon
is a vibration of that consciousness.
It's made of consciousness.
It's like you and I are both waves in an ocean.
We're both the ocean and the wave
and this wave doesn't experience what that wave experiences
but when we dissolve, we might,
and we'll talk about death
because I think that's gonna be important,
but so then answer me this, what the hell is a rock
and how is it different than a dog?
I think a dog is the appearance
of an actual dissociative process
in this extended feud of mentation, if you will.
So there is something it is like to be a dog in and of itself.
It has a private in a life of its own
because it's the appearance of a dissociative process
that creates a dissociative boundary
and therefore leads to this private character
of inner experience.
A rock, I don't think a rock or any inanimate object
exists as a separate object at an ontological level.
Let me try to unpack this for you.
We divide or we carve out the inanimate world
into separate objects for convenience
because I want to buy a car and not a house
so I need to be able to identify
what particular pattern of excitation
of this extended mind I am interested in.
So I nominally delineate a boundary around it
and I put a label on it so we can talk to each other.
But I don't think ontologically
there are such things as separate objects
in the same way that if I show you a picture
and I say, well, those pixels here,
I will group them together
because I like their shade of blue
and I will call that an object.
You would say, well, you can do that if you want
but it's only nominal.
It's an arbitrary carving out of the one photo.
The only thing that exists is the photo.
Your pixel grouping is something you did
for some convenience.
Well, I think we are doing this all the time
when we talk in terms of separate objects.
I don't think there is a car.
Even if you say, no, a car is that which you need
in order to perform a certain function, like to move.
Well, you quickly realize that there is no car
if you define an object in this way
because the car will not move without a road
that the tires can grip.
It will not move if there is no air
that allows for combustion and cools the engine.
It will not move if there is no gravity
to pull the tires towards the road
in order for there to be grip.
There is no car.
We arbitrarily carve out boundaries
in the one thing that's going on
which is the inanimate universe.
Merely for convenience, it's a nominal division.
So if you ask me, is a rock conscious?
I would say there is even no such a thing as a rock.
So the question doesn't make sense.
I don't think a rock is conscious in the same sense
that I don't think one neuron in my brain
is conscious in and of itself.
I think the image of my inner life
is my nervous system as a whole.
Carving it out in terms of neurons
is something we do for convenience,
a very important convenience.
We should keep on doing that,
but it's not something that reflects
a fundamental partition of reality.
A neuron is just a set of pixels in that image
of my dissociated inner life,
a subset of pixels that I carve out for convenience.
In the same way, I think my mobile phone
is something that we carve out for convenience.
There's nothing it's like to be my mobile phone.
There's nothing it's like to be a rock.
There is only something it is like to be
the inanimate universe as a whole.
Everything else are nominal, arbitrary partitions
of the image, the appearance
of that universal conscious inner life.
That is a lot to understand.
And I think I get at it.
It's gonna take, I mean, you could go for hours
trying to drill into what you're saying there
because I think it answers a fundamental question
when people say, well, everything is conscious,
and why isn't a rock, what's it like to be a rock?
And you're saying, when you say there is no rock,
it's really, the way I interpret this,
and I'm probably wrong, is that the rock
is some experiential reality that we experience as rock,
but it's really, that's not really how you think about it.
There's the, yeah, go ahead.
You never experienced the rock in and of itself.
There's always a context, and you arbitrarily carve out
the rock from that context.
Look, we can make it very intuitive.
Think of a table.
Suppose there's a panpsychist who says,
everything is conscious.
That's not what an idealist says.
What an idealist says is, everything is in consciousness.
Not that everything is conscious in and of itself
because the idealist would even reject the concept of thing
as separate entities.
So for the idealist, everything is in consciousness
and exists by virtue of being a pattern of excitation
of consciousness.
Not your consciousness alone, not mine alone,
but an extended field of mentality.
Now, the panpsychist who says, every object is conscious
faces immediate problems like, okay,
you're saying the table is conscious, right?
So what if I take one of the four legs of the table out?
Does it hurt the table?
Is that leg now conscious in and of itself
separate from the table?
And then the panpsychist might think,
yeah, then it's okay.
What if I glue the leg back?
No, and then you run into these arbitrary things.
Is the river conscious?
Okay, so where does the consciousness of the river ends
and that of the ocean begins?
If the mountain's conscious and then a rock sort of
gets shaken off by an earthquake
and tumbles down the mountain, does that rock now
become separate in consciousness from the mountain?
Does the mountain have one private inner life
and the rock another?
And if the rock settles at the bottom,
still touches the mountain,
are they now only one consciousness?
You see, you run into all kinds of nonsense.
If you start from this premise that things are conscious
fundamentally in and of themselves,
because our very notion of thinginess is nominal,
it's arbitrary.
So, but you could, you are making the assertion that
living organisms, say a dog, is a sign to us.
It's an experiential sign that there's a dissociative aspect
of the one mind there that's looking out
and has an inner experience.
So where do you end with that?
Do you end with a virus?
Do you end with a cell?
Do you end with a paramecium?
How do you think about that?
I think there is a gray boundary
in between cells and viruses.
I personally, but that's my own prejudice,
my own intellectual disposition.
For me, what defines life or defines dissociation,
life is just the appearance of dissociation.
What defines it is what we call metabolism.
So protein folding, ATP burning, all that good stuff
that happens in all life.
And it's common to all life regardless
of the extreme distinctions between different organisms.
I don't look like a mushroom,
but we can drill down into a level
where the mushroom and I are the same.
We are both metabolizing.
And that metabolism is surprisingly,
I mean, you know better than I do,
at the level of molecular biology metabolism
is the same across all living beings.
And a virus doesn't metabolize by itself.
So my personal disposition is to put the boundary
just above virus particles.
So for me, crystals are not the image
of dissociative processes.
In other words, they're not alive.
Viruses are not alive.
But of course, nature is a continuum.
We try to establish this sharp boundaries
because dissociation has to have a sharp boundary.
I mean, if I pinch my skin, I feel it.
If I pinch the leather of the chair where I'm sitting,
I don't feel it.
So ontologically, dissociation has a sharp boundary.
But it can only be precisely pinned down from the inside.
What do I feel and what do I not feel?
I don't see a photon hitting on the wall,
but if it hits my retina, I see it.
From the outside, it's much more tricky.
Why?
Because we didn't evolve to capture everything
that is salient about reality.
We evolved to capture what is relevant to our survival.
Not capture everything that is salient
to understanding the nature of reality.
We didn't evolve for that.
So through perception, through what we can see and measure,
it's difficult to pin down a precise boundary in nature
because the images are not that sharp.
There is a limiting resolution there.
But my personal disposition to finally answer your question
is to say it ends with metabolizing simple organisms.
If you go down enough that you can no longer speak
of standalone metabolism,
then I don't think that reflects
a dissociative process in nature anymore.
So the evolutionarily conserved act of metabolism
that goes all the way back to the simplest cells,
that's a, and you know what?
At first, I was skeptical of that distinction
and now it actually is starting to feel like it makes sense.
You know, in the old days,
they didn't understand cells at all.
And they said there was some ilan vitale,
some life force that makes life.
And maybe it's as simple as that and yet as complex
because even that, we don't fully understand.
But so that distinction, you know,
the other thing, since we brought evolution into this,
why the hell does this one mind seem to manifest a world
with very specific rules that is resource constrained enough
that we are forced to compete in a way that we evolve?
Well, what aspect of your theory would explain that?
Because all our natural constants are perfectly tuned
for life and all of that.
But why do they even exist?
Why are there rules?
If this is a mind, why isn't there just magic everywhere?
I completely understand the intuition underlying
that question, but I would invite you to explore it
from a different angle.
It's very tempting for people who are confronted
with idealism, not only analytic idealism,
but idealism for the first time to ask the question, why?
Because we are mental beings
and we are always asking for the reason,
the motivation that underlies everything
since that's what drives our behavior.
And we then sort of anthropocentrically transport that
to the whole of the universe.
But I would invite you to consider
that for most living organisms on this planet,
there is no why.
That's not how they operate.
The question of why arose with metacognition.
And arguably, we may be the only metacognitive animals
around that think symbolically,
that are able to objectify their own thoughts
and experiences and have the thought,
I am having this experience.
I don't think my cat walks around going,
I am having this experience now.
I don't think my cat metacognizes.
My cat experiences and my cat reacts instinctively.
You see, instinct always provides a clear,
unique and immediate answer to every natural circumstance.
Animals who behave instinctively
have predictable behavior.
Crocodiles are very predictable.
We are not because we have evolved this ability
to objectify our own subjectivity
and to think about our own thoughts,
think about our emotions,
and then ponder and deliberate.
This is a very human thing that has evolved
after three and a half billion years
of suffering and pain on this planet.
It's not something that was there
in the fabric of nature from the beginning.
And therefore, I don't think it's something
we can attribute to the feud of mentation that is out there
because that feud at that broad level
didn't undergo the pressures of evolution
in a planetary ecosystem.
So I don't see a reason to think that
the feud of mentation underlying nature at large
would have metacognition or premeditation
or plan things out or ponder
what's the best way to go about things.
And I think there is evidence that it's exactly not that.
I think there's plenty of evidence that it's instinctive
because the laws of nature seem to be very stable,
very predictable, we can model them
and they reliably unfold according
to the same regularities since we've begun taking records.
So nature at large seems to behave instinctively
in the sense that it always has one immediate
and precise answer to any set of circumstances.
And that answer has regularities.
And we call those regularities the laws of nature,
which is of course a metaphor.
It's not a law decreed by a God.
It's just a reflection of what nature is.
Nature can't help but being what it is
and therefore behaving the way it behaves.
And I think that behavior is instinctive.
I don't see good reasons to project onto the rest of nature
a cognitive, a higher cognitive capacity
that we have evolved at great cost
after three and a half billion years on this planet.
So the one mind doesn't necessarily think like a human.
It doesn't necessarily have this metacognition
where we're thinking about thinking,
where we're aware of being aware
where we have a why that we impute
as part of our instantiation,
more like our cat maybe that it has,
I'm probably simplifying this,
but it's more that it just is what it is.
It has a certain way of being and why are we here
because we're here and it just that manifests to us
as these laws of nature,
but it's a regularity of predictability, et cetera.
Correct me on that, but then also where is the space
in that for free will in this model?
Do humans actually have any component of that?
And I know that's a two hour talk in itself.
Yeah.
I'll start from the conclusion just to be provocative.
I think the whole thing about free will is a red herring.
And the reason it's a red herring
is that our intuition about free will requires us
to find some space in between determinism.
Things are just determined and randomness.
Things are just random.
They happen for no reason.
So free will seems to require something
in between randomness and determinism,
but that space is semantically empty.
There's nothing there.
Things are either determined or they are random.
And by the way, randomness is just the name we give
when we don't understand the mechanisms of determination
because you could argue, well, they are determined.
It's just that we don't have the cognitive capacity
to figure out what's going on
when you throw a coin up to randomly see
whether you get faces or how is it in English?
One side is face, the other side is what?
Heads and tails.
Yeah, yeah, heads and tails.
So it's random because we cannot compute
the deterministic parameters
that will necessarily tell the coin which face will be up.
At the same time, if you go down deep enough in nature
and you go to the quantum level,
then there nothing is determined.
Things are determined only at a statistical level,
but individual events are random.
They're fully indetermined.
So I think this idea of the notion of free will
to try to find semantic space
that isn't randomness and isn't determinism is futile.
I'll give you an alternative view.
What we actually mean by free will
is when things are determined,
but they are determined by that
which I identify myself with as opposed to an external force.
So if my going to work tomorrow is determined
by the rules of my society
and not by what I identify with, namely my will,
then I am forced to work as opposed to willing to work.
So the notion of free will and determinism
depends on the idea of what is in.
In other words, what I identify myself with
and what is out the external forces.
But at the level of universal mentation,
there is no in or out
because there is nothing outside of it.
So the universal mind will do what it does both
because it needs to do it by virtue of being what it is.
It does what it does.
Its actions are determined by its nature, by what it is.
And the following is equally true.
It does what it does because it wishes to do so.
The wish is the need, is the necessity.
There is no distinction between the two
if there is nothing outside
to impose something from the outside.
And Schopenhauer said,
we are free to act according to our will
but we are not free to will what we will.
That's right.
So in that sense, what you think you want,
you want it because of what you are.
So your will in a sense conflates with determinism
because you're not free to will anything.
You will what you do because you are what you are.
And at the level of the universe, the necessity is the will.
So if you ask me, is there free will in nature?
I would say yes, in all of nature.
And that free will is the necessity.
It is determined.
There is no distinction between these two concepts.
There is no semantic space
within which you could carve them out from one another.
It's a red herring, the whole idea of free will.
We'll do, oh man, that's great.
We'll do another show on this
because I want to talk about objective chance and so on.
But wow, okay, so now,
because I will run out of recording card at some point,
I want to get to, and we'll just have to do another show
to get into more into the weeds and some of this stuff
because this is fascinating.
So death, death of a human being, birth of a human being.
What, how do you conceptualize that?
And I know sometimes it can be beyond concept,
but how do you conceptualize that
in an idealistic framework such as you're proposing?
If life is what dissociation looks like
when observed from across its dissociative boundary,
then death is necessarily the end of the dissociation.
What we call death is what the end
of that dissociation looks like.
What should it feel like from within?
Well, if dissociation constrains your field of subjectivity,
your field of experiences,
then the end of this dissociation just enlarges it.
So to put it in a, yeah, maybe poetic way,
who am I to put it poetically?
But I know it will sound a little bit poetic,
which I tend to guard against,
but I have no better descriptive way to put it.
Life is when you observe the world.
Death is when you become the world.
What is accessible to you only through representation
becomes accessible now to you directly.
So now you're not knowing the world by looking at it.
Now you're knowing the world by being in it
because you can only access the thing in itself
by being in it.
So if the dissociation ends,
you no longer have the dissociative boundary
or the screen of perception to become acquainted
with the world indirectly through representation.
Now you become the world.
So I think when we die, we become the universe.
And I think although our individual self will cease to exist
because individuality is directly tied to dissociation.
So our individual self will probably cease to exist.
I don't think we will regret it anymore
than we regret and mourn the death of our dream avatar
when we wake up.
It's only from the perspective of those in the dream,
those that are still in the dream that there is a great loss.
I think from the first person perspective,
I don't think you will register that as a loss
at all on the contrary.
So I've thought about this a fair bit.
And psychedelics will simulate this for you too, ego death.
And ego, so when we think about ego, I like to think of it.
You know, meditation is a part of my life
and this sort of path has been,
but when I think about ego, I think about in your model,
I think about a dissociative internal process
of discursive thought that creates a sense of I
that reifies the boundaries between I
and the rest of the world that is defended,
that has its own personality and habit energy
and habit pattern.
And that meditation is a way to look at it,
to watch it and to realize it's in you,
it is not necessarily you, right?
You're the awareness in which it arises.
But the ego exists for a reason
and this resource constrained world,
which we don't know why it's risk and strain.
And as you say, the question may not even be relevant
because only humans ask the question.
We're, the ego is designed to keep us safe,
to protect us and to reify this organism as all there is.
So when it is threatened,
it generates a kind of defense and a suffering
that is legendary.
So ego death during psychedelics feels like
you're dying over an eternal timeframe.
And when you're released from the ego
and join the sense of unitary consciousness,
which mystics report it, psychedelic users report it,
people have had peak experiences,
they report it randomly, it's a deep bliss and release.
And I wonder whether physical death is very similar
in how it's experienced.
Well, physiologically, the best model of death we have
is the psychedelic experience
because we know that it significantly reduces brain activity,
particularly in the default mode network,
which is associated with the narrative of personal self
and the ego that you were describing.
Activity in that network is significantly reduced.
Activity is reduced everywhere, it doesn't increase anywhere.
But particularly in the default mode network,
which is the network that gives us
our sense of individual self.
So physiologically, psychedelics are the best model
of death we have because it seems to reduce the dissociation.
You see, if normal brain activity
is what the dissociation looks like,
then some forms of reduction of brain activity
should correlate with the reduction of the dissociation.
The logic is pretty clear.
Again, it's not only your anatomy,
but it's also the ordinary patterns of brain activity we have
that are the appearance, the image of a dissociative process.
So it tends to reason that a reduction,
certain reductions of brain activity,
not necessarily all, some of them can just reduce
the contents within the dissociation,
the experiences within.
But some patterns of brain activity reduction
should be what a reduction in the dissociation process
itself looks like.
So some reductions in brain activity
should impair the dissociative process itself,
should make the dissociative boundary more porous,
more permeable.
And I think that's exactly what psychedelics do.
They impair the dissociative mechanism,
so you become less dissociated
and that's why there is ego death.
I think it tends to reason that that's a very good model
of actual death because in actual death,
that's precisely what's going to happen.
Your default mode network goes dark
and activity ceases and dissociation reduces.
So I take very seriously ego dissolution
as the best guess we can have
to what death will feel like.
And from that perspective,
I think it's a great rehearsal
because psychonauts know that
if you don't resist ego dissolution,
if you just let go, which is very easy to say,
very hard to do.
Yeah, very hard to do.
But you can get to a point where that's natural.
I considered psychedelic experiences
as part of my research.
I think I wouldn't be serious
if I would go talk about these things
without undergoing those experiences myself.
So I have done that based on a lot of study.
I went to my doctor.
I was checked out before I did it.
I live in a country in which it's legal.
So I had all these benefits.
So I did it very thoroughly.
And you do get to a point where ego dissolution now
is you ride it out with pleasure
because if you've gone through the path enough times
that you know that what is already on the other side
is pretty good, if you only let go,
what is hardest to come back, I call reentry,
when the dissociative mechanism reasserts itself
and the entire concept of space and time come back
because space and time is a cognitive modalities
that we've evolved to survive.
They are not out there.
Now, even neuroscience, even physics itself
is telling us that space and time are not absolute.
Not fundamental, yeah.
When they reassert themselves
and the idea of restriction comes back,
that's massively unpleasant.
And it is the reason I don't trip anymore
to be very honest with you, Zubin.
Ego dissolution, I ride that wave now,
doing a hang lose, but reentry coming back.
Oh man, and I feel so bad about life afterwards
for 48 hours that I don't do it anymore.
I believe you.
And I'll say even, so they've looked at FMRIs of monks,
you know, meditating and it's the same thing,
quieting of the brain, quieting of brain activity
and they will report, oh, a sense of loving compassion
for everything because they are everything.
And what is love?
Love is a deep connection to something else.
There's no deeper connection than being something else,
which I think you can get through psychedelics,
you can get through meditation,
you can get through prayer, whatever it is,
whatever your modality is,
I think it points to the truth that you're saying
if we're getting just more philosophical
and less scientific about it.
But I think that, I think this idea
of ego dissolution being painful,
but then getting used to it,
but then ego reentry never feeling good is fascinating
because it implies something very positive,
which is the all, the universal mind being back in that
is blissful, is peaceful, it is a different experience.
And that should, in many who've experienced
with psychedelics, experienced with meditation,
they don't fear death in the way
that the contracted ego mind does,
where it's like, this is it, annihilation, I'm done,
I'm terrified.
It's more like, yeah, it's gonna suck the process of it,
but then it's gonna be awesome
and there's really no fear, yeah.
But don't get me wrong,
I don't dismiss the value of life on the contrary,
and let me tell you why,
but it's also an implication of the ideas I put forward
that we are the only metacognitive part of nature.
So we are the only way nature has
to take explicit account of itself
and to recognize itself.
And three and a half billion years of suffering
were invested into coming to this point,
whether it was planned or not,
is a moot point, it's immaterial.
The fact is, we've developed
this higher level cognitive ability.
And I think we are the only game in town.
As far as we know, we are the only game in town,
we are the only part of the universe
that can look around and say, this is happening
and we are a part of it.
And I think this is huge.
We pay an enormous price for it, we call it suffering,
because non-metacognitive beings have physical pain,
but they don't suffer, they don't walk around
regretting the past and being anxious about the future,
they are always in the present.
So we suffer because we are metacognitive beings
that can identify themselves as individual subjects,
separate from the rest.
But it is also by virtue of this
that there is self-awareness anywhere in nature.
And there ought to be value in that explicit recognition,
that explicit taking into account of existence.
There is a sense in which existence only really exists
when it's explicitly recognized as such
at a metacognitive level.
So from that perspective, to speaking religious metaphors,
I think we are God's spies.
God does not know what we know,
at least not in the way we do know it,
in a metacognitive sense.
And amazing energy, time and suffering
have been spent into this.
I don't dismiss it, so I don't want to get across
as saying that, you know what,
it's much better when we are dead.
So let's all pull the plug now.
No, no, yes, there is tremendous suffering involved,
but there is tremendous value too, for all we know.
That was beautifully put.
I really wanna emphasize what you just said,
because the Buddhists have a saying
being born as a human is the greatest of the gifts,
because you have this ability of consciousness
to know itself in a metacognitive, meta-aware way.
And again, we'll put a value on it and go,
well, consciousness did all this so it could know itself,
because that's what humans do.
They'll put their humanized anthropomorphized spin on it.
You were gonna say something?
Well, you know, there is room for telos for a goal,
even without metacognition.
Because you see, a metacognitive goal
is a pull from the front.
You already know where you want to be,
so you pull from the front.
But there is a push from behind as well.
You're going somewhere,
not because you know where you want to go,
but because at every point in the way,
you know whether you're getting colder or warmer.
You know whether you're feeling better or worse.
So there can still be a telos.
There can still be an attractor that doesn't attract.
Actually, it's just a push from behind
and things look as though there were,
there were an attractor from the front,
but everything is pushed from behind.
It's still progressing towards a goal.
Like the game of, no, you're getting warmer
or you're getting colder.
You can still steer from behind.
This might be going on.
I love that.
I love it.
I mean, the telos.
So define telos for folks because there may be.
Telos would be the final cause, you know,
the thing you live for,
the thing nature is unfolding towards.
That ultimate end goal, the end game.
What are we trying to get from all this?
What do we need to do in order to get there?
That would be the telos.
And nature is teleological if it is moving towards the telos.
But that can happen by a push from behind.
In other words, we are instinctively
feeling our way towards the telos,
but there is no part of nature
that knows exactly where it is.
We are just feeling our way towards that.
Or it can be a pull from the front.
There is some God sitting on a throne in the sky
that knows exactly where we want to go
and will sort of massage us towards that.
I don't think the latter is what's going on,
but I think nature through us
is feeling its way towards the telos, yeah.
So this is fascinating to me
because again, the meaning of the universe,
the reason we're all here,
da-da-da-da-da, all the big questions.
You just say, well,
consciousness is or the universal mind is,
and it is the way it is.
And as a result of how it is,
it is unfolding in a way that finds its way towards an end
that is the result of what it is.
Not that there's somebody there going,
we want to go here.
It's just, this is who I am.
And this is me in the world,
which is how I like to think about human authenticity.
If we're looking at the fractal nature of reality,
humans are little mini versions of the all,
when we're authentic to who we are,
when we wake up, when we stop trying to be someone we're not,
when we stop listening to the discursive voice
that is negative self-talking, all that,
we show up in the world in a way that feels right
and almost invariably, we're more successful,
we're happier, even if it doesn't have to be money,
we're happier and we're more connected.
And I think that that is a nice push from behind.
Instead of trying to set these arbitrary,
oh, I want to be rich and I want to do that.
Now, who am I?
How do I show up in the world?
And it just unfolds.
So I think that's a root.
Yeah, it's the distinction between your adaptive self
that follows the recipes of society
and your natural self that knows
whether you're getting happier or not.
And I'll tell you, in healthcare,
there are many people trapped in a world
where they are living somebody else's societal adaptive story
and they're not living their own story.
And in that tension, I think there's a lot
of what we call burnout,
which is really kind of a victim-shaming thing,
like you're not resilient enough.
Yeah, yeah.
Most people don't even know there is a natural self.
They are completely identified with their adaptive self.
The problem is that the adaptive self,
although it's important in the first half of your life
until you carve out a space in the world for yourself,
after that, it's not adaptive anymore.
It becomes maladaptive because it starts convincing you
that everything is for no reason,
everything is meaningless and nothing makes you happy
and there's nowhere to go.
And that's the point where you have to jump back
to your natural self,
but most people don't even know it exists.
You know, you're describing the middle-aged crisis.
You're describing Maslow's hierarchy.
You're describing this fact
that you do have to go through that adaptive phase.
You go to medical school, you go to computer science,
get your PhD, get your PhD in philosophy.
You argue you're a firebrand in the world,
me versus the world, what's my place?
What do I mean?
Then you accomplish what you think you wanted
and then you start to feel this weird emptiness that,
wait, what?
Why am I not happy?
And then-
Exactly.
And then you-
The game has to change,
but we don't know how to play the game differently.
So we get stuck and that's trouble.
That's trouble.
You see, the natural self is more or less
your instinctive self.
It's not busy creating narratives.
It just knows what feels right and what doesn't feel right.
But the adaptive self with its narratives
has become so dominant
that we don't fall back to our natural instinctive selves.
I mean, we are parts of nature, right?
Nature is going somewhere.
Deliberately or not, it's going somewhere.
And it's going somewhere through us, partly.
So there is something that wants to come
into the world naturally, through us,
or something that needs to be absorbed from the world by us.
And that's all nature.
That's all instinctive.
It doesn't come as a result of a narrative
or an argument line.
But we don't listen to nature anymore,
even though we are it.
We are nature.
We are lost in abstractions.
We are lost in abstractions in our psychology,
in our view of the meaning of life,
in our science, in our philosophy,
we are completely lost in abstractions.
And I think that will be the theme of the 21st century,
our painful emergence from the cocoon of abstraction.
That is the perfect way to wrap up this in a nice package.
Materialism as a vestige of that sort of failure
and awakening from that to the new paradigm
and then looking at coming back to that natural state.
And again, none of this is woo-woo.
This is exactly as we've built the case over two hours.
And I'll say this, one thing about that authenticity
and getting out of the narrative mind,
that's why I love doing live video on Facebook
or whatever when I'm talking about a topic.
It comes from what I feel is a whole,
I open a hole in the universe and stuff comes out.
Sometimes it's not perfect,
but it's always as authentic to that moment as I can be.
And for me, that's been a journey to get to that point
where I'm comfortable doing that.
And I think I encourage people to try to explore
more natural expressions of who they are.
And it sounds like, oh, it's a little soft
and I don't get it.
It's gonna sound like that
as someone who's deep in the adaptive game, right?
But as you wake up, you'll find joy in it.
Most people, when they suffer enough,
they see through it, unfortunately,
it takes a lot of suffering.
Most people to let go of the narratives.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Man, Bernardo, what a joy it was talking to you.
I learned so much and this is stuff that I-
Who did I, man?
I'm like a country doc, man.
You're, this is, will, okay.
Will you, this is gonna get five views
because there's like five people in the world
who love this stuff as much as you and I do.
But I suspect it'll be more than that.
Will you come back and go deeper
on some of these things sometimes?
Sure.
Sure, it's my natural self.
It is.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Exactly, exactly.
You always have my form
because I bet we're gonna get a ton of questions
in the comments and objections and things
and I'd love to just go through comments
and say, let's talk about this,
because I'll learn a lot.
Let's do it again.
Man, what a joy.
Let me tell the gang here, guys.
I mean, I hope you're thinking about stuff
in a metacognitive way,
but also relaxing into what is
and feeling what we're trying to say here.
If you like the show, share it, leave a comment,
tell us what bothers you about this,
what you agree with, what your own experience is,
and then we'll do a follow-up
where we take some of those comments
and respond to them.
If you really like what we do,
become a supporter, join our supporter tribe,
just go to ZDoggMD.com forward slash supporters
and we go deep on these things like every night
in a live authentic show
that where we are our natural selves,
ask the supporters, they'll tell you.
All right, guys, I love you, Bernardo.
Thanks a million, man.
Thanks for having me.
It was a great pleasure.
And we are out, peace.
